xxbos xxmaj this is the 100th xxmaj etext file presented by xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg , and 
 is presented in cooperation with xxmaj world xxmaj library , xxmaj inc . , from their 
 xxmaj library of the xxmaj future and xxmaj shakespeare xxup cdroms . xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg 
 often releases xxmaj etexts that are xxup not placed in the xxmaj public xxmaj domain ! ! 

 xxmaj shakespeare 

 * this xxmaj etext has certain copyright implications you should read ! * 

 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 

 * project xxmaj gutenberg is proud to cooperate with xxmaj the xxmaj world xxmaj library * 
 in the presentation of xxmaj the xxmaj complete xxmaj works of xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 
 for your reading for education and entertainment . xxup however , xxup this 
 xxup is xxup neither xxup shareware xxup nor xxup public xxup domain . . .and xxup under xxup the xxup library 
 xxup of xxup the xxup future xxup conditions xxup of xxup this xxup presentation . . .no xxup charges xxup may 
 xxup be xxup made xxup for * any * xxup access xxup to xxup this xxup material . xxup you xxup are xxup encouraged ! ! 
 xxup to xxup give xxup it xxup away xxup to xxup anyone xxup you xxup like , xxup but xxup no xxup charges xxup are xxup allowed ! ! 


 * * welcome xxmaj to xxmaj the xxmaj world of xxmaj free xxmaj plain xxmaj vanilla xxmaj electronic xxmaj texts * * 

 * * etexts xxmaj readable xxmaj by xxmaj both xxmaj humans and xxmaj by xxmaj computers , xxmaj since 1971 * * 

 * these xxmaj etexts xxmaj prepared xxmaj by xxmaj hundreds of xxmaj volunteers and xxmaj donations * 

 xxmaj information on contacting xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg to get xxmaj etexts , and 
 further information is included below . xxmaj we need your donations . 


 xxmaj the xxmaj complete xxmaj works of xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 

 xxmaj january , 1994 [ etext # 100 ] 


 xxmaj the xxmaj library of the xxmaj future xxmaj complete xxmaj works of xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 
 xxmaj library of the xxmaj future is a trademark ( tm ) of xxmaj world xxmaj library xxmaj inc . 
▁ xxrep 6 * xxmaj this file should be named shaks12.txt or shaks12.zip xxrep 5 * 

 xxmaj corrected xxup editions of our etexts get a new xxup number , shaks13.txt 
 xxup versions based on separate sources get new xxup letter , shaks10a.txt 

 xxmaj if you would like further information about xxmaj world xxmaj library , xxmaj inc . 
 xxmaj please call them at 1 - 800 - 443 - 0238 or email julianc@netcom.com 
 xxmaj please give them our thanks for their xxmaj shakespeare cooperation ! 


 xxmaj the official release date of all xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg xxmaj etexts is at 
 xxmaj midnight , xxmaj central xxmaj time , of the last day of the stated month . a 
 preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion , comment 
 and editing by those who wish to do so . xxmaj to be sure you have an 
 up to date first edition [ xxrep 5 x 10x . xxrep 3 x ] please check file sizes 
 in the first week of the next month . xxmaj since our ftp program has 
 a bug in it that scrambles the date [ tried to fix and failed ] a 
 look at the file size will have to do , but we will try to see a 
 new copy has at least one byte more or less . 


 xxmaj information about xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg ( one page ) 

 xxmaj we produce about two million dollars for each hour we work . xxmaj the 
 fifty hours is one conservative estimate for how long it we take 
 to get any etext selected , entered , proofread , edited , copyright 
 searched and analyzed , the copyright letters written , etc . xxmaj this 
 projected audience is one hundred million readers . xxmaj if our value 
 per text is nominally estimated at one dollar , then we produce 2 
 million dollars per hour this year we , will have to do four text 
 files per month : thus upping our productivity from one million . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj goal of xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg is to xxmaj give xxmaj away xxmaj one xxmaj trillion xxmaj etext 
 xxmaj files by the xxmaj december 31 , 2001 . [ 10 , xxrep 3 0 x 100 , xxrep 3 0 , xxrep 3 0 = trillion ] 
 xxmaj this is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers , 
 which is 10 % of the expected number of computer users by the end 
 of the year 2001 . 

 xxmaj we need your donations more than ever ! 

 xxmaj all donations should be made to " project xxmaj gutenberg / xxup ibc " , and are 
 tax deductible to the extent allowable by law ( " ibc " is xxmaj illinois 
 xxmaj benedictine xxmaj college ) . ( subscriptions to our paper newsletter go 
 to xxup ibc , too ) 

 xxmaj for these and other matters , please mail to : 

 xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg 
 xxup p. xxup o. xxmaj box 2782 
 xxmaj champaign , xxup il 61825 

 xxmaj when all other email fails try our xxmaj michael xxup s. xxmaj hart , xxmaj executive xxmaj director : 
 hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu ( internet ) hart@uiucvmd ( bitnet ) 

 xxmaj we would prefer to send you this information by email 
 ( internet , xxmaj bitnet , xxmaj compuserve , xxup attmail or mcimail ) . 

▁ xxrep 6 * 
 xxmaj if you have an xxup ftp program ( or emulator ) , please 
 xxup ftp directly to the xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg archives : 
 [ mac users , do xxup not point and click . . .type ] 

 ftp mrcnext.cso.uiuc.edu 
 login : anonymous 
 password : your@login 
 cd etext / etext91 
 or cd etext92 
 or cd etext93 [ for new books ] [ now also in cd etext / etext93 ] 
 or cd etext / articles [ get suggest gut for more information ] 
 dir [ to see files ] 
 get or mget [ to get files . . .set bin for zip files ] 
 xxup get 0index.gut 
 for a list of books 
 and 
 xxup get xxup new xxup gut for general information 
 and 
 xxup mget xxup gut * for newsletters . 

 * * information prepared by the xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg legal advisor * * 


▁ xxrep 5 * xxup small xxup print ! for xxup complete xxup shakespeare xxrep 5 * 

 xxup this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , 
 xxup and xxup is xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of 
 xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college xxup with xxup permission . 

 xxmaj since unlike many other xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg - tm etexts , this etext 
 is copyright protected , and since the materials and methods you 
 use will effect the xxmaj project 's reputation , your right to copy and 
 distribute it is limited by the copyright and other laws , and by 
 the conditions of this " small xxmaj print ! " statement . 

 1 . xxup license 

▁ xxup a ) xxup you xxup may ( and xxup are xxup encouraged ) xxup to xxup distribute xxup electronic xxup and 
 xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup of xxup this xxup etext , xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies 
 ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not 
 xxup distributed xxup or xxup used xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial 
 xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download 
 xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . 

▁ xxup b ) xxmaj this license is subject to the conditions that you honor 
 the refund and replacement provisions of this " small print ! " 
 statement ; and that you distribute exact copies of this etext , 
 including this xxmaj small xxmaj print statement . xxmaj such copies can be 
 compressed or any proprietary form ( including any form resulting 
 from word processing or hypertext software ) , so long as 
 * either * : 

▁ ( 1 ) xxmaj the etext , when displayed , is clearly readable , and does 
▁ * not * contain characters other than those intended by the 
▁ author of the work , although tilde ( ~ ) , asterisk ( * ) and 
▁ underline ( _ ) characters may be used to convey punctuation 
▁ intended by the author , and additional characters may be used 
▁ to indicate hypertext links ; xxup or 

▁ ( 2 ) xxmaj the etext is readily convertible by the reader at no 
▁ expense into plain xxup ascii , xxup ebcdic or equivalent form by the 
▁ program that displays the etext ( as is the case , for instance , 
▁ with most word processors ) ; xxup or 

▁ ( 3 ) xxmaj you provide or agree to provide on request at no 
▁ additional cost , fee or expense , a copy of the etext in plain 
▁ xxup ascii . 

 2 . xxup limited xxup warranty ; xxup disclaimer xxup of xxup damages 

 xxmaj this etext may contain a " defect " in the form of incomplete , 
 inaccurate or corrupt data , transcription errors , a copyright or 
 other infringement , a defective or damaged disk , computer virus , 
 or codes that damage or can not be read by your equipment . xxmaj but 
 for the " right of xxmaj replacement or xxmaj refund " described below , the 
 xxmaj project ( and any other party you may receive this etext from as 
 a xxup project gutenberg - tm etext ) disclaims all liability to you for 
 damages , costs and expenses , including legal fees , and xxup you xxup have 
 xxup no xxup remedies xxup for xxup negligence xxup or xxup under xxup strict xxup liability , xxup or xxup for 
 xxup breach xxup of xxup warranty xxup or xxup contract , xxup including xxup but xxup not xxup limited xxup to 
 xxup indirect , xxup consequential , xxup punitive xxup or xxup incidental xxup damages , xxup even xxup if 
 xxup you xxup give xxup notice xxup of xxup the xxup possibility xxup of xxup such xxup damages . 

 xxmaj if you discover a xxmaj defect in this etext within 90 days of receiv- 
 ing it , you can receive a refund of the money ( if any ) you paid 
 for it by sending an explanatory note within that time to the 
 person you received it from . xxmaj if you received it on a physical 
 medium , you must return it with your note , and such person may 
 choose to alternatively give you a replacement copy . xxmaj if you 
 received it electronically , such person may choose to 
 alternatively give you a second opportunity to receive it 
 electronically . 

 xxup this xxup etext xxup is xxup otherwise xxup provided xxup to xxup you " as - is " . xxup no xxup other 
 xxup warranties xxup of xxup any xxup kind , xxup express xxup or xxup implied , xxup are xxup made xxup to xxup you xxup as 
 xxup to xxup the xxup etext xxup or xxup any xxup medium xxup it xxup may xxup be xxup on , xxup including xxup but xxup not 
 xxup limited xxup to xxup warranties xxup of xxup merchantability xxup or xxup fitness xxup for a 
 xxup particular xxup purpose . xxmaj some states do not allow disclaimers of 
 implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of consequen- 
 tial damages , so the above disclaimers and exclusions may not 
 apply to you , and you may have other legal rights . 

 3 . xxup indemnity : xxmaj you will indemnify and hold the xxmaj project , its 
 directors , officers , members and agents harmless from all lia- 
 bility , cost and expense , including legal fees , that arise 
 directly or indirectly from any of the following that you do or 
 cause : [ a ] distribution of this etext , [ b ] alteration , 
 modification , or addition to the etext , or [ c ] any xxmaj defect . 

 4 . xxup what xxup if xxup you * want * xxup to xxup send xxup money xxup even xxup if xxup you xxup do n't xxup have xxup to ? 
 xxmaj project xxmaj gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of 
 public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed 
 in machine readable form . xxmaj the xxmaj project gratefully accepts 
 contributions in money , time , scanning machines , xxup ocr software , 
 public domain etexts , royalty free copyright licenses , and 
 whatever else you can think of . xxmaj money should be paid to " pro- 
 ject xxmaj gutenberg xxmaj association / xxmaj illinois xxmaj benedictine xxmaj college " . 

 xxup write xxup to xxup us ! xxmaj we can be reached at : 
▁ xxmaj internet : hart@vmd.cso.uiuc.edu 
▁ xxmaj bitnet : hart@uiucvmd 
▁ compuserve : > internet : hart@.vmd.cso.uiuc.edu 
▁ xxmaj attmail : internet!vmd.cso.uiuc.edu!hart 
▁ xxmaj mail : xxmaj prof . xxmaj michael xxmaj hart 
▁ xxup p.o . xxmaj box 2782 
▁ xxmaj champaign , xxup il 61825 

 xxmaj this " small xxmaj print ! " by xxmaj charles xxup b. xxmaj kramer , xxmaj attorney 
 xxmaj internet ( 72600.2026@compuserve.com ) ; xxup tel : ( 212 - 254 - 5093 ) 
▁ xxrep 4 * xxup small xxup print ! xxup for _ _ xxup complete xxup shakespeare xxrep 4 * 
 [ " small xxmaj print " xxup v.12.08.93 ] 

 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 


 1609 

 xxup the xxup sonnets 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



▁ 1 
▁ xxmaj from fairest creatures we desire increase , 
▁ xxmaj that thereby beauty 's rose might never die , 
▁ xxmaj but as the riper should by time decease , 
▁ xxmaj his tender heir might bear his memory : 
▁ xxmaj but thou contracted to thine own bright eyes , 
▁ xxmaj feed'st thy light 's flame with self - substantial fuel , 
▁ xxmaj making a famine where abundance lies , 
▁ xxmaj thy self thy foe , to thy sweet self too cruel : 
▁ xxmaj thou that art now the world 's fresh ornament , 
▁ xxmaj and only herald to the gaudy spring , 
▁ xxmaj within thine own bud buriest thy content , 
▁ xxmaj and tender churl mak'st waste in niggarding : 
▁ xxmaj pity the world , or else this glutton be , 
▁ xxmaj to eat the world 's due , by the grave and thee . 


▁ 2 
▁ xxmaj when forty winters shall besiege thy brow , 
▁ xxmaj and dig deep trenches in thy beauty 's field , 
▁ xxmaj thy youth 's proud livery so gazed on now , 
▁ xxmaj will be a tattered weed of small worth held : 
▁ xxmaj then being asked , where all thy beauty lies , 
▁ xxmaj where all the treasure of thy lusty days ; 
▁ xxmaj to say within thine own deep sunken eyes , 
▁ xxmaj were an all - eating shame , and thriftless praise . 
▁ xxmaj how much more praise deserved thy beauty 's use , 
▁ xxmaj if thou couldst answer ' this fair child of mine 
▁ xxmaj shall sum my count , and make my old excuse ' 
▁ xxmaj proving his beauty by succession thine . 
▁ xxmaj this were to be new made when thou art old , 
▁ xxmaj and see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold . 


▁ 3 
▁ xxmaj look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest , 
▁ xxmaj now is the time that face should form another , 
▁ xxmaj whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost beguile the world , unbless some mother . 
▁ xxmaj for where is she so fair whose uneared womb 
▁ xxmaj disdains the tillage of thy husbandry ? 
▁ xxmaj or who is he so fond will be the tomb , 
▁ xxmaj of his self - love to stop posterity ? 
▁ xxmaj thou art thy mother 's glass and she in thee 
▁ xxmaj calls back the lovely xxmaj april of her prime , 
▁ xxmaj so thou through windows of thine age shalt see , 
▁ xxmaj despite of wrinkles this thy golden time . 
▁ xxmaj but if thou live remembered not to be , 
▁ xxmaj die single and thine image dies with thee . 


▁ 4 
▁ xxmaj unthrifty loveliness why dost thou spend , 
▁ xxmaj upon thy self thy beauty 's legacy ? 
▁ xxmaj nature 's bequest gives nothing but doth lend , 
▁ xxmaj and being frank she lends to those are free : 
▁ xxmaj then beauteous niggard why dost thou abuse , 
▁ xxmaj the bounteous largess given thee to give ? 
▁ xxmaj profitless usurer why dost thou use 
▁ xxmaj so great a sum of sums yet canst not live ? 
▁ xxmaj for having traffic with thy self alone , 
▁ xxmaj thou of thy self thy sweet self dost deceive , 
▁ xxmaj then how when nature calls thee to be gone , 
▁ xxmaj what acceptable audit canst thou leave ? 
▁ xxmaj thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee , 
▁ xxmaj which used lives th ' executor to be . 


▁ 5 
▁ xxmaj those hours that with gentle work did frame 
▁ xxmaj the lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell 
▁ xxmaj will play the tyrants to the very same , 
▁ xxmaj and that unfair which fairly doth excel : 
▁ xxmaj for never - resting time leads summer on 
▁ xxmaj to hideous winter and confounds him there , 
▁ xxmaj sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone , 
▁ xxmaj beauty o'er - snowed and bareness every where : 
▁ xxmaj then were not summer 's distillation left 
▁ a liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass , 
▁ xxmaj beauty 's effect with beauty were bereft , 
▁ xxmaj nor it nor no remembrance what it was . 
▁ xxmaj but flowers distilled though they with winter meet , 
▁ xxmaj leese but their show , their substance still lives sweet . 


▁ 6 
▁ xxmaj then let not winter 's ragged hand deface , 
▁ xxmaj in thee thy summer ere thou be distilled : 
▁ xxmaj make sweet some vial ; treasure thou some place , 
▁ xxmaj with beauty 's treasure ere it be self - killed : 
▁ xxmaj that use is not forbidden usury , 
▁ xxmaj which happies those that pay the willing loan ; 
▁ xxmaj that 's for thy self to breed another thee , 
▁ xxmaj or ten times happier be it ten for one , 
▁ xxmaj ten times thy self were happier than thou art , 
▁ xxmaj if ten of thine ten times refigured thee : 
▁ xxmaj then what could death do if thou shouldst depart , 
▁ xxmaj leaving thee living in posterity ? 
▁ xxmaj be not self - willed for thou art much too fair , 
▁ xxmaj to be death 's conquest and make worms thine heir . 


▁ 7 
▁ xxmaj lo in the orient when the gracious light 
▁ xxmaj lifts up his burning head , each under eye 
▁ xxmaj doth homage to his new - appearing sight , 
▁ xxmaj serving with looks his sacred majesty , 
▁ xxmaj and having climbed the steep - up heavenly hill , 
▁ xxmaj resembling strong youth in his middle age , 
▁ xxmaj yet mortal looks adore his beauty still , 
▁ xxmaj attending on his golden pilgrimage : 
▁ xxmaj but when from highmost pitch with weary car , 
▁ xxmaj like feeble age he reeleth from the day , 
▁ xxmaj the eyes ( fore duteous ) now converted are 
▁ xxmaj from his low tract and look another way : 
▁ xxmaj so thou , thy self out - going in thy noon : 
▁ xxmaj unlooked on diest unless thou get a son . 


▁ 8 
▁ xxmaj music to hear , why hear'st thou music sadly ? 
▁ xxmaj sweets with sweets war not , joy delights in joy : 
▁ xxmaj why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly , 
▁ xxmaj or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy ? 
▁ xxmaj if the true concord of well - tuned sounds , 
▁ xxmaj by unions married do offend thine ear , 
▁ xxmaj they do but sweetly chide thee , who confounds 
▁ xxmaj in singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear : 
▁ xxmaj mark how one string sweet husband to another , 
▁ xxmaj strikes each in each by mutual ordering ; 
▁ xxmaj resembling sire , and child , and happy mother , 
▁ xxmaj who all in one , one pleasing note do sing : 
▁ xxmaj whose speechless song being many , seeming one , 
▁ xxmaj sings this to thee , ' thou single wilt prove none ' . 


▁ 9 
▁ xxmaj is it for fear to wet a widow 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj that thou consum'st thy self in single life ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , if thou issueless shalt hap to die , 
▁ xxmaj the world will wail thee like a makeless wife , 
▁ xxmaj the world will be thy widow and still weep , 
▁ xxmaj that thou no form of thee hast left behind , 
▁ xxmaj when every private widow well may keep , 
▁ xxmaj by children 's eyes , her husband 's shape in mind : 
▁ xxmaj look what an unthrift in the world doth spend 
▁ xxmaj shifts but his place , for still the world enjoys it ; 
▁ xxmaj but beauty 's waste hath in the world an end , 
▁ xxmaj and kept unused the user so destroys it : 
▁ xxmaj no love toward others in that bosom sits 
▁ xxmaj that on himself such murd'rous shame commits . 


▁ 10 
▁ xxmaj for shame deny that thou bear'st love to any 
▁ xxmaj who for thy self art so unprovident . 
▁ xxmaj grant if thou wilt , thou art beloved of many , 
▁ xxmaj but that thou none lov'st is most evident : 
▁ xxmaj for thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate , 
▁ xxmaj that ' gainst thy self thou stick'st not to conspire , 
▁ xxmaj seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate 
▁ xxmaj which to repair should be thy chief desire : 
▁ o change thy thought , that i may change my mind , 
▁ xxmaj shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love ? 
▁ xxmaj be as thy presence is gracious and kind , 
▁ xxmaj or to thy self at least kind - hearted prove , 
▁ xxmaj make thee another self for love of me , 
▁ xxmaj that beauty still may live in thine or thee . 


▁ 11 
▁ xxmaj as fast as thou shalt wane so fast thou grow'st , 
▁ xxmaj in one of thine , from that which thou departest , 
▁ xxmaj and that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st , 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst call thine , when thou from youth convertest , 
▁ xxmaj herein lives wisdom , beauty , and increase , 
▁ xxmaj without this folly , age , and cold decay , 
▁ xxmaj if all were minded so , the times should cease , 
▁ xxmaj and threescore year would make the world away : 
▁ xxmaj let those whom nature hath not made for store , 
▁ xxmaj harsh , featureless , and rude , barrenly perish : 
▁ xxmaj look whom she best endowed , she gave thee more ; 
▁ xxmaj which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish : 
▁ xxmaj she carved thee for her seal , and meant thereby , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst print more , not let that copy die . 


▁ 12 
▁ xxmaj when i do count the clock that tells the time , 
▁ xxmaj and see the brave day sunk in hideous night , 
▁ xxmaj when i behold the violet past prime , 
▁ xxmaj and sable curls all silvered o'er with white : 
▁ xxmaj when lofty trees i see barren of leaves , 
▁ xxmaj which erst from heat did canopy the herd 
▁ xxmaj and summer 's green all girded up in sheaves 
▁ xxmaj borne on the bier with white and bristly beard : 
▁ xxmaj then of thy beauty do i question make 
▁ xxmaj that thou among the wastes of time must go , 
▁ xxmaj since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake , 
▁ xxmaj and die as fast as they see others grow , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing ' gainst xxmaj time 's scythe can make defence 
▁ xxmaj save breed to brave him , when he takes thee hence . 


▁ 13 
▁ o that you were your self , but love you are 
▁ xxmaj no longer yours , than you your self here live , 
▁ xxmaj against this coming end you should prepare , 
▁ xxmaj and your sweet semblance to some other give . 
▁ xxmaj so should that beauty which you hold in lease 
▁ xxmaj find no determination , then you were 
▁ xxmaj your self again after your self 's decease , 
▁ xxmaj when your sweet issue your sweet form should bear . 
▁ xxmaj who lets so fair a house fall to decay , 
▁ xxmaj which husbandry in honour might uphold , 
▁ xxmaj against the stormy gusts of winter 's day 
▁ xxmaj and barren rage of death 's eternal cold ? 
▁ o none but unthrifts , dear my love you know , 
▁ xxmaj you had a father , let your son say so . 


▁ 14 
▁ xxmaj not from the stars do i my judgement pluck , 
▁ xxmaj and yet methinks i have astronomy , 
▁ xxmaj but not to tell of good , or evil luck , 
▁ xxmaj of plagues , of dearths , or seasons ' quality , 
▁ xxmaj nor can i fortune to brief minutes tell ; 
▁ xxmaj pointing to each his thunder , rain and wind , 
▁ xxmaj or say with princes if it shall go well 
▁ xxmaj by oft predict that i in heaven find . 
▁ xxmaj but from thine eyes my knowledge i derive , 
▁ xxmaj and constant stars in them i read such art 
▁ xxmaj as truth and beauty shall together thrive 
▁ xxmaj if from thy self , to store thou wouldst convert : 
▁ xxmaj or else of thee this i prognosticate , 
▁ xxmaj thy end is truth 's and beauty 's doom and date . 


▁ 15 
▁ xxmaj when i consider every thing that grows 
▁ xxmaj holds in perfection but a little moment . 
▁ xxmaj that this huge stage presenteth nought but shows 
▁ xxmaj whereon the stars in secret influence comment . 
▁ xxmaj when i perceive that men as plants increase , 
▁ xxmaj cheered and checked even by the self - same sky : 
▁ xxmaj vaunt in their youthful sap , at height decrease , 
▁ xxmaj and wear their brave state out of memory . 
▁ xxmaj then the conceit of this inconstant stay , 
▁ xxmaj sets you most rich in youth before my sight , 
▁ xxmaj where wasteful time debateth with decay 
▁ xxmaj to change your day of youth to sullied night , 
▁ xxmaj and all in war with xxmaj time for love of you , 
▁ xxmaj as he takes from you , i engraft you new . 


▁ 16 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore do not you a mightier way 
▁ xxmaj make war upon this bloody tyrant xxmaj time ? 
▁ xxmaj and fortify your self in your decay 
▁ xxmaj with means more blessed than my barren rhyme ? 
▁ xxmaj now stand you on the top of happy hours , 
▁ xxmaj and many maiden gardens yet unset , 
▁ xxmaj with virtuous wish would bear you living flowers , 
▁ xxmaj much liker than your painted counterfeit : 
▁ xxmaj so should the lines of life that life repair 
▁ xxmaj which this ( time 's pencil ) or my pupil pen 
▁ xxmaj neither in inward worth nor outward fair 
▁ xxmaj can make you live your self in eyes of men . 
▁ xxmaj to give away your self , keeps your self still , 
▁ xxmaj and you must live drawn by your own sweet skill . 


▁ 17 
▁ xxmaj who will believe my verse in time to come 
▁ xxmaj if it were filled with your most high deserts ? 
▁ xxmaj though yet heaven knows it is but as a tomb 
▁ xxmaj which hides your life , and shows not half your parts : 
▁ xxmaj if i could write the beauty of your eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and in fresh numbers number all your graces , 
▁ xxmaj the age to come would say this poet lies , 
▁ xxmaj such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces . 
▁ xxmaj so should my papers ( yellowed with their age ) 
▁ xxmaj be scorned , like old men of less truth than tongue , 
▁ xxmaj and your true rights be termed a poet 's rage , 
▁ xxmaj and stretched metre of an antique song . 
▁ xxmaj but were some child of yours alive that time , 
▁ xxmaj you should live twice in it , and in my rhyme . 


▁ 18 
▁ xxmaj shall i compare thee to a summer 's day ? 
▁ xxmaj thou art more lovely and more temperate : 
▁ xxmaj rough winds do shake the darling buds of xxmaj may , 
▁ xxmaj and summer 's lease hath all too short a date : 
▁ xxmaj sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines , 
▁ xxmaj and often is his gold complexion dimmed , 
▁ xxmaj and every fair from fair sometime declines , 
▁ xxmaj by chance , or nature 's changing course untrimmed : 
▁ xxmaj but thy eternal summer shall not fade , 
▁ xxmaj nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st , 
▁ xxmaj nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade , 
▁ xxmaj when in eternal lines to time thou grow'st , 
▁ xxmaj so long as men can breathe or eyes can see , 
▁ xxmaj so long lives this , and this gives life to thee . 


▁ 19 
▁ xxmaj devouring xxmaj time blunt thou the lion 's paws , 
▁ xxmaj and make the earth devour her own sweet brood , 
▁ xxmaj pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger 's jaws , 
▁ xxmaj and burn the long - lived phoenix , in her blood , 
▁ xxmaj make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st , 
▁ xxmaj and do whate'er thou wilt swift - footed xxmaj time 
▁ xxmaj to the wide world and all her fading sweets : 
▁ xxmaj but i forbid thee one most heinous crime , 
▁ o carve not with thy hours my love 's fair brow , 
▁ xxmaj nor draw no lines there with thine antique pen , 
▁ xxmaj him in thy course untainted do allow , 
▁ xxmaj for beauty 's pattern to succeeding men . 
▁ xxmaj yet do thy worst old xxmaj time : despite thy wrong , 
▁ xxmaj my love shall in my verse ever live young . 


▁ 20 
▁ a woman 's face with nature 's own hand painted , 
▁ xxmaj hast thou the master mistress of my passion , 
▁ a woman 's gentle heart but not acquainted 
▁ xxmaj with shifting change as is false women 's fashion , 
▁ xxmaj an eye more bright than theirs , less false in rolling : 
▁ xxmaj gilding the object whereupon it gazeth , 
▁ a man in hue all hues in his controlling , 
▁ xxmaj which steals men 's eyes and women 's souls amazeth . 
▁ xxmaj and for a woman wert thou first created , 
▁ xxmaj till nature as she wrought thee fell a - doting , 
▁ xxmaj and by addition me of thee defeated , 
▁ xxmaj by adding one thing to my purpose nothing . 
▁ xxmaj but since she pricked thee out for women 's pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj mine be thy love and thy love 's use their treasure . 


▁ 21 
▁ xxmaj so is it not with me as with that muse , 
▁ xxmaj stirred by a painted beauty to his verse , 
▁ xxmaj who heaven it self for ornament doth use , 
▁ xxmaj and every fair with his fair doth rehearse , 
▁ xxmaj making a couplement of proud compare 
▁ xxmaj with sun and moon , with earth and sea 's rich gems : 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj april 's first - born flowers and all things rare , 
▁ xxmaj that heaven 's air in this huge rondure hems . 
▁ o let me true in love but truly write , 
▁ xxmaj and then believe me , my love is as fair , 
▁ xxmaj as any mother 's child , though not so bright 
▁ xxmaj as those gold candles fixed in heaven 's air : 
▁ xxmaj let them say more that like of hearsay well , 
▁ i will not praise that purpose not to sell . 


▁ 22 
▁ xxmaj my glass shall not persuade me i am old , 
▁ xxmaj so long as youth and thou are of one date , 
▁ xxmaj but when in thee time 's furrows i behold , 
▁ xxmaj then look i death my days should expiate . 
▁ xxmaj for all that beauty that doth cover thee , 
▁ xxmaj is but the seemly raiment of my heart , 
▁ xxmaj which in thy breast doth live , as thine in me , 
▁ xxmaj how can i then be elder than thou art ? 
▁ o therefore love be of thyself so wary , 
▁ xxmaj as i not for my self , but for thee will , 
▁ xxmaj bearing thy heart which i will keep so chary 
▁ xxmaj as tender nurse her babe from faring ill . 
▁ xxmaj presume not on thy heart when mine is slain , 
▁ xxmaj thou gav'st me thine not to give back again . 


▁ 23 
▁ xxmaj as an unperfect actor on the stage , 
▁ xxmaj who with his fear is put beside his part , 
▁ xxmaj or some fierce thing replete with too much rage , 
▁ xxmaj whose strength 's abundance weakens his own heart ; 
▁ xxmaj so i for fear of trust , forget to say , 
▁ xxmaj the perfect ceremony of love 's rite , 
▁ xxmaj and in mine own love 's strength seem to decay , 
▁ xxmaj o'ercharged with burthen of mine own love 's might : 
▁ o let my looks be then the eloquence , 
▁ xxmaj and dumb presagers of my speaking breast , 
▁ xxmaj who plead for love , and look for recompense , 
▁ xxmaj more than that tongue that more hath more expressed . 
▁ o learn to read what silent love hath writ , 
▁ xxmaj to hear with eyes belongs to love 's fine wit . 


▁ 24 
▁ xxmaj mine eye hath played the painter and hath stelled , 
▁ xxmaj thy beauty 's form in table of my heart , 
▁ xxmaj my body is the frame wherein ' tis held , 
▁ xxmaj and perspective it is best painter 's art . 
▁ xxmaj for through the painter must you see his skill , 
▁ xxmaj to find where your true image pictured lies , 
▁ xxmaj which in my bosom 's shop is hanging still , 
▁ xxmaj that hath his windows glazed with thine eyes : 
▁ xxmaj now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done , 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes have drawn thy shape , and thine for me 
▁ xxmaj are windows to my breast , where - through the sun 
▁ xxmaj delights to peep , to gaze therein on thee ; 
▁ xxmaj yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art , 
▁ xxmaj they draw but what they see , know not the heart . 


▁ 25 
▁ xxmaj let those who are in favour with their stars , 
▁ xxmaj of public honour and proud titles boast , 
▁ xxmaj whilst i whom fortune of such triumph bars 
▁ xxmaj unlooked for joy in that i honour most ; 
▁ xxmaj great princes ' favourites their fair leaves spread , 
▁ xxmaj but as the marigold at the sun 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj and in themselves their pride lies buried , 
▁ xxmaj for at a frown they in their glory die . 
▁ xxmaj the painful warrior famoused for fight , 
▁ xxmaj after a thousand victories once foiled , 
▁ xxmaj is from the book of honour razed quite , 
▁ xxmaj and all the rest forgot for which he toiled : 
▁ xxmaj then happy i that love and am beloved 
▁ xxmaj where i may not remove nor be removed . 


▁ 26 
▁ xxmaj lord of my love , to whom in vassalage 
▁ xxmaj thy merit hath my duty strongly knit ; 
▁ xxmaj to thee i send this written embassage 
▁ xxmaj to witness duty , not to show my wit . 
▁ xxmaj duty so great , which wit so poor as mine 
▁ xxmaj may make seem bare , in wanting words to show it ; 
▁ xxmaj but that i hope some good conceit of thine 
▁ xxmaj in thy soul 's thought ( all naked ) will bestow it : 
▁ xxmaj till whatsoever star that guides my moving , 
▁ xxmaj points on me graciously with fair aspect , 
▁ xxmaj and puts apparel on my tattered loving , 
▁ xxmaj to show me worthy of thy sweet respect , 
▁ xxmaj then may i dare to boast how i do love thee , 
▁ xxmaj till then , not show my head where thou mayst prove me . 


▁ 27 
▁ xxmaj weary with toil , i haste me to my bed , 
▁ xxmaj the dear respose for limbs with travel tired , 
▁ xxmaj but then begins a journey in my head 
▁ xxmaj to work my mind , when body 's work 's expired . 
▁ xxmaj for then my thoughts ( from far where i abide ) 
▁ xxmaj intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee , 
▁ xxmaj and keep my drooping eyelids open wide , 
▁ xxmaj looking on darkness which the blind do see . 
▁ xxmaj save that my soul 's imaginary sight 
▁ xxmaj presents thy shadow to my sightless view , 
▁ xxmaj which like a jewel ( hung in ghastly night ) 
▁ xxmaj makes black night beauteous , and her old face new . 
▁ xxmaj lo thus by day my limbs , by night my mind , 
▁ xxmaj for thee , and for my self , no quiet find . 


▁ 28 
▁ xxmaj how can i then return in happy plight 
▁ xxmaj that am debarred the benefit of rest ? 
▁ xxmaj when day 's oppression is not eased by night , 
▁ xxmaj but day by night and night by day oppressed . 
▁ xxmaj and each ( though enemies to either 's reign ) 
▁ xxmaj do in consent shake hands to torture me , 
▁ xxmaj the one by toil , the other to complain 
▁ xxmaj how far i toil , still farther off from thee . 
▁ i tell the day to please him thou art bright , 
▁ xxmaj and dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven : 
▁ xxmaj so flatter i the swart - complexioned night , 
▁ xxmaj when sparkling stars twire not thou gild'st the even . 
▁ xxmaj but day doth daily draw my sorrows longer , 
▁ xxmaj and night doth nightly make grief 's length seem stronger 


▁ 29 
▁ xxmaj when in disgrace with xxmaj fortune and men 's eyes , 
▁ i all alone beweep my outcast state , 
▁ xxmaj and trouble deaf heaven with my bootless cries , 
▁ xxmaj and look upon my self and curse my fate , 
▁ xxmaj wishing me like to one more rich in hope , 
▁ xxmaj featured like him , like him with friends possessed , 
▁ xxmaj desiring this man 's art , and that man 's scope , 
▁ xxmaj with what i most enjoy contented least , 
▁ xxmaj yet in these thoughts my self almost despising , 
▁ xxmaj haply i think on thee , and then my state , 
▁ ( like to the lark at break of day arising 
▁ xxmaj from sullen earth ) sings hymns at heaven 's gate , 
▁ xxmaj for thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings , 
▁ xxmaj that then i scorn to change my state with kings . 


▁ 30 
▁ xxmaj when to the sessions of sweet silent thought , 
▁ i summon up remembrance of things past , 
▁ i sigh the lack of many a thing i sought , 
▁ xxmaj and with old woes new wail my dear time 's waste : 
▁ xxmaj then can i drown an eye ( unused to flow ) 
▁ xxmaj for precious friends hid in death 's dateless night , 
▁ xxmaj and weep afresh love 's long since cancelled woe , 
▁ xxmaj and moan th ' expense of many a vanished sight . 
▁ xxmaj then can i grieve at grievances foregone , 
▁ xxmaj and heavily from woe to woe tell o'er 
▁ xxmaj the sad account of fore - bemoaned moan , 
▁ xxmaj which i new pay as if not paid before . 
▁ xxmaj but if the while i think on thee ( dear friend ) 
▁ xxmaj all losses are restored , and sorrows end . 


▁ 31 
▁ xxmaj thy bosom is endeared with all hearts , 
▁ xxmaj which i by lacking have supposed dead , 
▁ xxmaj and there reigns love and all love 's loving parts , 
▁ xxmaj and all those friends which i thought buried . 
▁ xxmaj how many a holy and obsequious tear 
▁ xxmaj hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj as interest of the dead , which now appear , 
▁ xxmaj but things removed that hidden in thee lie . 
▁ xxmaj thou art the grave where buried love doth live , 
▁ xxmaj hung with the trophies of my lovers gone , 
▁ xxmaj who all their parts of me to thee did give , 
▁ xxmaj that due of many , now is thine alone . 
▁ xxmaj their images i loved , i view in thee , 
▁ xxmaj and thou ( all they ) hast all the all of me . 


▁ 32 
▁ xxmaj if thou survive my well - contented day , 
▁ xxmaj when that churl death my bones with dust shall cover 
▁ xxmaj and shalt by fortune once more re - survey 
▁ xxmaj these poor rude lines of thy deceased lover : 
▁ xxmaj compare them with the bett'ring of the time , 
▁ xxmaj and though they be outstripped by every pen , 
▁ xxmaj reserve them for my love , not for their rhyme , 
▁ xxmaj exceeded by the height of happier men . 
▁ o then vouchsafe me but this loving thought , 
▁ ' had my friend 's xxmaj muse grown with this growing age , 
▁ a dearer birth than this his love had brought 
▁ xxmaj to march in ranks of better equipage : 
▁ xxmaj but since he died and poets better prove , 
▁ xxmaj theirs for their style xxmaj i 'll read , his for his love ' . 


▁ 33 
▁ xxmaj full many a glorious morning have i seen , 
▁ xxmaj flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye , 
▁ xxmaj kissing with golden face the meadows green ; 
▁ xxmaj gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy : 
▁ xxmaj anon permit the basest clouds to ride , 
▁ xxmaj with ugly rack on his celestial face , 
▁ xxmaj and from the forlorn world his visage hide 
▁ xxmaj stealing unseen to west with this disgrace : 
▁ xxmaj even so my sun one early morn did shine , 
▁ xxmaj with all triumphant splendour on my brow , 
▁ xxmaj but out alack , he was but one hour mine , 
▁ xxmaj the region cloud hath masked him from me now . 
▁ xxmaj yet him for this , my love no whit disdaineth , 
▁ xxmaj suns of the world may stain , when heaven 's sun staineth . 


▁ 34 
▁ xxmaj why didst thou promise such a beauteous day , 
▁ xxmaj and make me travel forth without my cloak , 
▁ xxmaj to let base clouds o'ertake me in my way , 
▁ xxmaj hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke ? 
▁ ' tis not enough that through the cloud thou break , 
▁ xxmaj to dry the rain on my storm - beaten face , 
▁ xxmaj for no man well of such a salve can speak , 
▁ xxmaj that heals the wound , and cures not the disgrace : 
▁ xxmaj nor can thy shame give physic to my grief , 
▁ xxmaj though thou repent , yet i have still the loss , 
▁ xxmaj th ' offender 's sorrow lends but weak relief 
▁ xxmaj to him that bears the strong offence 's cross . 
▁ xxmaj ah but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds , 
▁ xxmaj and they are rich , and ransom all ill deeds . 


▁ 35 
▁ xxmaj no more be grieved at that which thou hast done , 
▁ xxmaj roses have thorns , and silver fountains mud , 
▁ xxmaj clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun , 
▁ xxmaj and loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud . 
▁ xxmaj all men make faults , and even i in this , 
▁ xxmaj authorizing thy trespass with compare , 
▁ xxmaj my self corrupting salving thy amiss , 
▁ xxmaj excusing thy sins more than thy sins are : 
▁ xxmaj for to thy sensual fault i bring in sense , 
▁ xxmaj thy adverse party is thy advocate , 
▁ xxmaj and ' gainst my self a lawful plea commence : 
▁ xxmaj such civil war is in my love and hate , 
▁ xxmaj that i an accessary needs must be , 
▁ xxmaj to that sweet thief which sourly robs from me . 


▁ 36 
▁ xxmaj let me confess that we two must be twain , 
▁ xxmaj although our undivided loves are one : 
▁ xxmaj so shall those blots that do with me remain , 
▁ xxmaj without thy help , by me be borne alone . 
▁ xxmaj in our two loves there is but one respect , 
▁ xxmaj though in our lives a separable spite , 
▁ xxmaj which though it alter not love 's sole effect , 
▁ xxmaj yet doth it steal sweet hours from love 's delight . 
▁ i may not evermore acknowledge thee , 
▁ xxmaj lest my bewailed guilt should do thee shame , 
▁ xxmaj nor thou with public kindness honour me , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou take that honour from thy name : 
▁ xxmaj but do not so , i love thee in such sort , 
▁ xxmaj as thou being mine , mine is thy good report . 


▁ 37 
▁ xxmaj as a decrepit father takes delight , 
▁ xxmaj to see his active child do deeds of youth , 
▁ xxmaj so xxup i , made lame by xxmaj fortune 's dearest spite 
▁ xxmaj take all my comfort of thy worth and truth . 
▁ xxmaj for whether beauty , birth , or wealth , or wit , 
▁ xxmaj or any of these all , or all , or more 
▁ xxmaj entitled in thy parts , do crowned sit , 
▁ i make my love engrafted to this store : 
▁ xxmaj so then i am not lame , poor , nor despised , 
▁ xxmaj whilst that this shadow doth such substance give , 
▁ xxmaj that i in thy abundance am sufficed , 
▁ xxmaj and by a part of all thy glory live : 
▁ xxmaj look what is best , that best i wish in thee , 
▁ xxmaj this wish i have , then ten times happy me . 


▁ 38 
▁ xxmaj how can my muse want subject to invent 
▁ xxmaj while thou dost breathe that pour'st into my verse , 
▁ xxmaj thine own sweet argument , too excellent , 
▁ xxmaj for every vulgar paper to rehearse ? 
▁ o give thy self the thanks if aught in me , 
▁ xxmaj worthy perusal stand against thy sight , 
▁ xxmaj for who 's so dumb that can not write to thee , 
▁ xxmaj when thou thy self dost give invention light ? 
▁ xxmaj be thou the tenth xxmaj muse , ten times more in worth 
▁ xxmaj than those old nine which rhymers invocate , 
▁ xxmaj and he that calls on thee , let him bring forth 
▁ xxmaj eternal numbers to outlive long date . 
▁ xxmaj if my slight muse do please these curious days , 
▁ xxmaj the pain be mine , but thine shall be the praise . 


▁ 39 
▁ o how thy worth with manners may i sing , 
▁ xxmaj when thou art all the better part of me ? 
▁ xxmaj what can mine own praise to mine own self bring : 
▁ xxmaj and what is't but mine own when i praise thee ? 
▁ xxmaj even for this , let us divided live , 
▁ xxmaj and our dear love lose name of single one , 
▁ xxmaj that by this separation i may give : 
▁ xxmaj that due to thee which thou deserv'st alone : 
▁ o absence what a torment wouldst thou prove , 
▁ xxmaj were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave , 
▁ xxmaj to entertain the time with thoughts of love , 
▁ xxmaj which time and thoughts so sweetly doth deceive . 
▁ xxmaj and that thou teachest how to make one twain , 
▁ xxmaj by praising him here who doth hence remain . 


▁ 40 
▁ xxmaj take all my loves , my love , yea take them all , 
▁ xxmaj what hast thou then more than thou hadst before ? 
▁ xxmaj no love , my love , that thou mayst true love call , 
▁ xxmaj all mine was thine , before thou hadst this more : 
▁ xxmaj then if for my love , thou my love receivest , 
▁ i can not blame thee , for my love thou usest , 
▁ xxmaj but yet be blamed , if thou thy self deceivest 
▁ xxmaj by wilful taste of what thy self refusest . 
▁ i do forgive thy robbery gentle thief 
▁ xxmaj although thou steal thee all my poverty : 
▁ xxmaj and yet love knows it is a greater grief 
▁ xxmaj to bear greater wrong , than hate 's known injury . 
▁ xxmaj lascivious grace , in whom all ill well shows , 
▁ xxmaj kill me with spites yet we must not be foes . 


▁ 41 
▁ xxmaj those pretty wrongs that liberty commits , 
▁ xxmaj when i am sometime absent from thy heart , 
▁ xxmaj thy beauty , and thy years full well befits , 
▁ xxmaj for still temptation follows where thou art . 
▁ xxmaj gentle thou art , and therefore to be won , 
▁ xxmaj beauteous thou art , therefore to be assailed . 
▁ xxmaj and when a woman woos , what woman 's son , 
▁ xxmaj will sourly leave her till he have prevailed ? 
▁ xxmaj ay me , but yet thou mightst my seat forbear , 
▁ xxmaj and chide thy beauty , and thy straying youth , 
▁ xxmaj who lead thee in their riot even there 
▁ xxmaj where thou art forced to break a twofold truth : 
▁ xxmaj hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee , 
▁ xxmaj thine by thy beauty being false to me . 


▁ 42 
▁ xxmaj that thou hast her it is not all my grief , 
▁ xxmaj and yet it may be said i loved her dearly , 
▁ xxmaj that she hath thee is of my wailing chief , 
▁ a loss in love that touches me more nearly . 
▁ xxmaj loving offenders thus i will excuse ye , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost love her , because thou know'st i love her , 
▁ xxmaj and for my sake even so doth she abuse me , 
▁ xxmaj suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her . 
▁ xxmaj if i lose thee , my loss is my love 's gain , 
▁ xxmaj and losing her , my friend hath found that loss , 
▁ xxmaj both find each other , and i lose both twain , 
▁ xxmaj and both for my sake lay on me this cross , 
▁ xxmaj but here 's the joy , my friend and i are one , 
▁ xxmaj sweet flattery , then she loves but me alone . 


▁ 43 
▁ xxmaj when most i wink then do mine eyes best see , 
▁ xxmaj for all the day they view things unrespected , 
▁ xxmaj but when i sleep , in dreams they look on thee , 
▁ xxmaj and darkly bright , are bright in dark directed . 
▁ xxmaj then thou whose shadow shadows doth make bright 
▁ xxmaj how would thy shadow 's form , form happy show , 
▁ xxmaj to the clear day with thy much clearer light , 
▁ xxmaj when to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so ! 
▁ xxmaj how would ( i say ) mine eyes be blessed made , 
▁ xxmaj by looking on thee in the living day , 
▁ xxmaj when in dead night thy fair imperfect shade , 
▁ xxmaj through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay ! 
▁ xxmaj all days are nights to see till i see thee , 
▁ xxmaj and nights bright days when dreams do show thee me . 


▁ 44 
▁ xxmaj if the dull substance of my flesh were thought , 
▁ xxmaj injurious distance should not stop my way , 
▁ xxmaj for then despite of space i would be brought , 
▁ xxmaj from limits far remote , where thou dost stay , 
▁ xxmaj no matter then although my foot did stand 
▁ xxmaj upon the farthest earth removed from thee , 
▁ xxmaj for nimble thought can jump both sea and land , 
▁ xxmaj as soon as think the place where he would be . 
▁ xxmaj but ah , thought kills me that i am not thought 
▁ xxmaj to leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone , 
▁ xxmaj but that so much of earth and water wrought , 
▁ i must attend , time 's leisure with my moan . 
▁ xxmaj receiving nought by elements so slow , 
▁ xxmaj but heavy tears , badges of either 's woe .