xxbos 45 
▁ xxmaj the other two , slight air , and purging fire , 
▁ xxmaj are both with thee , wherever i abide , 
▁ xxmaj the first my thought , the other my desire , 
▁ xxmaj these present - absent with swift motion slide . 
▁ xxmaj for when these quicker elements are gone 
▁ xxmaj in tender embassy of love to thee , 
▁ xxmaj my life being made of four , with two alone , 
▁ xxmaj sinks down to death , oppressed with melancholy . 
▁ xxmaj until life 's composition be recured , 
▁ xxmaj by those swift messengers returned from thee , 
▁ xxmaj who even but now come back again assured , 
▁ xxmaj of thy fair health , recounting it to me . 
▁ xxmaj this told , i joy , but then no longer glad , 
▁ i send them back again and straight grow sad . 


▁ 46 
▁ xxmaj mine eye and heart are at a mortal war , 
▁ xxmaj how to divide the conquest of thy sight , 
▁ xxmaj mine eye , my heart thy picture 's sight would bar , 
▁ xxmaj my heart , mine eye the freedom of that right , 
▁ xxmaj my heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie , 
▁ ( a closet never pierced with crystal eyes ) 
▁ xxmaj but the defendant doth that plea deny , 
▁ xxmaj and says in him thy fair appearance lies . 
▁ xxmaj to side this title is impanelled 
▁ a quest of thoughts , all tenants to the heart , 
▁ xxmaj and by their verdict is determined 
▁ xxmaj the clear eye 's moiety , and the dear heart 's part . 
▁ xxmaj as thus , mine eye 's due is thy outward part , 
▁ xxmaj and my heart 's right , thy inward love of heart . 


▁ 47 
▁ xxmaj betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took , 
▁ xxmaj and each doth good turns now unto the other , 
▁ xxmaj when that mine eye is famished for a look , 
▁ xxmaj or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother ; 
▁ xxmaj with my love 's picture then my eye doth feast , 
▁ xxmaj and to the painted banquet bids my heart : 
▁ xxmaj another time mine eye is my heart 's guest , 
▁ xxmaj and in his thoughts of love doth share a part . 
▁ xxmaj so either by thy picture or my love , 
▁ xxmaj thy self away , art present still with me , 
▁ xxmaj for thou not farther than my thoughts canst move , 
▁ xxmaj and i am still with them , and they with thee . 
▁ xxmaj or if they sleep , thy picture in my sight 
▁ xxmaj awakes my heart , to heart 's and eye 's delight . 


▁ 48 
▁ xxmaj how careful was i when i took my way , 
▁ xxmaj each trifle under truest bars to thrust , 
▁ xxmaj that to my use it might unused stay 
▁ xxmaj from hands of falsehood , in sure wards of trust ! 
▁ xxmaj but thou , to whom my jewels trifles are , 
▁ xxmaj most worthy comfort , now my greatest grief , 
▁ xxmaj thou best of dearest , and mine only care , 
▁ xxmaj art left the prey of every vulgar thief . 
▁ xxmaj thee have i not locked up in any chest , 
▁ xxmaj save where thou art not , though i feel thou art , 
▁ xxmaj within the gentle closure of my breast , 
▁ xxmaj from whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part , 
▁ xxmaj and even thence thou wilt be stol'n i fear , 
▁ xxmaj for truth proves thievish for a prize so dear . 


▁ 49 
▁ xxmaj against that time ( if ever that time come ) 
▁ xxmaj when i shall see thee frown on my defects , 
▁ xxmaj when as thy love hath cast his utmost sum , 
▁ xxmaj called to that audit by advised respects , 
▁ xxmaj against that time when thou shalt strangely pass , 
▁ xxmaj and scarcely greet me with that sun thine eye , 
▁ xxmaj when love converted from the thing it was 
▁ xxmaj shall reasons find of settled gravity ; 
▁ xxmaj against that time do i ensconce me here 
▁ xxmaj within the knowledge of mine own desert , 
▁ xxmaj and this my hand , against my self uprear , 
▁ xxmaj to guard the lawful reasons on thy part , 
▁ xxmaj to leave poor me , thou hast the strength of laws , 
▁ xxmaj since why to love , i can allege no cause . 


▁ 50 
▁ xxmaj how heavy do i journey on the way , 
▁ xxmaj when what i seek ( my weary travel 's end ) 
▁ xxmaj doth teach that case and that repose to say 
▁ ' thus far the miles are measured from thy friend . ' 
▁ xxmaj the beast that bears me , tired with my woe , 
▁ xxmaj plods dully on , to bear that weight in me , 
▁ xxmaj as if by some instinct the wretch did know 
▁ xxmaj his rider loved not speed being made from thee : 
▁ xxmaj the bloody spur can not provoke him on , 
▁ xxmaj that sometimes anger thrusts into his hide , 
▁ xxmaj which heavily he answers with a groan , 
▁ xxmaj more sharp to me than spurring to his side , 
▁ xxmaj for that same groan doth put this in my mind , 
▁ xxmaj my grief lies onward and my joy behind . 


▁ 51 
▁ xxmaj thus can my love excuse the slow offence , 
▁ xxmaj of my dull bearer , when from thee i speed , 
▁ xxmaj from where thou art , why should i haste me thence ? 
▁ xxmaj till i return of posting is no need . 
▁ o what excuse will my poor beast then find , 
▁ xxmaj when swift extremity can seem but slow ? 
▁ xxmaj then should i spur though mounted on the wind , 
▁ xxmaj in winged speed no motion shall i know , 
▁ xxmaj then can no horse with my desire keep pace , 
▁ xxmaj therefore desire ( of perfect'st love being made ) 
▁ xxmaj shall neigh ( no dull flesh ) in his fiery race , 
▁ xxmaj but love , for love , thus shall excuse my jade , 
▁ xxmaj since from thee going , he went wilful - slow , 
▁ xxmaj towards thee xxmaj i 'll run , and give him leave to go . 


▁ 52 
▁ xxmaj so am i as the rich whose blessed key , 
▁ xxmaj can bring him to his sweet up - locked treasure , 
▁ xxmaj the which he will not every hour survey , 
▁ xxmaj for blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare , 
▁ xxmaj since seldom coming in that long year set , 
▁ xxmaj like stones of worth they thinly placed are , 
▁ xxmaj or captain jewels in the carcanet . 
▁ xxmaj so is the time that keeps you as my chest 
▁ xxmaj or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide , 
▁ xxmaj to make some special instant special - blest , 
▁ xxmaj by new unfolding his imprisoned pride . 
▁ xxmaj blessed are you whose worthiness gives scope , 
▁ xxmaj being had to triumph , being lacked to hope . 


▁ 53 
▁ xxmaj what is your substance , whereof are you made , 
▁ xxmaj that millions of strange shadows on you tend ? 
▁ xxmaj since every one , hath every one , one shade , 
▁ xxmaj and you but one , can every shadow lend : 
▁ xxmaj describe xxmaj adonis and the counterfeit , 
▁ xxmaj is poorly imitated after you , 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj helen 's cheek all art of beauty set , 
▁ xxmaj and you in xxmaj grecian tires are painted new : 
▁ xxmaj speak of the spring , and foison of the year , 
▁ xxmaj the one doth shadow of your beauty show , 
▁ xxmaj the other as your bounty doth appear , 
▁ xxmaj and you in every blessed shape we know . 
▁ xxmaj in all external grace you have some part , 
▁ xxmaj but you like none , none you for constant heart . 


▁ 54 
▁ o how much more doth beauty beauteous seem , 
▁ xxmaj by that sweet ornament which truth doth give ! 
▁ xxmaj the rose looks fair , but fairer we it deem 
▁ xxmaj for that sweet odour , which doth in it live : 
▁ xxmaj the canker blooms have full as deep a dye , 
▁ xxmaj as the perfumed tincture of the roses , 
▁ xxmaj hang on such thorns , and play as wantonly , 
▁ xxmaj when summer 's breath their masked buds discloses : 
▁ xxmaj but for their virtue only is their show , 
▁ xxmaj they live unwooed , and unrespected fade , 
▁ xxmaj die to themselves . xxmaj sweet roses do not so , 
▁ xxmaj of their sweet deaths , are sweetest odours made : 
▁ xxmaj and so of you , beauteous and lovely youth , 
▁ xxmaj when that shall vade , by verse distills your truth . 


▁ 55 
▁ xxmaj not marble , nor the gilded monuments 
▁ xxmaj of princes shall outlive this powerful rhyme , 
▁ xxmaj but you shall shine more bright in these contents 
▁ xxmaj than unswept stone , besmeared with sluttish time . 
▁ xxmaj when wasteful war shall statues overturn , 
▁ xxmaj and broils root out the work of masonry , 
▁ xxmaj nor xxmaj mars his sword , nor war 's quick fire shall burn : 
▁ xxmaj the living record of your memory . 
▁ ' gainst death , and all - oblivious enmity 
▁ xxmaj shall you pace forth , your praise shall still find room , 
▁ xxmaj even in the eyes of all posterity 
▁ xxmaj that wear this world out to the ending doom . 
▁ xxmaj so till the judgment that your self arise , 
▁ xxmaj you live in this , and dwell in lovers ' eyes . 


▁ 56 
▁ xxmaj sweet love renew thy force , be it not said 
▁ xxmaj thy edge should blunter be than appetite , 
▁ xxmaj which but to - day by feeding is allayed , 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow sharpened in his former might . 
▁ xxmaj so love be thou , although to - day thou fill 
▁ xxmaj thy hungry eyes , even till they wink with fulness , 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow see again , and do not kill 
▁ xxmaj the spirit of love , with a perpetual dulness : 
▁ xxmaj let this sad interim like the ocean be 
▁ xxmaj which parts the shore , where two contracted new , 
▁ xxmaj come daily to the banks , that when they see : 
▁ xxmaj return of love , more blest may be the view . 
▁ xxmaj or call it winter , which being full of care , 
▁ xxmaj makes summer 's welcome , thrice more wished , more rare . 


▁ 57 
▁ xxmaj being your slave what should i do but tend , 
▁ xxmaj upon the hours , and times of your desire ? 
▁ i have no precious time at all to spend ; 
▁ xxmaj nor services to do till you require . 
▁ xxmaj nor dare i chide the world - without - end hour , 
▁ xxmaj whilst i ( my sovereign ) watch the clock for you , 
▁ xxmaj nor think the bitterness of absence sour , 
▁ xxmaj when you have bid your servant once adieu . 
▁ xxmaj nor dare i question with my jealous thought , 
▁ xxmaj where you may be , or your affairs suppose , 
▁ xxmaj but like a sad slave stay and think of nought 
▁ xxmaj save where you are , how happy you make those . 
▁ xxmaj so true a fool is love , that in your will , 
▁ ( though you do any thing ) he thinks no ill . 


▁ 58 
▁ xxmaj that god forbid , that made me first your slave , 
▁ i should in thought control your times of pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj or at your hand th ' account of hours to crave , 
▁ xxmaj being your vassal bound to stay your leisure . 
▁ o let me suffer ( being at your beck ) 
▁ xxmaj th ' imprisoned absence of your liberty , 
▁ xxmaj and patience tame to sufferance bide each check , 
▁ xxmaj without accusing you of injury . 
▁ xxmaj be where you list , your charter is so strong , 
▁ xxmaj that you your self may privilage your time 
▁ xxmaj to what you will , to you it doth belong , 
▁ xxmaj your self to pardon of self - doing crime . 
▁ i am to wait , though waiting so be hell , 
▁ xxmaj not blame your pleasure be it ill or well . 


▁ 59 
▁ xxmaj if there be nothing new , but that which is , 
▁ xxmaj hath been before , how are our brains beguiled , 
▁ xxmaj which labouring for invention bear amis 
▁ xxmaj the second burthen of a former child ! 
▁ o that record could with a backward look , 
▁ xxmaj even of five hundred courses of the sun , 
▁ xxmaj show me your image in some antique book , 
▁ xxmaj since mind at first in character was done . 
▁ xxmaj that i might see what the old world could say , 
▁ xxmaj to this composed wonder of your frame , 
▁ xxmaj whether we are mended , or whether better they , 
▁ xxmaj or whether revolution be the same . 
▁ o sure i am the wits of former days , 
▁ xxmaj to subjects worse have given admiring praise . 


▁ 60 
▁ xxmaj like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore , 
▁ xxmaj so do our minutes hasten to their end , 
▁ xxmaj each changing place with that which goes before , 
▁ xxmaj in sequent toil all forwards do contend . 
▁ xxmaj nativity once in the main of light , 
▁ xxmaj crawls to maturity , wherewith being crowned , 
▁ xxmaj crooked eclipses ' gainst his glory fight , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj time that gave , doth now his gift confound . 
▁ xxmaj time doth transfix the flourish set on youth , 
▁ xxmaj and delves the parallels in beauty 's brow , 
▁ xxmaj feeds on the rarities of nature 's truth , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing stands but for his scythe to mow . 
▁ xxmaj and yet to times in hope , my verse shall stand 
▁ xxmaj praising thy worth , despite his cruel hand . 


▁ 61 
▁ xxmaj is it thy will , thy image should keep open 
▁ xxmaj my heavy eyelids to the weary night ? 
▁ xxmaj dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken , 
▁ xxmaj while shadows like to thee do mock my sight ? 
▁ xxmaj is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee 
▁ xxmaj so far from home into my deeds to pry , 
▁ xxmaj to find out shames and idle hours in me , 
▁ xxmaj the scope and tenure of thy jealousy ? 
▁ o no , thy love though much , is not so great , 
▁ xxmaj it is my love that keeps mine eye awake , 
▁ xxmaj mine own true love that doth my rest defeat , 
▁ xxmaj to play the watchman ever for thy sake . 
▁ xxmaj for thee watch xxup i , whilst thou dost wake elsewhere , 
▁ xxmaj from me far off , with others all too near . 


▁ 62 
▁ xxmaj sin of self - love possesseth all mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj and all my soul , and all my every part ; 
▁ xxmaj and for this sin there is no remedy , 
▁ xxmaj it is so grounded inward in my heart . 
▁ xxmaj methinks no face so gracious is as mine , 
▁ xxmaj no shape so true , no truth of such account , 
▁ xxmaj and for my self mine own worth do define , 
▁ xxmaj as i all other in all worths surmount . 
▁ xxmaj but when my glass shows me my self indeed 
▁ beated and chopt with tanned antiquity , 
▁ xxmaj mine own self - love quite contrary i read : 
▁ xxmaj self , so self - loving were iniquity . 
▁ ' tis thee ( my self ) that for my self i praise , 
▁ xxmaj painting my age with beauty of thy days . 


▁ 63 
▁ xxmaj against my love shall be as i am now 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj time 's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn , 
▁ xxmaj when hours have drained his blood and filled his brow 
▁ xxmaj with lines and wrinkles , when his youthful morn 
▁ xxmaj hath travelled on to age 's steepy night , 
▁ xxmaj and all those beauties whereof now he 's king 
▁ xxmaj are vanishing , or vanished out of sight , 
▁ xxmaj stealing away the treasure of his spring : 
▁ xxmaj for such a time do i now fortify 
▁ xxmaj against confounding age 's cruel knife , 
▁ xxmaj that he shall never cut from memory 
▁ xxmaj my sweet love 's beauty , though my lover 's life . 
▁ xxmaj his beauty shall in these black lines be seen , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall live , and he in them still green . 


▁ 64 
▁ xxmaj when i have seen by xxmaj time 's fell hand defaced 
▁ xxmaj the rich - proud cost of outworn buried age , 
▁ xxmaj when sometime lofty towers i see down - rased , 
▁ xxmaj and brass eternal slave to mortal rage . 
▁ xxmaj when i have seen the hungry ocean gain 
▁ xxmaj advantage on the kingdom of the shore , 
▁ xxmaj and the firm soil win of the watery main , 
▁ xxmaj increasing store with loss , and loss with store . 
▁ xxmaj when i have seen such interchange of xxmaj state , 
▁ xxmaj or state it self confounded , to decay , 
▁ xxmaj ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj time will come and take my love away . 
▁ xxmaj this thought is as a death which can not choose 
▁ xxmaj but weep to have , that which it fears to lose . 


▁ 65 
▁ xxmaj since brass , nor stone , nor earth , nor boundless sea , 
▁ xxmaj but sad mortality o'ersways their power , 
▁ xxmaj how with this rage shall beauty hold a plea , 
▁ xxmaj whose action is no stronger than a flower ? 
▁ o how shall summer 's honey breath hold out , 
▁ xxmaj against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days , 
▁ xxmaj when rocks impregnable are not so stout , 
▁ xxmaj nor gates of steel so strong but time decays ? 
▁ o fearful meditation , where alack , 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj time 's best jewel from xxmaj time 's chest lie hid ? 
▁ xxmaj or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back , 
▁ xxmaj or who his spoil of beauty can forbid ? 
▁ o none , unless this miracle have might , 
▁ xxmaj that in black ink my love may still shine bright . 


▁ 66 
▁ xxmaj tired with all these for restful death i cry , 
▁ xxmaj as to behold desert a beggar born , 
▁ xxmaj and needy nothing trimmed in jollity , 
▁ xxmaj and purest faith unhappily forsworn , 
▁ xxmaj and gilded honour shamefully misplaced , 
▁ xxmaj and maiden virtue rudely strumpeted , 
▁ xxmaj and right perfection wrongfully disgraced , 
▁ xxmaj and strength by limping sway disabled 
▁ xxmaj and art made tongue - tied by authority , 
▁ xxmaj and folly ( doctor - like ) controlling skill , 
▁ xxmaj and simple truth miscalled simplicity , 
▁ xxmaj and captive good attending captain ill . 
▁ xxmaj tired with all these , from these would i be gone , 
▁ xxmaj save that to die , i leave my love alone . 


▁ 67 
▁ xxmaj ah wherefore with infection should he live , 
▁ xxmaj and with his presence grace impiety , 
▁ xxmaj that sin by him advantage should achieve , 
▁ xxmaj and lace it self with his society ? 
▁ xxmaj why should false painting imitate his cheek , 
▁ xxmaj and steal dead seeming of his living hue ? 
▁ xxmaj why should poor beauty indirectly seek , 
▁ xxmaj roses of shadow , since his rose is true ? 
▁ xxmaj why should he live , now nature bankrupt is , 
▁ xxmaj beggared of blood to blush through lively veins , 
▁ xxmaj for she hath no exchequer now but his , 
▁ xxmaj and proud of many , lives upon his gains ? 
▁ o him she stores , to show what wealth she had , 
▁ xxmaj in days long since , before these last so bad . 


▁ 68 
▁ xxmaj thus is his cheek the map of days outworn , 
▁ xxmaj when beauty lived and died as flowers do now , 
▁ xxmaj before these bastard signs of fair were born , 
▁ xxmaj or durst inhabit on a living brow : 
▁ xxmaj before the golden tresses of the dead , 
▁ xxmaj the right of sepulchres , were shorn away , 
▁ xxmaj to live a second life on second head , 
▁ xxmaj ere beauty 's dead fleece made another gay : 
▁ xxmaj in him those holy antique hours are seen , 
▁ xxmaj without all ornament , it self and true , 
▁ xxmaj making no summer of another 's green , 
▁ xxmaj robbing no old to dress his beauty new , 
▁ xxmaj and him as for a map doth xxmaj nature store , 
▁ xxmaj to show false xxmaj art what beauty was of yore . 


▁ 69 
▁ xxmaj those parts of thee that the world 's eye doth view , 
▁ xxmaj want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend : 
▁ xxmaj all tongues ( the voice of souls ) give thee that due , 
▁ xxmaj uttering bare truth , even so as foes commend . 
▁ xxmaj thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned , 
▁ xxmaj but those same tongues that give thee so thine own , 
▁ xxmaj in other accents do this praise confound 
▁ xxmaj by seeing farther than the eye hath shown . 
▁ xxmaj they look into the beauty of thy mind , 
▁ xxmaj and that in guess they measure by thy deeds , 
▁ xxmaj then churls their thoughts ( although their eyes were kind ) 
▁ xxmaj to thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds : 
▁ xxmaj but why thy odour matcheth not thy show , 
▁ xxmaj the soil is this , that thou dost common grow . 


▁ 70 
▁ xxmaj that thou art blamed shall not be thy defect , 
▁ xxmaj for slander 's mark was ever yet the fair , 
▁ xxmaj the ornament of beauty is suspect , 
▁ a crow that flies in heaven 's sweetest air . 
▁ xxmaj so thou be good , slander doth but approve , 
▁ xxmaj thy worth the greater being wooed of time , 
▁ xxmaj for canker vice the sweetest buds doth love , 
▁ xxmaj and thou present'st a pure unstained prime . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast passed by the ambush of young days , 
▁ xxmaj either not assailed , or victor being charged , 
▁ xxmaj yet this thy praise can not be so thy praise , 
▁ xxmaj to tie up envy , evermore enlarged , 
▁ xxmaj if some suspect of ill masked not thy show , 
▁ xxmaj then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe . 


▁ 71 
▁ xxmaj no longer mourn for me when i am dead , 
▁ xxmaj than you shall hear the surly sullen bell 
▁ xxmaj give warning to the world that i am fled 
▁ xxmaj from this vile world with vilest worms to dwell : 
▁ xxmaj nay if you read this line , remember not , 
▁ xxmaj the hand that writ it , for i love you so , 
▁ xxmaj that i in your sweet thoughts would be forgot , 
▁ xxmaj if thinking on me then should make you woe . 
▁ o if ( i say ) you look upon this verse , 
▁ xxmaj when i ( perhaps ) compounded am with clay , 
▁ xxmaj do not so much as my poor name rehearse ; 
▁ xxmaj but let your love even with my life decay . 
▁ xxmaj lest the wise world should look into your moan , 
▁ xxmaj and mock you with me after i am gone . 


▁ 72 
▁ o lest the world should task you to recite , 
▁ xxmaj what merit lived in me that you should love 
▁ xxmaj after my death ( dear love ) forget me quite , 
▁ xxmaj for you in me can nothing worthy prove . 
▁ xxmaj unless you would devise some virtuous lie , 
▁ xxmaj to do more for me than mine own desert , 
▁ xxmaj and hang more praise upon deceased xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj than niggard truth would willingly impart : 
▁ o lest your true love may seem false in this , 
▁ xxmaj that you for love speak well of me untrue , 
▁ xxmaj my name be buried where my body is , 
▁ xxmaj and live no more to shame nor me , nor you . 
▁ xxmaj for i am shamed by that which i bring forth , 
▁ xxmaj and so should you , to love things nothing worth . 


▁ 73 
▁ xxmaj that time of year thou mayst in me behold , 
▁ xxmaj when yellow leaves , or none , or few do hang 
▁ xxmaj upon those boughs which shake against the cold , 
▁ xxmaj bare ruined choirs , where late the sweet birds sang . 
▁ xxmaj in me thou seest the twilight of such day , 
▁ xxmaj as after sunset fadeth in the west , 
▁ xxmaj which by and by black night doth take away , 
▁ xxmaj death 's second self that seals up all in rest . 
▁ xxmaj in me thou seest the glowing of such fire , 
▁ xxmaj that on the ashes of his youth doth lie , 
▁ xxmaj as the death - bed , whereon it must expire , 
▁ xxmaj consumed with that which it was nourished by . 
▁ xxmaj this thou perceiv'st , which makes thy love more strong , 
▁ xxmaj to love that well , which thou must leave ere long . 


▁ 74 
▁ xxmaj but be contented when that fell arrest , 
▁ xxmaj without all bail shall carry me away , 
▁ xxmaj my life hath in this line some interest , 
▁ xxmaj which for memorial still with thee shall stay . 
▁ xxmaj when thou reviewest this , thou dost review , 
▁ xxmaj the very part was consecrate to thee , 
▁ xxmaj the earth can have but earth , which is his due , 
▁ xxmaj my spirit is thine the better part of me , 
▁ xxmaj so then thou hast but lost the dregs of life , 
▁ xxmaj the prey of worms , my body being dead , 
▁ xxmaj the coward conquest of a wretch 's knife , 
▁ xxmaj too base of thee to be remembered , 
▁ xxmaj the worth of that , is that which it contains , 
▁ xxmaj and that is this , and this with thee remains . 


▁ 75 
▁ xxmaj so are you to my thoughts as food to life , 
▁ xxmaj or as sweet - seasoned showers are to the ground ; 
▁ xxmaj and for the peace of you i hold such strife 
▁ xxmaj as ' twixt a miser and his wealth is found . 
▁ xxmaj now proud as an enjoyer , and anon 
▁ xxmaj doubting the filching age will steal his treasure , 
▁ xxmaj now counting best to be with you alone , 
▁ xxmaj then bettered that the world may see my pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj sometime all full with feasting on your sight , 
▁ xxmaj and by and by clean starved for a look , 
▁ xxmaj possessing or pursuing no delight 
▁ xxmaj save what is had , or must from you be took . 
▁ xxmaj thus do i pine and surfeit day by day , 
▁ xxmaj or gluttoning on all , or all away . 


▁ 76 
▁ xxmaj why is my verse so barren of new pride ? 
▁ xxmaj so far from variation or quick change ? 
▁ xxmaj why with the time do i not glance aside 
▁ xxmaj to new - found methods , and to compounds strange ? 
▁ xxmaj why write i still all one , ever the same , 
▁ xxmaj and keep invention in a noted weed , 
▁ xxmaj that every word doth almost tell my name , 
▁ xxmaj showing their birth , and where they did proceed ? 
▁ o know sweet love i always write of you , 
▁ xxmaj and you and love are still my argument : 
▁ xxmaj so all my best is dressing old words new , 
▁ xxmaj spending again what is already spent : 
▁ xxmaj for as the sun is daily new and old , 
▁ xxmaj so is my love still telling what is told . 


▁ 77 
▁ xxmaj thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear , 
▁ xxmaj thy dial how thy precious minutes waste , 
▁ xxmaj these vacant leaves thy mind 's imprint will bear , 
▁ xxmaj and of this book , this learning mayst thou taste . 
▁ xxmaj the wrinkles which thy glass will truly show , 
▁ xxmaj of mouthed graves will give thee memory , 
▁ xxmaj thou by thy dial 's shady stealth mayst know , 
▁ xxmaj time 's thievish progress to eternity . 
▁ xxmaj look what thy memory can not contain , 
▁ xxmaj commit to these waste blanks , and thou shalt find 
▁ xxmaj those children nursed , delivered from thy brain , 
▁ xxmaj to take a new acquaintance of thy mind . 
▁ xxmaj these offices , so oft as thou wilt look , 
▁ xxmaj shall profit thee , and much enrich thy book . 


▁ 78 
▁ xxmaj so oft have i invoked thee for my muse , 
▁ xxmaj and found such fair assistance in my verse , 
▁ xxmaj as every alien pen hath got my use , 
▁ xxmaj and under thee their poesy disperse . 
▁ xxmaj thine eyes , that taught the dumb on high to sing , 
▁ xxmaj and heavy ignorance aloft to fly , 
▁ xxmaj have added feathers to the learned 's wing , 
▁ xxmaj and given grace a double majesty . 
▁ xxmaj yet be most proud of that which i compile , 
▁ xxmaj whose influence is thine , and born of thee , 
▁ xxmaj in others ' works thou dost but mend the style , 
▁ xxmaj and arts with thy sweet graces graced be . 
▁ xxmaj but thou art all my art , and dost advance 
▁ xxmaj as high as learning , my rude ignorance . 


▁ 79 
▁ xxmaj whilst i alone did call upon thy aid , 
▁ xxmaj my verse alone had all thy gentle grace , 
▁ xxmaj but now my gracious numbers are decayed , 
▁ xxmaj and my sick muse doth give an other place . 
▁ i grant ( sweet love ) thy lovely argument 
▁ xxmaj deserves the travail of a worthier pen , 
▁ xxmaj yet what of thee thy poet doth invent , 
▁ xxmaj he robs thee of , and pays it thee again , 
▁ xxmaj he lends thee virtue , and he stole that word , 
▁ xxmaj from thy behaviour , beauty doth he give 
▁ xxmaj and found it in thy cheek : he can afford 
▁ xxmaj no praise to thee , but what in thee doth live . 
▁ xxmaj then thank him not for that which he doth say , 
▁ xxmaj since what he owes thee , thou thy self dost pay . 


▁ 80 
▁ o how i faint when i of you do write , 
▁ xxmaj knowing a better spirit doth use your name , 
▁ xxmaj and in the praise thereof spends all his might , 
▁ xxmaj to make me tongue - tied speaking of your fame . 
▁ xxmaj but since your worth ( wide as the ocean is ) 
▁ xxmaj the humble as the proudest sail doth bear , 
▁ xxmaj my saucy bark ( inferior far to his ) 
▁ xxmaj on your broad main doth wilfully appear . 
▁ xxmaj your shallowest help will hold me up afloat , 
▁ xxmaj whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride , 
▁ xxmaj or ( being wrecked ) i am a worthless boat , 
▁ xxmaj he of tall building , and of goodly pride . 
▁ xxmaj then if he thrive and i be cast away , 
▁ xxmaj the worst was this , my love was my decay . 


▁ 81 
▁ xxmaj or i shall live your epitaph to make , 
▁ xxmaj or you survive when i in earth am rotten , 
▁ xxmaj from hence your memory death can not take , 
▁ xxmaj although in me each part will be forgotten . 
▁ xxmaj your name from hence immortal life shall have , 
▁ xxmaj though i ( once gone ) to all the world must die , 
▁ xxmaj the earth can yield me but a common grave , 
▁ xxmaj when you entombed in men 's eyes shall lie , 
▁ xxmaj your monument shall be my gentle verse , 
▁ xxmaj which eyes not yet created shall o'er - read , 
▁ xxmaj and tongues to be , your being shall rehearse , 
▁ xxmaj when all the breathers of this world are dead , 
▁ xxmaj you still shall live ( such virtue hath my pen ) 
▁ xxmaj where breath most breathes , even in the mouths of men . 


▁ 82 
▁ i grant thou wert not married to my muse , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook 
▁ xxmaj the dedicated words which writers use 
▁ xxmaj of their fair subject , blessing every book . 
▁ xxmaj thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue , 
▁ xxmaj finding thy worth a limit past my praise , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore art enforced to seek anew , 
▁ xxmaj some fresher stamp of the time - bettering days . 
▁ xxmaj and do so love , yet when they have devised , 
▁ xxmaj what strained touches rhetoric can lend , 
▁ xxmaj thou truly fair , wert truly sympathized , 
▁ xxmaj in true plain words , by thy true - telling friend . 
▁ xxmaj and their gross painting might be better used , 
▁ xxmaj where cheeks need blood , in thee it is abused . 


▁ 83 
▁ i never saw that you did painting need , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore to your fair no painting set , 
▁ i found ( or thought i found ) you did exceed , 
▁ xxmaj that barren tender of a poet 's debt : 
▁ xxmaj and therefore have i slept in your report , 
▁ xxmaj that you your self being extant well might show , 
▁ xxmaj how far a modern quill doth come too short , 
▁ xxmaj speaking of worth , what worth in you doth grow . 
▁ xxmaj this silence for my sin you did impute , 
▁ xxmaj which shall be most my glory being dumb , 
▁ xxmaj for i impair not beauty being mute , 
▁ xxmaj when others would give life , and bring a tomb . 
▁ xxmaj there lives more life in one of your fair eyes , 
▁ xxmaj than both your poets can in praise devise . 


▁ 84 
▁ xxmaj who is it that says most , which can say more , 
▁ xxmaj than this rich praise , that you alone , are you ? 
▁ xxmaj in whose confine immured is the store , 
▁ xxmaj which should example where your equal grew . 
▁ xxmaj lean penury within that pen doth dwell , 
▁ xxmaj that to his subject lends not some small glory , 
▁ xxmaj but he that writes of you , if he can tell , 
▁ xxmaj that you are you , so dignifies his story . 
▁ xxmaj let him but copy what in you is writ , 
▁ xxmaj not making worse what nature made so clear , 
▁ xxmaj and such a counterpart shall fame his wit , 
▁ xxmaj making his style admired every where . 
▁ xxmaj you to your beauteous blessings add a curse , 
▁ xxmaj being fond on praise , which makes your praises worse . 


▁ 85 
▁ xxmaj my tongue - tied muse in manners holds her still , 
▁ xxmaj while comments of your praise richly compiled , 
▁ xxmaj reserve their character with golden quill , 
▁ xxmaj and precious phrase by all the xxmaj muses filed . 
▁ i think good thoughts , whilst other write good words , 
▁ xxmaj and like unlettered clerk still cry xxmaj amen , 
▁ xxmaj to every hymn that able spirit affords , 
▁ xxmaj in polished form of well refined pen . 
▁ xxmaj hearing you praised , i say ' tis so , ' tis true , 
▁ xxmaj and to the most of praise add something more , 
▁ xxmaj but that is in my thought , whose love to you 
▁ ( though words come hindmost ) holds his rank before , 
▁ xxmaj then others , for the breath of words respect , 
▁ xxmaj me for my dumb thoughts , speaking in effect . 


▁ 86 
▁ xxmaj was it the proud full sail of his great verse , 
▁ xxmaj bound for the prize of ( all too precious ) you , 
▁ xxmaj that did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse , 
▁ xxmaj making their tomb the womb wherein they grew ? 
▁ xxmaj was it his spirit , by spirits taught to write , 
▁ xxmaj above a mortal pitch , that struck me dead ? 
▁ xxmaj no , neither he , nor his compeers by night 
▁ xxmaj giving him aid , my verse astonished . 
▁ xxmaj he nor that affable familiar ghost 
▁ xxmaj which nightly gulls him with intelligence , 
▁ xxmaj as victors of my silence can not boast , 
▁ i was not sick of any fear from thence . 
▁ xxmaj but when your countenance filled up his line , 
▁ xxmaj then lacked i matter , that enfeebled mine . 


▁ 87 
▁ xxmaj farewell ! thou art too dear for my possessing , 
▁ xxmaj and like enough thou know'st thy estimate , 
▁ xxmaj the charter of thy worth gives thee releasing : 
▁ xxmaj my bonds in thee are all determinate . 
▁ xxmaj for how do i hold thee but by thy granting , 
▁ xxmaj and for that riches where is my deserving ? 
▁ xxmaj the cause of this fair gift in me is wanting , 
▁ xxmaj and so my patent back again is swerving . 
▁ xxmaj thy self thou gav'st , thy own worth then not knowing , 
▁ xxmaj or me to whom thou gav'st it , else mistaking , 
▁ xxmaj so thy great gift upon misprision growing , 
▁ xxmaj comes home again , on better judgement making . 
▁ xxmaj thus have i had thee as a dream doth flatter , 
▁ xxmaj in sleep a king , but waking no such matter . 


▁ 88 
▁ xxmaj when thou shalt be disposed to set me light , 
▁ xxmaj and place my merit in the eye of scorn , 
▁ xxmaj upon thy side , against my self xxmaj i 'll fight , 
▁ xxmaj and prove thee virtuous , though thou art forsworn : 
▁ xxmaj with mine own weakness being best acquainted , 
▁ xxmaj upon thy part i can set down a story 
▁ xxmaj of faults concealed , wherein i am attainted : 
▁ xxmaj that thou in losing me , shalt win much glory : 
▁ xxmaj and i by this will be a gainer too , 
▁ xxmaj for bending all my loving thoughts on thee , 
▁ xxmaj the injuries that to my self i do , 
▁ xxmaj doing thee vantage , double - vantage me . 
▁ xxmaj such is my love , to thee i so belong , 
▁ xxmaj that for thy right , my self will bear all wrong . 


▁ 89 
▁ xxmaj say that thou didst forsake me for some fault , 
▁ xxmaj and i will comment upon that offence , 
▁ xxmaj speak of my lameness , and i straight will halt : 
▁ xxmaj against thy reasons making no defence . 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not ( love ) disgrace me half so ill , 
▁ xxmaj to set a form upon desired change , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj i 'll my self disgrace , knowing thy will , 
▁ i will acquaintance strangle and look strange : 
▁ xxmaj be absent from thy walks and in my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj thy sweet beloved name no more shall dwell , 
▁ xxmaj lest i ( too much profane ) should do it wronk : 
▁ xxmaj and haply of our old acquaintance tell . 
▁ xxmaj for thee , against my self xxmaj i 'll vow debate , 
▁ xxmaj for i must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate . 


▁ 90 
▁ xxmaj then hate me when thou wilt , if ever , now , 
▁ xxmaj now while the world is bent my deeds to cross , 
▁ join with the spite of fortune , make me bow , 
▁ xxmaj and do not drop in for an after - loss : 
▁ xxmaj ah do not , when my heart hath ' scaped this sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj come in the rearward of a conquered woe , 
▁ xxmaj give not a windy night a rainy morrow , 
▁ xxmaj to linger out a purposed overthrow . 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt leave me , do not leave me last , 
▁ xxmaj when other petty griefs have done their spite , 
▁ xxmaj but in the onset come , so shall i taste 
▁ xxmaj at first the very worst of fortune 's might . 
▁ xxmaj and other strains of woe , which now seem woe , 
▁ xxmaj compared with loss of thee , will not seem so . 


▁ 91 
▁ xxmaj some glory in their birth , some in their skill , 
▁ xxmaj some in their wealth , some in their body 's force , 
▁ xxmaj some in their garments though new - fangled ill : 
▁ xxmaj some in their hawks and hounds , some in their horse . 
▁ xxmaj and every humour hath his adjunct pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj wherein it finds a joy above the rest , 
▁ xxmaj but these particulars are not my measure , 
▁ xxmaj all these i better in one general best . 
▁ xxmaj thy love is better than high birth to me , 
▁ xxmaj richer than wealth , prouder than garments ' costs , 
▁ xxmaj of more delight than hawks and horses be : 
▁ xxmaj and having thee , of all men 's pride i boast . 
▁ xxmaj wretched in this alone , that thou mayst take , 
▁ xxmaj all this away , and me most wretchcd make . 


▁ 92 
▁ xxmaj but do thy worst to steal thy self away , 
▁ xxmaj for term of life thou art assured mine , 
▁ xxmaj and life no longer than thy love will stay , 
▁ xxmaj for it depends upon that love of thine . 
▁ xxmaj then need i not to fear the worst of wrongs , 
▁ xxmaj when in the least of them my life hath end , 
▁ i see , a better state to me belongs 
▁ xxmaj than that , which on thy humour doth depend . 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind , 
▁ xxmaj since that my life on thy revolt doth lie , 
▁ o what a happy title do i find , 
▁ xxmaj happy to have thy love , happy to die ! 
▁ xxmaj but what 's so blessed - fair that fears no blot ? 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst be false , and yet i know it not . 


▁ 93 
▁ xxmaj so shall i live , supposing thou art true , 
▁ xxmaj like a deceived husband , so love 's face , 
▁ xxmaj may still seem love to me , though altered new : 
▁ xxmaj thy looks with me , thy heart in other place . 
▁ xxmaj for there can live no hatred in thine eye , 
▁ xxmaj therefore in that i can not know thy change , 
▁ xxmaj in many 's looks , the false heart 's history 
▁ xxmaj is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange . 
▁ xxmaj but heaven in thy creation did decree , 
▁ xxmaj that in thy face sweet love should ever dwell , 
▁ xxmaj whate'er thy thoughts , or thy heart 's workings be , 
▁ xxmaj thy looks should nothing thence , but sweetness tell . 
▁ xxmaj how like xxmaj eve 's apple doth thy beauty grow , 
▁ xxmaj if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show . 


▁ 94 
▁ xxmaj they that have power to hurt , and will do none , 
▁ xxmaj that do not do the thing , they most do show , 
▁ xxmaj who moving others , are themselves as stone , 
▁ xxmaj unmoved , cold , and to temptation slow : 
▁ xxmaj they rightly do inherit heaven 's graces , 
▁ xxmaj and husband nature 's riches from expense , 
▁ xxmaj tibey are the lords and owners of their faces , 
▁ xxmaj others , but stewards of their excellence : 
▁ xxmaj the summer 's flower is to the summer sweet , 
▁ xxmaj though to it self , it only live and die , 
▁ xxmaj but if that flower with base infection meet , 
▁ xxmaj the basest weed outbraves his dignity : 
▁ xxmaj for sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds , 
▁ xxmaj lilies that fester , smell far worse than weeds . 


▁ 95 
▁ xxmaj how sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame , 
▁ xxmaj which like a canker in the fragrant rose , 
▁ xxmaj doth spot the beauty of thy budding name ! 
▁ o in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose ! 
▁ xxmaj that tongue that tells the story of thy days , 
▁ ( making lascivious comments on thy sport ) 
▁ xxmaj can not dispraise , but in a kind of praise , 
▁ xxmaj naming thy name , blesses an ill report . 
▁ o what a mansion have those vices got , 
▁ xxmaj which for their habitation chose out thee , 
▁ xxmaj where beauty 's veil doth cover every blot , 
▁ xxmaj and all things turns to fair , that eyes can see ! 
▁ xxmaj take heed ( dear heart ) of this large privilege , 
▁ xxmaj the hardest knife ill - used doth lose his edge . 


▁ 96 
▁ xxmaj some say thy fault is youth , some wantonness , 
▁ xxmaj some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport , 
▁ xxmaj both grace and faults are loved of more and less : 
▁ xxmaj thou mak'st faults graces , that to thee resort : 
▁ xxmaj as on the finger of a throned queen , 
▁ xxmaj the basest jewel will be well esteemed : 
▁ xxmaj so are those errors that in thee are seen , 
▁ xxmaj to truths translated , and for true things deemed . 
▁ xxmaj how many lambs might the stern wolf betray , 
▁ xxmaj if like a lamb he could his looks translate ! 
▁ xxmaj how many gazers mightst thou lead away , 
▁ if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state ! 
▁ xxmaj but do not so , i love thee in such sort , 
▁ xxmaj as thou being mine , mine is thy good report . 


▁ 97 
▁ xxmaj how like a winter hath my absence been 
▁ xxmaj from thee , the pleasure of the fleeting year ! 
▁ xxmaj what freezings have i felt , what dark days seen ! 
▁ xxmaj what old xxmaj december 's bareness everywhere ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet this time removed was summer 's time , 
▁ xxmaj the teeming autumn big with rich increase , 
▁ xxmaj bearing the wanton burden of the prime , 
▁ xxmaj like widowed wombs after their lords ' decease : 
▁ xxmaj yet this abundant issue seemed to me 
▁ xxmaj but hope of orphans , and unfathered fruit , 
▁ xxmaj for summer and his pleasures wait on thee , 
▁ xxmaj and thou away , the very birds are mute . 
▁ xxmaj or if they sing , ' tis with so dull a cheer , 
▁ xxmaj that leaves look pale , dreading the winter 's near . 


▁ 98 
▁ xxmaj from you have i been absent in the spring , 
▁ xxmaj when proud - pied xxmaj april ( dressed in all his trim ) 
▁ xxmaj hath put a spirit of youth in every thing : 
▁ xxmaj that heavy xxmaj saturn laughed and leaped with him . 
▁ xxmaj yet nor the lays of birds , nor the sweet smell 
▁ xxmaj of different flowers in odour and in hue , 
▁ xxmaj could make me any summer 's story tell : 
▁ xxmaj or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew : 
▁ xxmaj nor did i wonder at the lily 's white , 
▁ xxmaj nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose , 
▁ xxmaj they were but sweet , but figures of delight : 
▁ xxmaj drawn after you , you pattern of all those . 
▁ xxmaj yet seemed it winter still , and you away , 
▁ xxmaj as with your shadow i with these did play . 


▁ 99 
▁ xxmaj the forward violet thus did i chide , 
▁ xxmaj sweet thief , whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells , 
▁ xxmaj if not from my love 's breath ? xxmaj the purple pride 
▁ xxmaj which on thy soft check for complexion dwells , 
▁ xxmaj in my love 's veins thou hast too grossly dyed . 
▁ xxmaj the lily i condemned for thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj and buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair , 
▁ xxmaj the roses fearfully on thorns did stand , 
▁ xxmaj one blushing shame , another white despair : 
▁ a third nor red , nor white , had stol'n of both , 
▁ xxmaj and to his robbery had annexed thy breath , 
▁ xxmaj but for his theft in pride of all his growth 
▁ a vengeful canker eat him up to death . 
▁ xxmaj more flowers i noted , yet i none could see , 
▁ xxmaj but sweet , or colour it had stol'n from thee . 


▁ 100 
▁ xxmaj where art thou xxmaj muse that thou forget'st so long , 
▁ xxmaj to speak of that which gives thee all thy might ? 
▁ xxmaj spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song , 
▁ xxmaj darkening thy power to lend base subjects light ? 
▁ xxmaj return forgetful xxmaj muse , and straight redeem , 
▁ xxmaj in gentle numbers time so idly spent , 
▁ xxmaj sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem , 
▁ xxmaj and gives thy pen both skill and argument . 
▁ xxmaj rise resty xxmaj muse , my love 's sweet face survey , 
▁ xxmaj if time have any wrinkle graven there , 
▁ xxmaj if any , be a satire to decay , 
▁ xxmaj and make time 's spoils despised everywhere . 
▁ xxmaj give my love fame faster than xxmaj time wastes life , 
▁ xxmaj so thou prevent'st his scythe , and crooked knife . 

▁
▁ 101 
▁ o truant xxmaj muse what shall be thy amends , 
▁ xxmaj for thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed ? 
▁ xxmaj both truth and beauty on my love depends : 
▁ xxmaj so dost thou too , and therein dignified : 
▁ xxmaj make answer xxmaj muse , wilt thou not haply say , 
▁ ' truth needs no colour with his colour fixed , 
▁ xxmaj beauty no pencil , beauty 's truth to lay : 
▁ xxmaj but best is best , if never intermixed ' ? 
▁ xxmaj because he needs no praise , wilt thou be dumb ? 
▁ xxmaj excuse not silence so , for't lies in thee , 
▁ xxmaj to make him much outlive a gilded tomb : 
▁ xxmaj and to be praised of ages yet to be . 
▁ xxmaj then do thy office xxmaj muse , i teach thee how , 
▁ xxmaj to make him seem long hence , as he shows now . 


▁ 102 
▁ xxmaj my love is strengthened though more weak in seeming , 
▁ i love not less , though less the show appear , 
▁ xxmaj that love is merchandized , whose rich esteeming , 
▁ xxmaj the owner 's tongue doth publish every where . 
▁ xxmaj our love was new , and then but in the spring , 
▁ xxmaj when i was wo nt to greet it with my lays , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj philomel in summer 's front doth sing , 
▁ xxmaj and stops her pipe in growth of riper days : 
▁ xxmaj not that the summer is less pleasant now 
▁ xxmaj than when her mournful hymns did hush the night , 
▁ xxmaj but that wild music burthens every bough , 
▁ xxmaj and sweets grown common lose their dear delight . 
▁ xxmaj therefore like her , i sometime hold my tongue : 
▁ xxmaj because i would not dull you with my song . 


▁ 103 
▁ xxmaj alack what poverty my muse brings forth , 
▁ xxmaj that having such a scope to show her pride , 
▁ xxmaj the argument all bare is of more worth 
▁ xxmaj than when it hath my added praise beside . 
▁ o blame me not if i no more can write ! 
▁ xxmaj look in your glass and there appears a face , 
▁ xxmaj that over - goes my blunt invention quite , 
▁ xxmaj dulling my lines , and doing me disgrace . 
▁ xxmaj were it not sinful then striving to mend , 
▁ xxmaj to mar the subject that before was well ? 
▁ xxmaj for to no other pass my verses tend , 
▁ xxmaj than of your graces and your gifts to tell .