xxbos xxmaj and more , much more than in my verse can sit , 
▁ xxmaj your own glass shows you , when you look in it . 


▁ 104 
▁ xxmaj to me fair friend you never can be old , 
▁ xxmaj for as you were when first your eye i eyed , 
▁ xxmaj such seems your beauty still : three winters cold , 
▁ xxmaj have from the forests shook three summers ' pride , 
▁ xxmaj three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned , 
▁ xxmaj in process of the seasons have i seen , 
▁ xxmaj three xxmaj april perfumes in three hot xxmaj junes burned , 
▁ xxmaj since first i saw you fresh which yet are green . 
▁ xxmaj ah yet doth beauty like a dial hand , 
▁ xxmaj steal from his figure , and no pace perceived , 
▁ xxmaj so your sweet hue , which methinks still doth stand 
▁ xxmaj hath motion , and mine eye may be deceived . 
▁ xxmaj for fear of which , hear this thou age unbred , 
▁ xxmaj ere you were born was beauty 's summer dead . 


▁ 105 
▁ xxmaj let not my love be called idolatry , 
▁ xxmaj nor my beloved as an idol show , 
▁ xxmaj since all alike my songs and praises be 
▁ xxmaj to one , of one , still such , and ever so . 
▁ xxmaj kind is my love to - day , to - morrow kind , 
▁ xxmaj still constant in a wondrous excellence , 
▁ xxmaj therefore my verse to constancy confined , 
▁ xxmaj one thing expressing , leaves out difference . 
▁ xxmaj fair , kind , and true , is all my argument , 
▁ xxmaj fair , kind , and true , varying to other words , 
▁ xxmaj and in this change is my invention spent , 
▁ xxmaj three themes in one , which wondrous scope affords . 
▁ xxmaj fair , kind , and true , have often lived alone . 
▁ xxmaj which three till now , never kept seat in one . 

▁
▁ 106 
▁ xxmaj when in the chronicle of wasted time , 
▁ i see descriptions of the fairest wights , 
▁ xxmaj and beauty making beautiful old rhyme , 
▁ xxmaj in praise of ladies dead , and lovely knights , 
▁ xxmaj then in the blazon of sweet beauty 's best , 
▁ xxmaj of hand , of foot , of lip , of eye , of brow , 
▁ i see their antique pen would have expressed , 
▁ xxmaj even such a beauty as you master now . 
▁ xxmaj so all their praises are but prophecies 
▁ xxmaj of this our time , all you prefiguring , 
▁ xxmaj and for they looked but with divining eyes , 
▁ xxmaj they had not skill enough your worth to sing : 
▁ xxmaj for we which now behold these present days , 
▁ xxmaj have eyes to wonder , but lack tongues to praise . 


▁ 107 
▁ xxmaj not mine own fears , nor the prophetic soul , 
▁ xxmaj of the wide world , dreaming on things to come , 
▁ xxmaj can yet the lease of my true love control , 
▁ xxmaj supposed as forfeit to a confined doom . 
▁ xxmaj the mortal moon hath her eclipse endured , 
▁ xxmaj and the sad augurs mock their own presage , 
▁ xxmaj incertainties now crown themselves assured , 
▁ xxmaj and peace proclaims olives of endless age . 
▁ xxmaj now with the drops of this most balmy time , 
▁ xxmaj my love looks fresh , and death to me subscribes , 
▁ xxmaj since spite of him xxmaj i 'll live in this poor rhyme , 
▁ xxmaj while he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes . 
▁ xxmaj and thou in this shalt find thy monument , 
▁ xxmaj when tyrants ' crests and tombs of brass are spent . 


▁ 108 
▁ xxmaj what 's in the brain that ink may character , 
▁ xxmaj which hath not figured to thee my true spirit , 
▁ xxmaj what 's new to speak , what now to register , 
▁ xxmaj that may express my love , or thy dear merit ? 
▁ xxmaj nothing sweet boy , but yet like prayers divine , 
▁ i must each day say o'er the very same , 
▁ xxmaj counting no old thing old , thou mine , i thine , 
▁ xxmaj even as when first i hallowed thy fair name . 
▁ xxmaj so that eternal love in love 's fresh case , 
▁ xxmaj weighs not the dust and injury of age , 
▁ xxmaj nor gives to necessary wrinkles place , 
▁ xxmaj but makes antiquity for aye his page , 
▁ xxmaj finding the first conceit of love there bred , 
▁ xxmaj where time and outward form would show it dead . 


▁ 109 
▁ o never say that i was false of heart , 
▁ xxmaj though absence seemed my flame to qualify , 
▁ xxmaj as easy might i from my self depart , 
▁ xxmaj as from my soul which in thy breast doth lie : 
▁ xxmaj that is my home of love , if i have ranged , 
▁ xxmaj like him that travels i return again , 
▁ xxmaj just to the time , not with the time exchanged , 
▁ xxmaj so that my self bring water for my stain , 
▁ xxmaj never believe though in my nature reigned , 
▁ xxmaj all frailties that besiege all kinds of blood , 
▁ xxmaj that it could so preposterously be stained , 
▁ xxmaj to leave for nothing all thy sum of good : 
▁ xxmaj for nothing this wide universe i call , 
▁ xxmaj save thou my rose , in it thou art my all . 


▁ 110 
▁ xxmaj alas ' tis true , i have gone here and there , 
▁ xxmaj and made my self a motley to the view , 
▁ xxmaj gored mine own thoughts , sold cheap what is most dear , 
▁ xxmaj made old offences of affections new . 
▁ xxmaj most true it is , that i have looked on truth 
▁ xxmaj askance and strangely : but by all above , 
▁ xxmaj these blenches gave my heart another youth , 
▁ xxmaj and worse essays proved thee my best of love . 
▁ xxmaj now all is done , have what shall have no end , 
▁ xxmaj mine appetite i never more will grind 
▁ xxmaj on newer proof , to try an older friend , 
▁ a god in love , to whom i am confined . 
▁ xxmaj then give me welcome , next my heaven the best , 
▁ xxmaj even to thy pure and most most loving breast . 

▁
▁ xxrep 3 1 
▁ o for my sake do you with xxmaj fortune chide , 
▁ xxmaj the guilty goddess of my harmful deeds , 
▁ xxmaj that did not better for my life provide , 
▁ xxmaj than public means which public manners breeds . 
▁ xxmaj thence comes it that my name receives a brand , 
▁ xxmaj and almost thence my nature is subdued 
▁ xxmaj to what it works in , like the dyer 's hand : 
▁ xxmaj pity me then , and wish i were renewed , 
▁ xxmaj whilst like a willing patient i will drink , 
▁ xxmaj potions of eisel ' gainst my strong infection , 
▁ xxmaj no bitterness that i will bitter think , 
▁ xxmaj nor double penance to correct correction . 
▁ xxmaj pity me then dear friend , and i assure ye , 
▁ xxmaj even that your pity is enough to cure me . 


▁ 112 
▁ xxmaj your love and pity doth th ' impression fill , 
▁ xxmaj which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow , 
▁ xxmaj for what care i who calls me well or ill , 
▁ xxmaj so you o'er - green my bad , my good allow ? 
▁ xxmaj you are my all the world , and i must strive , 
▁ xxmaj to know my shames and praises from your tongue , 
▁ xxmaj none else to me , nor i to none alive , 
▁ xxmaj that my steeled sense or changes right or wrong . 
▁ xxmaj in so profound abysm i throw all care 
▁ xxmaj of others ' voices , that my adder 's sense , 
▁ xxmaj to critic and to flatterer stopped are : 
▁ xxmaj mark how with my neglect i do dispense . 
▁ xxmaj you are so strongly in my purpose bred , 
▁ xxmaj that all the world besides methinks are dead . 


▁ 113 
▁ xxmaj since i left you , mine eye is in my mind , 
▁ xxmaj and that which governs me to go about , 
▁ xxmaj doth part his function , and is partly blind , 
▁ xxmaj seems seeing , but effectually is out : 
▁ xxmaj for it no form delivers to the heart 
▁ xxmaj of bird , of flower , or shape which it doth latch , 
▁ xxmaj of his quick objects hath the mind no part , 
▁ xxmaj nor his own vision holds what it doth catch : 
▁ xxmaj for if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight , 
▁ xxmaj the most sweet favour or deformed'st creature , 
▁ xxmaj the mountain , or the sea , the day , or night : 
▁ xxmaj the crow , or dove , it shapes them to your feature . 
▁ xxmaj incapable of more , replete with you , 
▁ xxmaj my most true mind thus maketh mine untrue . 


▁ 114 
▁ xxmaj or whether doth my mind being crowned with you 
▁ xxmaj drink up the monarch 's plague this flattery ? 
▁ xxmaj or whether shall i say mine eye saith true , 
▁ xxmaj and that your love taught it this alchemy ? 
▁ xxmaj to make of monsters , and things indigest , 
▁ xxmaj such cherubins as your sweet self resemble , 
▁ xxmaj creating every bad a perfect best 
▁ xxmaj as fast as objects to his beams assemble : 
▁ o ' tis the first , ' tis flattery in my seeing , 
▁ xxmaj and my great mind most kingly drinks it up , 
▁ xxmaj mine eye well knows what with his gust is ' greeing , 
▁ xxmaj and to his palate doth prepare the cup . 
▁ xxmaj if it be poisoned , ' tis the lesser sin , 
▁ xxmaj that mine eye loves it and doth first begin . 


▁ 115 
▁ xxmaj those lines that i before have writ do lie , 
▁ xxmaj even those that said i could not love you dearer , 
▁ xxmaj yet then my judgment knew no reason why , 
▁ xxmaj my most full flame should afterwards burn clearer , 
▁ xxmaj but reckoning time , whose millioned accidents 
▁ xxmaj creep in ' twixt vows , and change decrees of kings , 
▁ xxmaj tan sacred beauty , blunt the sharp'st intents , 
▁ xxmaj divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things : 
▁ xxmaj alas why fearing of time 's tyranny , 
▁ xxmaj might i not then say ' now i love you best , ' 
▁ xxmaj when i was certain o'er incertainty , 
▁ xxmaj crowning the present , doubting of the rest ? 
▁ xxmaj love is a babe , then might i not say so 
▁ xxmaj to give full growth to that which still doth grow . 

▁
▁ 116 
▁ xxmaj let me not to the marriage of true minds 
▁ xxmaj admit impediments , love is not love 
▁ xxmaj which alters when it alteration finds , 
▁ xxmaj or bends with the remover to remove . 
▁ o no , it is an ever - fixed mark 
▁ xxmaj that looks on tempests and is never shaken ; 
▁ xxmaj it is the star to every wand'ring bark , 
▁ xxmaj whose worth 's unknown , although his height be taken . 
▁ xxmaj love 's not xxmaj time 's fool , though rosy lips and cheeks 
▁ xxmaj within his bending sickle 's compass come , 
▁ xxmaj love alters not with his brief hours and weeks , 
▁ xxmaj but bears it out even to the edge of doom : 
▁ xxmaj if this be error and upon me proved , 
▁ i never writ , nor no man ever loved . 


▁ 117 
▁ xxmaj accuse me thus , that i have scanted all , 
▁ xxmaj wherein i should your great deserts repay , 
▁ xxmaj forgot upon your dearest love to call , 
▁ xxmaj whereto all bonds do tie me day by day , 
▁ xxmaj that i have frequent been with unknown minds , 
▁ xxmaj and given to time your own dear - purchased right , 
▁ xxmaj that i have hoisted sail to all the winds 
▁ xxmaj which should transport me farthest from your sight . 
▁ xxmaj book both my wilfulness and errors down , 
▁ xxmaj and on just proof surmise , accumulate , 
▁ xxmaj bring me within the level of your frown , 
▁ xxmaj but shoot not at me in your wakened hate : 
▁ xxmaj since my appeal says i did strive to prove 
▁ xxmaj the constancy and virtue of your love . 


▁ 118 
▁ xxmaj like as to make our appetite more keen 
▁ xxmaj with eager compounds we our palate urge , 
▁ xxmaj as to prevent our maladies unseen , 
▁ xxmaj we sicken to shun sickness when we purge . 
▁ xxmaj even so being full of your ne'er - cloying sweetness , 
▁ xxmaj to bitter sauces did i frame my feeding ; 
▁ xxmaj and sick of welfare found a kind of meetness , 
▁ xxmaj to be diseased ere that there was true needing . 
▁ xxmaj thus policy in love t ' anticipate 
▁ xxmaj the ills that were not , grew to faults assured , 
▁ xxmaj and brought to medicine a healthful state 
▁ xxmaj which rank of goodness would by ill be cured . 
▁ xxmaj but thence i learn and find the lesson true , 
▁ xxmaj drugs poison him that so feil sick of you . 


▁ 119 
▁ xxmaj what potions have i drunk of xxmaj siren tears 
▁ xxmaj distilled from limbecks foul as hell within , 
▁ xxmaj applying fears to hopes , and hopes to fears , 
▁ xxmaj still losing when i saw my self to win ! 
▁ xxmaj what wretched errors hath my heart committed , 
▁ xxmaj whilst it hath thought it self so blessed never ! 
▁ xxmaj how have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted 
▁ xxmaj in the distraction of this madding fever ! 
▁ o benefit of ill , now i find true 
▁ xxmaj that better is , by evil still made better . 
▁ xxmaj and ruined love when it is built anew 
▁ xxmaj grows fairer than at first , more strong , far greater . 
▁ xxmaj so i return rebuked to my content , 
▁ xxmaj and gain by ills thrice more than i have spent . 


▁ 120 
▁ xxmaj that you were once unkind befriends me now , 
▁ xxmaj and for that sorrow , which i then did feel , 
▁ xxmaj needs must i under my transgression bow , 
▁ xxmaj unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel . 
▁ xxmaj for if you were by my unkindness shaken 
▁ xxmaj as i by yours , y'have passed a hell of time , 
▁ xxmaj and i a tyrant have no leisure taken 
▁ xxmaj to weigh how once i suffered in your crime . 
▁ o that our night of woe might have remembered 
▁ xxmaj my deepest sense , how hard true sorrow hits , 
▁ xxmaj and soon to you , as you to me then tendered 
▁ xxmaj the humble salve , which wounded bosoms fits ! 
▁ xxmaj but that your trespass now becomes a fee , 
▁ xxmaj mine ransoms yours , and yours must ransom me . 

▁
▁ 121 
▁ ' tis better to be vile than vile esteemed , 
▁ xxmaj when not to be , receives reproach of being , 
▁ xxmaj and the just pleasure lost , which is so deemed , 
▁ xxmaj not by our feeling , but by others ' seeing . 
▁ xxmaj for why should others ' false adulterate eyes 
▁ xxmaj give salutation to my sportive blood ? 
▁ xxmaj or on my frailties why are frailer spies , 
▁ xxmaj which in their wills count bad what i think good ? 
▁ xxmaj no , i am that i am , and they that level 
▁ xxmaj at my abuses , reckon up their own , 
▁ i may be straight though they themselves be bevel ; 
▁ xxmaj by their rank thoughts , my deeds must not be shown 
▁ xxmaj unless this general evil they maintain , 
▁ xxmaj all men are bad and in their badness reign . 


▁ 122 
▁ xxmaj thy gift , thy tables , are within my brain 
▁ xxmaj full charactered with lasting memory , 
▁ xxmaj which shall above that idle rank remain 
▁ xxmaj beyond all date even to eternity . 
▁ xxmaj or at the least , so long as brain and heart 
▁ xxmaj have faculty by nature to subsist , 
▁ xxmaj till each to razed oblivion yield his part 
▁ xxmaj of thee , thy record never can be missed : 
▁ xxmaj that poor retention could not so much hold , 
▁ xxmaj nor need i tallies thy dear love to score , 
▁ xxmaj therefore to give them from me was i bold , 
▁ xxmaj to trust those tables that receive thee more : 
▁ xxmaj to keep an adjunct to remember thee 
▁ xxmaj were to import forgetfulness in me . 


▁ 123 
▁ xxmaj no ! xxmaj time , thou shalt not boast that i do change , 
▁ xxmaj thy pyramids built up with newer might 
▁ xxmaj to me are nothing novel , nothing strange , 
▁ xxmaj they are but dressings xxmaj of a former sight : 
▁ xxmaj our dates are brief , and therefore we admire , 
▁ xxmaj what thou dost foist upon us that is old , 
▁ xxmaj and rather make them born to our desire , 
▁ xxmaj than think that we before have heard them told : 
▁ xxmaj thy registers and thee i both defy , 
▁ xxmaj not wond'ring at the present , nor the past , 
▁ xxmaj for thy records , and what we see doth lie , 
▁ xxmaj made more or less by thy continual haste : 
▁ xxmaj this i do vow and this shall ever be , 
▁ i will be true despite thy scythe and thee . 


▁ 124 
▁ xxmaj if my dear love were but the child of state , 
▁ xxmaj it might for xxmaj fortune 's bastard be unfathered , 
▁ xxmaj as subject to time 's love or to time 's hate , 
▁ xxmaj weeds among weeds , or flowers with flowers gathered . 
▁ xxmaj no it was builded far from accident , 
▁ xxmaj it suffers not in smiling pomp , nor falls 
▁ xxmaj under the blow of thralled discontent , 
▁ xxmaj whereto th ' inviting time our fashion calls : 
▁ xxmaj it fears not policy that heretic , 
▁ xxmaj which works on leases of short - numbered hours , 
▁ xxmaj but all alone stands hugely politic , 
▁ xxmaj that it nor grows with heat , nor drowns with showers . 
▁ xxmaj to this i witness call the fools of time , 
▁ xxmaj which die for goodness , who have lived for crime . 


▁ 125 
▁ xxmaj were't aught to me i bore the canopy , 
▁ xxmaj with my extern the outward honouring , 
▁ xxmaj or laid great bases for eternity , 
▁ xxmaj which proves more short than waste or ruining ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not seen dwellers on form and favour 
▁ xxmaj lose all , and more by paying too much rent 
▁ xxmaj for compound sweet ; forgoing simple savour , 
▁ xxmaj pitiful thrivers in their gazing spent ? 
▁ xxmaj no , let me be obsequious in thy heart , 
▁ xxmaj and take thou my oblation , poor but free , 
▁ xxmaj which is not mixed with seconds , knows no art , 
▁ xxmaj but mutual render , only me for thee . 
▁ xxmaj hence , thou suborned informer , a true soul 
▁ xxmaj when most impeached , stands least in thy control . 

▁
▁ 126 
▁ o thou my lovely boy who in thy power , 
▁ xxmaj dost hold xxmaj time 's fickle glass his fickle hour : 
▁ xxmaj who hast by waning grown , and therein show'st , 
▁ xxmaj thy lovers withering , as thy sweet self grow'st . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj nature ( sovereign mistress over wrack ) 
▁ xxmaj as thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back , 
▁ xxmaj she keeps thee to this purpose , that her skill 
▁ xxmaj may time disgrace , and wretched minutes kill . 
▁ xxmaj yet fear her o thou minion of her pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj she may detain , but not still keep her treasure ! 
▁ xxmaj her audit ( though delayed ) answered must be , 
▁ xxmaj and her quietus is to render thee . 


▁ 127 
▁ xxmaj in the old age black was not counted fair , 
▁ xxmaj or if it were it bore not beauty 's name : 
▁ xxmaj but now is black beauty 's successive heir , 
▁ xxmaj and beauty slandered with a bastard shame , 
▁ xxmaj for since each hand hath put on nature 's power , 
▁ xxmaj fairing the foul with art 's false borrowed face , 
▁ xxmaj sweet beauty hath no name no holy bower , 
▁ xxmaj but is profaned , if not lives in disgrace . 
▁ xxmaj therefore my mistress ' eyes are raven black , 
▁ xxmaj her eyes so suited , and they mourners seem , 
▁ xxmaj at such who not born fair no beauty lack , 
▁ xxmaj slandering creation with a false esteem , 
▁ xxmaj yet so they mourn becoming of their woe , 
▁ xxmaj that every tongue says beauty should look so . 


▁ 128 
▁ xxmaj how oft when thou , my music , music play'st , 
▁ xxmaj upon that blessed wood whose motion sounds 
▁ xxmaj with thy sweet fingers when thou gently sway'st 
▁ xxmaj the wiry concord that mine ear confounds , 
▁ xxmaj do i envy those jacks that nimble leap , 
▁ xxmaj to kiss the tender inward of thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj whilst my poor lips which should that harvest reap , 
▁ xxmaj at the wood 's boldness by thee blushing stand . 
▁ xxmaj to be so tickled they would change their state 
▁ xxmaj and situation with those dancing chips , 
▁ xxmaj o'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait , 
▁ xxmaj making dead wood more blest than living lips , 
▁ xxmaj since saucy jacks so happy are in this , 
▁ xxmaj give them thy fingers , me thy lips to kiss . 


▁ 129 
▁ xxmaj th ' expense of spirit in a waste of shame 
▁ xxmaj is lust in action , and till action , lust 
▁ xxmaj is perjured , murd'rous , bloody full of blame , 
▁ xxmaj savage , extreme , rude , cruel , not to trust , 
▁ xxmaj enjoyed no sooner but despised straight , 
▁ xxmaj past reason hunted , and no sooner had 
▁ xxmaj past reason hated as a swallowed bait , 
▁ xxmaj on purpose laid to make the taker mad . 
▁ xxmaj mad in pursuit and in possession so , 
▁ xxmaj had , having , and in quest , to have extreme , 
▁ a bliss in proof and proved , a very woe , 
▁ xxmaj before a joy proposed behind a dream . 
▁ xxmaj all this the world well knows yet none knows well , 
▁ xxmaj to shun the heaven that leads men to this hell . 


▁ 130 
▁ xxmaj my mistress ' eyes are nothing like the sun , 
▁ xxmaj coral is far more red , than her lips red , 
▁ xxmaj if snow be white , why then her breasts are dun : 
▁ xxmaj if hairs be wires , black wires grow on her head : 
▁ i have seen roses damasked , red and white , 
▁ xxmaj but no such roses see i in her cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj and in some perfumes is there more delight , 
▁ xxmaj than in the breath that from my mistress reeks . 
▁ i love to hear her speak , yet well i know , 
▁ xxmaj that music hath a far more pleasing sound : 
▁ i grant i never saw a goddess go , 
▁ xxmaj my mistress when she walks treads on the ground . 
▁ xxmaj and yet by heaven i think my love as rare , 
▁ xxmaj as any she belied with false compare . 


▁ 131 
▁ xxmaj thou art as tyrannous , so as thou art , 
▁ xxmaj as those whose beauties proudly make them cruel ; 
▁ xxmaj for well thou know'st to my dear doting heart 
▁ xxmaj thou art the fairest and most precious jewel . 
▁ xxmaj yet in good faith some say that thee behold , 
▁ xxmaj thy face hath not the power to make love groan ; 
▁ xxmaj to say they err , i dare not be so bold , 
▁ xxmaj although i swear it to my self alone . 
▁ xxmaj and to be sure that is not false i swear , 
▁ a thousand groans but thinking on thy face , 
▁ xxmaj one on another 's neck do witness bear 
▁ xxmaj thy black is fairest in my judgment 's place . 
▁ xxmaj in nothing art thou black save in thy deeds , 
▁ xxmaj and thence this slander as i think proceeds . 


▁ 132 
▁ xxmaj thine eyes i love , and they as pitying me , 
▁ xxmaj knowing thy heart torment me with disdain , 
▁ xxmaj have put on black , and loving mourners be , 
▁ xxmaj looking with pretty ruth upon my pain . 
▁ xxmaj and truly not the morning sun of heaven 
▁ xxmaj better becomes the grey cheeks of the east , 
▁ xxmaj nor that full star that ushers in the even 
▁ xxmaj doth half that glory to the sober west 
▁ xxmaj as those two mourning eyes become thy face : 
▁ o let it then as well beseem thy heart 
▁ xxmaj to mourn for me since mourning doth thee grace , 
▁ xxmaj and suit thy pity like in every part . 
▁ xxmaj then will i swear beauty herself is black , 
▁ xxmaj and all they foul that thy complexion lack . 


▁ 133 
▁ xxmaj beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan 
▁ xxmaj for that deep wound it gives my friend and me ; 
▁ xxmaj is't not enough to torture me alone , 
▁ xxmaj but slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be ? 
▁ xxmaj me from my self thy cruel eye hath taken , 
▁ xxmaj and my next self thou harder hast engrossed , 
▁ xxmaj of him , my self , and thee i am forsaken , 
▁ a torment thrice three - fold thus to be crossed : 
▁ xxmaj prison my heart in thy steel bosom 's ward , 
▁ xxmaj but then my friend 's heart let my poor heart bail , 
▁ xxmaj whoe'er keeps me , let my heart be his guard , 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not then use rigour in my gaol . 
▁ xxmaj and yet thou wilt , for i being pent in thee , 
▁ xxmaj perforce am thine and all that is in me . 


▁ 134 
▁ xxmaj so now i have confessed that he is thine , 
▁ xxmaj and i my self am mortgaged to thy will , 
▁ xxmaj my self xxmaj i 'll forfeit , so that other mine , 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt restore to be my comfort still : 
▁ xxmaj but thou wilt not , nor he will not be free , 
▁ xxmaj for thou art covetous , and he is kind , 
▁ xxmaj he learned but surety - like to write for me , 
▁ xxmaj under that bond that him as fist doth bind . 
▁ xxmaj the statute of thy beauty thou wilt take , 
▁ xxmaj thou usurer that put'st forth all to use , 
▁ xxmaj and sue a friend , came debtor for my sake , 
▁ xxmaj so him i lose through my unkind abuse . 
▁ xxmaj him have i lost , thou hast both him and me , 
▁ xxmaj he pays the whole , and yet am i not free . 


▁ 135 
▁ xxmaj whoever hath her wish , thou hast thy will , 
▁ xxmaj and ' will ' to boot , and ' will ' in over - plus , 
▁ xxmaj more than enough am i that vex thee still , 
▁ xxmaj to thy sweet will making addition thus . 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou whose will is large and spacious , 
▁ xxmaj not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine ? 
▁ xxmaj shall will in others seem right gracious , 
▁ xxmaj and in my will no fair acceptance shine ? 
▁ xxmaj the sea all water , yet receives rain still , 
▁ xxmaj and in abundance addeth to his store , 
▁ xxmaj so thou being rich in will add to thy will 
▁ xxmaj one will of mine to make thy large will more . 
▁ xxmaj let no unkind , no fair beseechers kill , 
▁ xxmaj think all but one , and me in that one ' will . ' 


▁ 136 
▁ xxmaj if thy soul check thee that i come so near , 
▁ xxmaj swear to thy blind soul that i was thy ' will ' , 
▁ xxmaj and will thy soul knows is admitted there , 
▁ xxmaj thus far for love , my love - suit sweet fulfil . 
▁ ' will ' , will fulfil the treasure of thy love , 
▁ xxmaj ay , fill it full with wills , and my will one , 
▁ xxmaj in things of great receipt with case we prove , 
▁ xxmaj among a number one is reckoned none . 
▁ xxmaj then in the number let me pass untold , 
▁ xxmaj though in thy store 's account i one must be , 
▁ xxmaj for nothing hold me , so it please thee hold , 
▁ xxmaj that nothing me , a something sweet to thee . 
▁ xxmaj make but my name thy love , and love that still , 
▁ xxmaj and then thou lov'st me for my name is xxmaj will . 


▁ 137 
▁ xxmaj thou blind fool xxmaj love , what dost thou to mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj that they behold and see not what they see ? 
▁ xxmaj they know what beauty is , see where it lies , 
▁ xxmaj yet what the best is , take the worst to be . 
▁ xxmaj if eyes corrupt by over - partial looks , 
▁ xxmaj be anchored in the bay where all men ride , 
▁ xxmaj why of eyes ' falsehood hast thou forged hooks , 
▁ xxmaj whereto the judgment of my heart is tied ? 
▁ xxmaj why should my heart think that a several plot , 
▁ xxmaj which my heart knows the wide world 's common place ? 
▁ xxmaj or mine eyes seeing this , say this is not 
▁ xxmaj to put fair truth upon so foul a face ? 
▁ xxmaj in things right true my heart and eyes have erred , 
▁ xxmaj and to this false plague are they now transferred . 


▁ 138 
▁ xxmaj when my love swears that she is made of truth , 
▁ i do believe her though i know she lies , 
▁ xxmaj that she might think me some untutored youth , 
▁ xxmaj unlearned in the world 's false subtleties . 
▁ xxmaj thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young , 
▁ xxmaj although she knows my days are past the best , 
▁ xxmaj simply i credit her false - speaking tongue , 
▁ xxmaj on both sides thus is simple truth suppressed : 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore says she not she is unjust ? 
▁ xxmaj and wherefore say not i that i am old ? 
▁ o love 's best habit is in seeming trust , 
▁ xxmaj and age in love , loves not to have years told . 
▁ xxmaj therefore i lie with her , and she with me , 
▁ xxmaj and in our faults by lies we flattered be . 


▁ 139 
▁ o call not me to justify the wrong , 
▁ xxmaj that thy unkindness lays upon my heart , 
▁ xxmaj wound me not with thine eye but with thy tongue , 
▁ xxmaj use power with power , and slay me not by art , 
▁ xxmaj tell me thou lov'st elsewhere ; but in my sight , 
▁ xxmaj dear heart forbear to glance thine eye aside , 
▁ xxmaj what need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might 
▁ xxmaj is more than my o'erpressed defence can bide ? 
▁ xxmaj let me excuse thee , ah my love well knows , 
▁ xxmaj her pretty looks have been mine enemies , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore from my face she turns my foes , 
▁ xxmaj that they elsewhere might dart their injuries : 
▁ xxmaj yet do not so , but since i am near slain , 
▁ xxmaj kill me outright with looks , and rid my pain . 


▁ 140 
▁ xxmaj be wise as thou art cruel , do not press 
▁ xxmaj my tongue - tied patience with too much disdain : 
▁ xxmaj lest sorrow lend me words and words express , 
▁ xxmaj the manner of my pity - wanting pain . 
▁ xxmaj if i might teach thee wit better it were , 
▁ xxmaj though not to love , yet love to tell me so , 
▁ xxmaj as testy sick men when their deaths be near , 
▁ xxmaj no news but health from their physicians know . 
▁ xxmaj for if i should despair i should grow mad , 
▁ xxmaj and in my madness might speak ill of thee , 
▁ xxmaj now this ill - wresting world is grown so bad , 
▁ xxmaj mad slanderers by mad ears believed be . 
▁ xxmaj that i may not be so , nor thou belied , 
▁ xxmaj bear thine eyes straight , though thy proud heart go wide . 


▁ 141 
▁ xxmaj in faith i do not love thee with mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj for they in thee a thousand errors note , 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis my heart that loves what they despise , 
▁ xxmaj who in despite of view is pleased to dote . 
▁ xxmaj nor are mine cars with thy tongue 's tune delighted , 
▁ xxmaj nor tender feeling to base touches prone , 
▁ xxmaj nor taste , nor smell , desire to be invited 
▁ xxmaj to any sensual feast with thee alone : 
▁ xxmaj but my five wits , nor my five senses can 
▁ xxmaj dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee , 
▁ xxmaj who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man , 
▁ xxmaj thy proud heart 's slave and vassal wretch to be : 
▁ xxmaj only my plague thus far i count my gain , 
▁ xxmaj that she that makes me sin , awards me pain . 


▁ 142 
▁ xxmaj love is my sin , and thy dear virtue hate , 
▁ xxmaj hate of my sin , grounded on sinful loving , 
▁ o but with mine , compare thou thine own state , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt find it merits not reproving , 
▁ xxmaj or if it do , not from those lips of thine , 
▁ xxmaj that have profaned their scarlet ornaments , 
▁ xxmaj and sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine , 
▁ xxmaj robbed others ' beds ' revenues of their rents . 
▁ xxmaj be it lawful i love thee as thou lov'st those , 
▁ xxmaj whom thine eyes woo as mine importune thee , 
▁ xxmaj root pity in thy heart that when it grows , 
▁ xxmaj thy pity may deserve to pitied be . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide , 
▁ xxmaj by self - example mayst thou be denied . 


▁ 143 
▁ xxmaj lo as a careful huswife runs to catch , 
▁ xxmaj one of her feathered creatures broke away , 
▁ xxmaj sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch 
▁ xxmaj in pursuit of the thing she would have stay : 
▁ xxmaj whilst her neglected child holds her in chase , 
▁ xxmaj cries to catch her whose busy care is bent , 
▁ xxmaj to follow that which flies before her face : 
▁ xxmaj not prizing her poor infant 's discontent ; 
▁ xxmaj so run'st thou after that which flies from thee , 
▁ xxmaj whilst i thy babe chase thee afar behind , 
▁ xxmaj but if thou catch thy hope turn back to me : 
▁ xxmaj and play the mother 's part , kiss me , be kind . 
▁ xxmaj so will i pray that thou mayst have thy xxmaj will , 
▁ xxmaj if thou turn back and my loud crying still . 


▁ 144 
▁ xxmaj two loves i have of comfort and despair , 
▁ xxmaj which like two spirits do suggest me still , 
▁ xxmaj the better angel is a man right fair : 
▁ xxmaj the worser spirit a woman coloured ill . 
▁ xxmaj to win me soon to hell my female evil , 
▁ xxmaj tempteth my better angel from my side , 
▁ xxmaj and would corrupt my saint to be a devil : 
▁ xxmaj wooing his purity with her foul pride . 
▁ xxmaj and whether that my angel be turned fiend , 
▁ xxmaj suspect i may , yet not directly tell , 
▁ xxmaj but being both from me both to each friend , 
▁ i guess one angel in another 's hell . 
▁ xxmaj yet this shall i ne'er know but live in doubt , 
▁ xxmaj till my bad angel fire my good one out . 


▁ 145 
▁ xxmaj those lips that xxmaj love 's own hand did make , 
▁ xxmaj breathed forth the sound that said ' i hate ' , 
▁ xxmaj to me that languished for her sake : 
▁ xxmaj but when she saw my woeful state , 
▁ xxmaj straight in her heart did mercy come , 
▁ xxmaj chiding that tongue that ever sweet , 
▁ xxmaj was used in giving gentle doom : 
▁ xxmaj and taught it thus anew to greet : 
▁ ' i hate ' she altered with an end , 
▁ xxmaj that followed it as gentle day , 
▁ xxmaj doth follow night who like a fiend 
▁ xxmaj from heaven to hell is flown away . 
▁ ' i hate ' , from hate away she threw , 
▁ xxmaj and saved my life saying ' not you ' . 


▁ 146 
▁ xxmaj poor soul the centre of my sinful earth , 
▁ xxmaj my sinful earth these rebel powers array , 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth 
▁ xxmaj painting thy outward walls so costly gay ? 
▁ xxmaj why so large cost having so short a lease , 
▁ xxmaj dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend ? 
▁ xxmaj shall worms inheritors of this excess 
▁ xxmaj eat up thy charge ? is this thy body 's end ? 
▁ xxmaj then soul live thou upon thy servant 's loss , 
▁ xxmaj and let that pine to aggravate thy store ; 
▁ xxmaj buy terms divine in selling hours of dross ; 
▁ xxmaj within be fed , without be rich no more , 
▁ xxmaj so shall thou feed on death , that feeds on men , 
▁ xxmaj and death once dead , there 's no more dying then . 


▁ 147 
▁ xxmaj my love is as a fever longing still , 
▁ xxmaj for that which longer nurseth the disease , 
▁ xxmaj feeding on that which doth preserve the ill , 
▁ xxmaj th ' uncertain sickly appetite to please : 
▁ xxmaj my reason the physician to my love , 
▁ xxmaj angry that his prescriptions are not kept 
▁ xxmaj hath left me , and i desperate now approve , 
▁ xxmaj desire is death , which physic did except . 
▁ xxmaj past cure i am , now reason is past care , 
▁ xxmaj and frantic - mad with evermore unrest , 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts and my discourse as mad men 's are , 
▁ xxmaj at random from the truth vainly expressed . 
▁ xxmaj for i have sworn thee fair , and thought thee bright , 
▁ xxmaj who art as black as hell , as dark as night . 


▁ 148 
▁ o me ! what eyes hath love put in my head , 
▁ xxmaj which have no correspondence with true sight , 
▁ xxmaj or if they have , where is my judgment fled , 
▁ xxmaj that censures falsely what they see aright ? 
▁ xxmaj if that be fair whereon my false eyes dote , 
▁ xxmaj what means the world to say it is not so ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be not , then love doth well denote , 
▁ xxmaj love 's eye is not so true as all men 's : no , 
▁ xxmaj how can it ? o how can love 's eye be true , 
▁ xxmaj that is so vexed with watching and with tears ? 
▁ xxmaj no marvel then though i mistake my view , 
▁ xxmaj the sun it self sees not , till heaven clears . 
▁ o cunning love , with tears thou keep'st me blind , 
▁ xxmaj lest eyes well - seeing thy foul faults should find . 


▁ 149 
▁ xxmaj canst thou o cruel , say i love thee not , 
▁ xxmaj when i against my self with thee partake ? 
▁ xxmaj do i not think on thee when i forgot 
▁ xxmaj am of my self , all - tyrant , for thy sake ? 
▁ xxmaj who hateth thee that i do call my friend , 
▁ xxmaj on whom frown'st thou that i do fawn upon , 
▁ xxmaj nay if thou lour'st on me do i not spend 
▁ xxmaj revenge upon my self with present moan ? 
▁ xxmaj what merit do i in my self respect , 
▁ xxmaj that is so proud thy service to despise , 
▁ xxmaj when all my best doth worship thy defect , 
▁ xxmaj commanded by the motion of thine eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj but love hate on for now i know thy mind , 
▁ xxmaj those that can see thou lov'st , and i am blind . 


▁ 150 
▁ o from what power hast thou this powerful might , 
▁ xxmaj with insufficiency my heart to sway , 
▁ xxmaj to make me give the lie to my true sight , 
▁ xxmaj and swear that brightness doth not grace the day ? 
▁ xxmaj whence hast thou this becoming of things ill , 
▁ xxmaj that in the very refuse of thy deeds , 
▁ xxmaj there is such strength and warrantise of skill , 
▁ xxmaj that in my mind thy worst all best exceeds ? 
▁ xxmaj who taught thee how to make me love thee more , 
▁ xxmaj the more i hear and see just cause of hate ? 
▁ o though i love what others do abhor , 
▁ xxmaj with others thou shouldst not abhor my state . 
▁ xxmaj if thy unworthiness raised love in me , 
▁ xxmaj more worthy i to be beloved of thee . 


▁ 151 
▁ xxmaj love is too young to know what conscience is , 
▁ xxmaj yet who knows not conscience is born of love ? 
▁ xxmaj then gentle cheater urge not my amiss , 
▁ xxmaj lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove . 
▁ xxmaj for thou betraying me , i do betray 
▁ xxmaj my nobler part to my gross body 's treason , 
▁ xxmaj my soul doth tell my body that he may , 
▁ xxmaj triumph in love , flesh stays no farther reason , 
▁ xxmaj but rising at thy name doth point out thee , 
▁ xxmaj as his triumphant prize , proud of this pride , 
▁ xxmaj he is contented thy poor drudge to be , 
▁ xxmaj to stand in thy affairs , fall by thy side . 
▁ xxmaj no want of conscience hold it that i call , 
▁ xxmaj her love , for whose dear love i rise and fall . 


▁ 152 
▁ xxmaj in loving thee thou know'st i am forsworn , 
▁ xxmaj but thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing , 
▁ xxmaj in act thy bed - vow broke and new faith torn , 
▁ xxmaj in vowing new hate after new love bearing : 
▁ xxmaj but why of two oaths ' breach do i accuse thee , 
▁ xxmaj when i break twenty ? i am perjured most , 
▁ xxmaj for all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee : 
▁ xxmaj and all my honest faith in thee is lost . 
▁ xxmaj for i have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness : 
▁ xxmaj oaths of thy love , thy truth , thy constancy , 
▁ xxmaj and to enlighten thee gave eyes to blindness , 
▁ xxmaj or made them swear against the thing they see . 
▁ xxmaj for i have sworn thee fair : more perjured xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj to swear against the truth so foul a be . 


▁ 153 
▁ xxmaj cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep , 
▁ a maid of xxmaj dian 's this advantage found , 
▁ xxmaj and his love - kindling fire did quickly steep 
▁ xxmaj in a cold valley - fountain of that ground : 
▁ xxmaj which borrowed from this holy fire of xxmaj love , 
▁ a dateless lively heat still to endure , 
▁ xxmaj and grew a seeting bath which yet men prove , 
▁ xxmaj against strange maladies a sovereign cure : 
▁ xxmaj but at my mistress ' eye xxmaj love 's brand new - fired , 
▁ xxmaj the boy for trial needs would touch my breast , 
▁ i sick withal the help of bath desired , 
▁ xxmaj and thither hied a sad distempered guest . 
▁ xxmaj but found no cure , the bath for my help lies , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj cupid got new fire ; my mistress ' eyes . 


▁ 154 
▁ xxmaj the little xxmaj love - god lying once asleep , 
▁ xxmaj laid by his side his heart - inflaming brand , 
▁ xxmaj whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep , 
▁ xxmaj came tripping by , but in her maiden hand , 
▁ xxmaj the fairest votary took up that fire , 
▁ xxmaj which many legions of true hearts had warmed , 
▁ xxmaj and so the general of hot desire , 
▁ xxmaj was sleeping by a virgin hand disarmed . 
▁ xxmaj this brand she quenched in a cool well by , 
▁ xxmaj which from xxmaj love 's fire took heat perpetual , 
▁ xxmaj growing a bath and healthful remedy , 
▁ xxmaj for men discased , but i my mistress ' thrall , 
▁ xxmaj came there for cure and this by that i prove , 
▁ xxmaj love 's fire heats water , water cools not love . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1603 

 xxup alls xxup well xxup that xxup ends xxup well 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 


 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup king xxup of xxup france 
▁ xxup the xxup duke xxup of xxup florence 
▁ xxup bertram , xxmaj count of xxmaj rousillon 
▁ xxup lafeu , an old lord 
▁ xxup parolles , a follower of xxmaj bertram 
▁ xxup two xxup french xxup lords , serving with xxmaj bertram 

▁ xxup steward , xxmaj servant to the xxmaj countess of xxmaj rousillon 
▁ xxup lavache , a clown and xxmaj servant to the xxmaj countess of xxmaj rousillon 
▁ a xxup page , xxmaj servant to the xxmaj countess of xxmaj rousillon 

▁ xxup countess xxup of xxup rousillon , mother to xxmaj bertram 
▁ xxup helena , a gentlewoman protected by the xxmaj countess 
▁ a xxup widow xxup of xxup florence . 
▁ xxup diana , daughter to the xxmaj widow 


▁ xxup violenta , neighbour and friend to the xxmaj widow 
▁ xxup mariana , neighbour and friend to the xxmaj widow 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , etc . , xxmaj french and xxmaj florentine 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj rousillon ; xxmaj paris ; xxmaj florence ; xxmaj marseilles 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup bertram , the xxup countess xxup of xxup rousillon , xxup helena , and xxup lafeu , all in black 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj in delivering my son from me , i bury a second husband . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj and i in going , madam , weep o'er my father 's death anew ; 
▁ but i must attend his xxmaj majesty 's command , to whom i am now in 
▁ ward , evermore in subjection . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj you shall find of the xxmaj king a husband , madam ; you , sir , a 
▁ father . xxmaj he that so generally is at all times good must of 
▁ necessity hold his virtue to you , whose worthiness would stir it 
▁ up where it wanted , rather than lack it where there is such 
▁ abundance . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what hope is there of his xxmaj majesty 's amendment ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj he hath abandon'd his physicians , madam ; under whose 
▁ practices he hath persecuted time with hope , and finds no other 
▁ advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj this young gentlewoman had a father- xxup o , that ' had , ' how 
▁ sad a passage ' tis!-whose skill was almost as great as his 
▁ honesty ; had it stretch'd so far , would have made nature 
▁ immortal , and death should have play for lack of work . xxmaj would , for 
▁ the xxmaj king 's sake , he were living ! i think it would be the death of 
▁ the xxmaj king 's disease . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj how call'd you the man you speak of , madam ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj he was famous , sir , in his profession , and it was his 
▁ great right to be so- xxmaj gerard de xxmaj narbon . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj he was excellent indeed , madam ; the xxmaj king very lately spoke 
▁ of him admiringly and mourningly ; he was skilful enough to have 
▁ liv'd still , if knowledge could be set up against mortality . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj what is it , my good lord , the xxmaj king languishes of ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . a fistula , my lord . 
▁ xxup bertram . i heard not of it before . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i would it were not notorious . xxmaj was this gentlewoman the 
▁ daughter of xxmaj gerard de xxmaj narbon ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj his sole child , my lord , and bequeathed to my 
▁ overlooking . i have those hopes of her good that her education 
▁ promises ; her dispositions she inherits , which makes fair gifts 
▁ fairer ; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities , 
▁ there commendations go with pity - they are virtues and traitors 
▁ too . xxmaj in her they are the better for their simpleness ; she derives 
▁ her honesty , and achieves her goodness . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj your commendations , madam , get from her tears . 
▁ xxup countess . ' tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in . 
▁ xxmaj the remembrance of her father never approaches her heart but the 
▁ tyranny of her sorrows takes all livelihood from her cheek . xxmaj no 
▁ more of this , xxmaj helena ; go to , no more , lest it be rather thought 
▁ you affect a sorrow than to have- 
▁ xxup helena . i do affect a sorrow indeed , but i have it too . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj moderate lamentation is the right of the dead : excessive 
▁ grief the enemy to the living . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj if the living be enemy to the grief , the excess makes it 
▁ soon mortal . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj madam , i desire your holy wishes . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj how understand we that ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj be thou blest , xxmaj bertram , and succeed thy father 
▁ xxmaj in manners , as in shape ! xxmaj thy blood and virtue 
▁ xxmaj contend for empire in thee , and thy goodness 
▁ xxmaj share with thy birthright ! xxmaj love all , trust a few , 
▁ xxmaj do wrong to none ; be able for thine enemy 
▁ xxmaj rather in power than use , and keep thy friend 
▁ xxmaj under thy own life 's key ; be check'd for silence , 
▁ xxmaj but never tax'd for speech . xxmaj what heaven more will , 
▁ xxmaj that thee may furnish , and my prayers pluck down , 
▁ xxmaj fall on thy head ! xxmaj farewell . xxmaj my lord ,