xxbos ' tis an unseason'd courtier ; good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj advise him . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj he can not want the best 
▁ xxmaj that shall attend his love . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj heaven bless him ! xxmaj farewell , xxmaj bertram . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj the best wishes that can be forg'd in your thoughts be 
▁ servants to you ! [ to xxup helena ] xxmaj be comfortable to my mother , your 
▁ mistress , and make much of her . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj farewell , pretty lady ; you must hold the credit of your 
▁ father . xxmaj exeunt xxup bertram and xxup lafeu 
▁ xxup helena . xxup o , were that all ! i think not on my father ; 
▁ xxmaj and these great tears grace his remembrance more 
▁ xxmaj than those i shed for him . xxmaj what was he like ? 
▁ i have forgot him ; my imagination 
▁ xxmaj carries no favour in't but xxmaj bertram 's . 
▁ i am undone ; there is no living , none , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj bertram be away . ' twere all one 
▁ xxmaj that i should love a bright particular star 
▁ xxmaj and think to we d it , he is so above me . 
▁ xxmaj in his bright radiance and collateral light 
▁ xxmaj must i be comforted , not in his sphere . 
▁ xxmaj th ' ambition in my love thus plagues itself : 
▁ xxmaj the hind that would be mated by the lion 
▁ xxmaj must die for love . ' twas pretty , though a plague , 
▁ xxmaj to see him every hour ; to sit and draw 
▁ xxmaj his arched brows , his hawking eye , his curls , 
▁ xxmaj in our heart 's table - heart too capable 
▁ xxmaj of every line and trick of his sweet favour . 
▁ xxmaj but now he 's gone , and my idolatrous fancy 
▁ xxmaj must sanctify his relics . xxmaj who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles 

▁ [ aside ] xxmaj one that goes with him . i love him for his sake ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i know him a notorious liar , 
▁ xxmaj think him a great way fool , solely a coward ; 
▁ xxmaj yet these fix'd evils sit so fit in him 
▁ xxmaj that they take place when virtue 's steely bones 
▁ xxmaj looks bleak i ' th ' cold wind ; withal , full oft we see 
▁ xxmaj cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj save you , fair queen ! 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and you , monarch ! 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and no . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj are you meditating on virginity ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay . xxmaj you have some stain of soldier in you ; let me ask you a 
▁ question . xxmaj man is enemy to virginity ; how may we barricado it 
▁ against him ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj keep him out . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj but he assails ; and our virginity , though valiant in the 
▁ defence , yet is weak . xxmaj unfold to us some warlike resistance . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj there is none . xxmaj man , setting down before you , will 
▁ undermine you and blow you up . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj bless our poor virginity from underminers and blowers - up ! 
▁ xxmaj is there no military policy how virgins might blow up men ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj virginity being blown down , man will quicklier be blown 
▁ up ; marry , in blowing him down again , with the breach yourselves 
▁ made , you lose your city . xxmaj it is not politic in the commonwealth 
▁ of nature to preserve virginity . xxmaj loss of virginity is rational 
▁ increase ; and there was never virgin got till virginity was first 
▁ lost . xxmaj that you were made of is metal to make virgins . xxmaj virginity 
▁ by being once lost may be ten times found ; by being ever kept , it 
▁ is ever lost . ' tis too cold a companion ; away with't . 
▁ xxup helena . i will stand for ' t a little , though therefore i die a 
▁ virgin . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj there 's little can be said in ' t ; ' tis against the rule 
▁ of nature . xxmaj to speak on the part of virginity is to accuse your 
▁ mothers ; which is most infallible disobedience . xxmaj he that hangs 
▁ himself is a virgin ; virginity murders itself , and should be 
▁ buried in highways , out of all sanctified limit , as a desperate 
▁ offendress against nature . xxmaj virginity breeds mites , much like a 
▁ cheese ; consumes itself to the very paring , and so dies with 
▁ feeding his own stomach . xxmaj besides , virginity is peevish , proud , 
▁ idle , made of self - love , which is the most inhibited sin in the 
▁ canon . xxmaj keep it not ; you can not choose but lose by't . xxmaj out with't . 
▁ xxmaj within ten year it will make itself ten , which is a goodly 
▁ increase ; and the principal itself not much the worse . xxmaj away 
▁ with't . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj how might one do , sir , to lose it to her own liking ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj let me see . xxmaj marry , ill to like him that ne'er it likes . 
▁ ' tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying ; the longer kept , 
▁ the less worth . xxmaj off with't while ' tis vendible ; answer the time 
▁ of request . xxmaj virginity , like an old courtier , wears her cap out of 
▁ fashion , richly suited but unsuitable ; just like the brooch and 
▁ the toothpick , which wear not now . xxmaj your date is better in your 
▁ pie and your porridge than in your cheek . xxmaj and your virginity , 
▁ your old virginity , is like one of our xxmaj french wither'd pears : it 
▁ looks ill , it eats drily ; marry , ' tis a wither'd pear ; it was 
▁ formerly better ; marry , yet ' tis a wither'd pear . xxmaj will you 
▁ anything with it ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj not my virginity yet . 
▁ xxmaj there shall your master have a thousand loves , 
▁ a mother , and a mistress , and a friend , 
▁ a phoenix , captain , and an enemy , 
▁ a guide , a goddess , and a sovereign , 
▁ a counsellor , a traitress , and a dear ; 
▁ xxmaj his humble ambition , proud humility , 
▁ xxmaj his jarring concord , and his discord dulcet , 
▁ xxmaj his faith , his sweet disaster ; with a world 
▁ xxmaj of pretty , fond , adoptious christendoms 
▁ xxmaj that blinking xxmaj cupid gossips . xxmaj now shall he- 
▁ i know not what he shall . xxmaj god send him well ! 
▁ xxmaj the court 's a learning - place , and he is one- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj what one , i ' faith ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj that i wish well . ' tis pity- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj what 's pity ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj that wishing well had not a body in't 
▁ xxmaj which might be felt ; that we , the poorer born , 
▁ xxmaj whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes , 
▁ xxmaj might with effects of them follow our friends 
▁ xxmaj and show what we alone must think , which never 
▁ xxmaj returns us thanks . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj monsieur xxmaj parolles , my lord calls for you . xxmaj exit xxup page 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj little xxmaj helen , farewell ; if i can remember thee , i will 
▁ think of thee at court . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj monsieur xxmaj parolles , you were born under a charitable star . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj under xxmaj mars , xxup i. 
▁ xxup helena . i especially think , under xxmaj mars . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why under xxmaj man ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj the wars hath so kept you under that you must needs be born 
▁ under xxmaj mars . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj when he was predominant . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj when he was retrograde , i think , rather . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why think you so ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj you go so much backward when you fight . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj that 's for advantage . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj so is running away , when fear proposes the safety : but the 
▁ composition that your valour and fear makes in you is a virtue of 
▁ a good wing , and i like the wear well . 
▁ xxup parolles . i am so full of business i can not answer thee acutely . i 
▁ will return perfect courtier ; in the which my instruction shall 
▁ serve to naturalize thee , so thou wilt be capable of a courtier 's 
▁ counsel , and understand what advice shall thrust upon thee ; else 
▁ thou diest in thine unthankfulness , and thine ignorance makes 
▁ thee away . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj when thou hast leisure , say thy prayers ; 
▁ when thou hast none , remember thy friends . xxmaj get thee a good 
▁ husband and use him as he uses thee . xxmaj so , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj our remedies oft in ourselves do lie , 
▁ xxmaj which we ascribe to heaven . xxmaj the fated sky 
▁ xxmaj gives us free scope ; only doth backward pull 
▁ xxmaj our slow designs when we ourselves are dull . 
▁ xxmaj what power is it which mounts my love so high , 
▁ xxmaj that makes me see , and can not feed mine eye ? 
▁ xxmaj the mightiest space in fortune nature brings 
▁ xxmaj to join like likes , and kiss like native things . 
▁ xxmaj impossible be strange attempts to those 
▁ xxmaj that weigh their pains in sense , and do suppose 
▁ xxmaj what hath been can not be . xxmaj who ever strove 
▁ xxmaj to show her merit that did miss her love ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's disease - my project may deceive me , 
▁ xxmaj but my intents are fix'd , and will not leave me . xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj paris . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj flourish of cornets . xxmaj enter the xxup king xxup of xxup france , with letters , 
 and divers xxup attendants 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj the xxmaj florentines and xxmaj senoys are by th ' ears ; 
▁ xxmaj have fought with equal fortune , and continue 
▁ a braving war . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj so ' tis reported , sir . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj nay , ' tis most credible . xxmaj we here receive it , 
▁ a certainty , vouch'd from our cousin xxmaj austria , 
▁ xxmaj with caution , that the xxmaj florentine will move us 
▁ xxmaj for speedy aid ; wherein our dearest friend 
▁ xxmaj prejudicates the business , and would seem 
▁ xxmaj to have us make denial . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj his love and wisdom , 
▁ xxmaj approv'd so to your xxmaj majesty , may plead 
▁ xxmaj for amplest credence . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj he hath arm'd our answer , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj florence is denied before he comes ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , for our gentlemen that mean to see 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj tuscan service , freely have they leave 
▁ xxmaj to stand on either part . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj it well may serve 
▁ a nursery to our gentry , who are sick 
▁ xxmaj for breathing and exploit . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what 's he comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bertram , xxup lafeu , and xxup parolles 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj it is the xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon , my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj bertram . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj youth , thou bear'st thy father 's face ; 
▁ xxmaj frank nature , rather curious than in haste , 
▁ xxmaj hath well compos'd thee . xxmaj thy father 's moral parts 
▁ xxmaj mayst thou inherit too ! xxmaj welcome to xxmaj paris . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my thanks and duty are your xxmaj majesty 's . 
▁ xxup king . i would i had that corporal soundness now , 
▁ xxmaj as when thy father and myself in friendship 
▁ xxmaj first tried our soldiership . xxmaj he did look far 
▁ xxmaj into the service of the time , and was 
▁ xxmaj discipled of the bravest . xxmaj he lasted long ; 
▁ xxmaj but on us both did haggish age steal on , 
▁ xxmaj and wore us out of act . xxmaj it much repairs me 
▁ xxmaj to talk of your good father . xxmaj in his youth 
▁ xxmaj he had the wit which i can well observe 
▁ xxmaj to - day in our young lords ; but they may jest 
▁ xxmaj till their own scorn return to them unnoted 
▁ xxmaj ere they can hide their levity in honour . 
▁ xxmaj so like a courtier , contempt nor bitterness 
▁ xxmaj were in his pride or sharpness ; if they were , 
▁ xxmaj his equal had awak'd them ; and his honour , 
▁ xxmaj clock to itself , knew the true minute when 
▁ xxmaj exception bid him speak , and at this time 
▁ xxmaj his tongue obey'd his hand . xxmaj who were below him 
▁ xxmaj he us'd as creatures of another place ; 
▁ xxmaj and bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks , 
▁ xxmaj making them proud of his humility 
▁ xxmaj in their poor praise he humbled . xxmaj such a man 
▁ xxmaj might be a copy to these younger times ; 
▁ xxmaj which , followed well , would demonstrate them now 
▁ xxmaj but goers backward . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj his good remembrance , sir , 
▁ xxmaj lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb ; 
▁ xxmaj so in approof lives not his epitaph 
▁ xxmaj as in your royal speech . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj would i were with him ! xxmaj he would always say- 
▁ xxmaj methinks i hear him now ; his plausive words 
▁ xxmaj he scatter'd not in ears , but grafted them 
▁ xxmaj to grow there , and to bear- ' let me not live'- 
▁ xxmaj this his good melancholy oft began , 
▁ xxmaj on the catastrophe and heel of pastime , 
▁ xxmaj when it was out-'let me not live ' quoth he 
▁ ' after my flame lacks oil , to be the snuff 
▁ xxmaj of younger spirits , whose apprehensive senses 
▁ xxmaj all but new things disdain ; whose judgments are 
▁ xxmaj mere fathers of their garments ; whose constancies 
▁ xxmaj expire before their fashions . ' xxmaj this he wish'd . 
▁ xxup i , after him , do after him wish too , 
▁ xxmaj since i nor wax nor honey can bring home , 
▁ i quickly were dissolved from my hive , 
▁ xxmaj to give some labourers room . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj you 're loved , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj they that least lend it you shall lack you first . 
▁ xxup king . i fill a place , i know't . xxmaj how long is't , xxmaj count , 
▁ xxmaj since the physician at your father 's died ? 
▁ xxmaj he was much fam'd . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj some six months since , my lord . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj if he were living , i would try him yet- 
▁ xxmaj lend me an arm - the rest have worn me out 
▁ xxmaj with several applications . xxmaj nature and sickness 
▁ xxmaj debate it at their leisure . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj count ; 
▁ xxmaj my son 's no dearer . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj thank your xxmaj majesty . xxmaj exeunt [ flourish ] 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup countess , xxup steward , and xxup clown 

▁ xxup countess . i will now hear ; what say you of this gentlewoman ? 
▁ xxup steward . xxmaj madam , the care i have had to even your content i wish 
▁ might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours ; for then we 
▁ wound our modesty , and make foul the clearness of our deservings , 
▁ when of ourselves we publish them . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what does this knave here ? xxmaj get you gone , sirrah . xxmaj the 
▁ complaints i have heard of you i do not all believe ; ' tis my 
▁ slowness that i do not , for i know you lack not folly to commit 
▁ them and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours . 
▁ xxup clown . ' tis not unknown to you , madam , i am a poor fellow . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj well , sir . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no , madam , ' tis not so well that i am poor , though many of 
▁ the rich are damn'd ; but if i may have your ladyship 's good will 
▁ to go to the world , xxmaj isbel the woman and i will do as we may . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj wilt thou needs be a beggar ? 
▁ xxup clown . i do beg your good will in this case . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj in what case ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj in xxmaj isbel 's case and mine own . xxmaj service is no heritage ; and i 
▁ think i shall never have the blessing of xxmaj god till i have issue o ' 
▁ my body ; for they say bames are blessings . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj my poor body , madam , requires it . i am driven on by the 
▁ flesh ; and he must needs go that the devil drives . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj is this all your worship 's reason ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj faith , madam , i have other holy reasons , such as they are . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj may the world know them ? 
▁ xxup clown . i have been , madam , a wicked creature , as you and all flesh 
▁ and blood are ; and , indeed , i do marry that i may repent . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj thy marriage , sooner than thy wickedness . 
▁ xxup clown . i am out o ' friends , madam , and i hope to have friends for 
▁ my wife 's sake . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj such friends are thine enemies , knave . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj y'are shallow , madam - in great friends ; for the knaves come 
▁ to do that for me which i am aweary of . xxmaj he that ears my land 
▁ spares my team , and gives me leave to in the crop . xxmaj if i be his 
▁ cuckold , he 's my drudge . xxmaj he that comforts my wife is the 
▁ cherisher of my flesh and blood ; he that cherishes my flesh and 
▁ blood loves my flesh and blood ; he that loves my flesh and blood 
▁ is my friend ; ergo , he that kisses my wife is my friend . xxmaj if men 
▁ could be contented to be what they are , there were no fear in 
▁ marriage ; for young xxmaj charbon the puritan and old xxmaj poysam the 
▁ papist , howsome'er their hearts are sever'd in religion , their 
▁ heads are both one ; they may jowl horns together like any deer 
▁ i ' th ' herd . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj wilt thou ever be a foul - mouth'd and calumnious knave ? 
▁ xxup clown . a prophet xxup i , madam ; and i speak the truth the next way : 

▁ xxmaj for i the ballad will repeat , 
▁ xxmaj which men full true shall find : 
▁ xxmaj your marriage comes by destiny , 
▁ xxmaj your cuckoo sings by kind . 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj get you gone , sir ; xxmaj i 'll talk with you more anon . 
▁ xxup steward . xxmaj may it please you , madam , that he bid xxmaj helen come to you . 
▁ xxmaj of her i am to speak . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj sirrah , tell my gentlewoman i would speak with her ; xxmaj helen 
▁ i mean . 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] 

▁ ' was this fair face the cause ' quoth she 
▁ ' why the xxmaj grecians sacked xxmaj troy ? 
▁ xxmaj fond done , done fond , 
▁ xxmaj was this xxmaj king xxmaj priam 's joy ? ' 
▁ xxmaj with that she sighed as she stood , 
▁ xxmaj with that she sighed as she stood , 
▁ xxmaj and gave this sentence then : 
▁ ' among nine bad if one be good , 
▁ xxmaj among nine bad if one be good , 
▁ xxmaj there 's yet one good in ten . ' 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what , one good in ten ? xxmaj you corrupt the song , sirrah . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj one good woman in ten , madam , which is a purifying o ' th ' 
▁ song . xxmaj would xxmaj god would serve the world so all the year ! xxmaj we 'd find 
▁ no fault with the tithe - woman , if i were the parson . xxmaj one in ten , 
▁ quoth ' a ! xxmaj an we might have a good woman born before every blazing 
▁ star , or at an earthquake , ' twould mend the lottery well : a man 
▁ may draw his heart out ere ' a pluck one . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj you 'll be gone , sir knave , and do as i command you . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj that man should be at woman 's command , and yet no hurt done ! 
▁ xxmaj though honesty be no puritan , yet it will do no hurt ; it will 
▁ wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart . 
▁ i am going , forsooth . xxmaj the business is for xxmaj helen to come hither . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj well , now . 
▁ xxup steward . i know , madam , you love your gentlewoman entirely . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj faith i do . xxmaj her father bequeath'd her to me ; and she 
▁ herself , without other advantage , may lawfully make title to as 
▁ much love as she finds . xxmaj there is more owing her than is paid ; and 
▁ more shall be paid her than she 'll demand . 
▁ xxup steward . xxmaj madam , i was very late more near her than i think she 
▁ wish'd me . xxmaj alone she was , and did communicate to herself her own 
▁ words to her own ears ; she thought , i dare vow for her , they 
▁ touch'd not any stranger sense . xxmaj her matter was , she loved your 
▁ son . xxmaj fortune , she said , was no goddess , that had put such 
▁ difference betwixt their two estates ; xxmaj love no god , that would not 
▁ extend his might only where qualities were level ; xxmaj diana no queen 
▁ of virgins , that would suffer her poor knight surpris'd without 
▁ rescue in the first assault , or ransom afterward . xxmaj this she 
▁ deliver'd in the most bitter touch of sorrow that e'er i heard 
▁ virgin exclaim in ; which i held my duty speedily to acquaint you 
▁ withal ; sithence , in the loss that may happen , it concerns you 
▁ something to know it . 
▁ xxup countess . xxup you have discharg'd this honestly ; keep it to yourself . 
▁ xxmaj many likelihoods inform'd me of this before , which hung so 
▁ tott'ring in the balance that i could neither believe nor 
▁ misdoubt . xxmaj pray you leave me . xxmaj stall this in your bosom ; and i 
▁ thank you for your honest care . i will speak with you further 
▁ anon . xxmaj exit xxup steward 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup helena 

▁ xxmaj even so it was with me when i was young . 
▁ xxmaj if ever we are nature 's , these are ours ; this thorn 
▁ xxmaj doth to our rose of youth rightly belong ; 
▁ xxmaj our blood to us , this to our blood is born . 
▁ xxmaj it is the show and seal of nature 's truth , 
▁ xxmaj where love 's strong passion is impress'd in youth . 
▁ xxmaj by our remembrances of days foregone , 
▁ xxmaj such were our faults , or then we thought them none . 
▁ xxmaj her eye is sick on't ; i observe her now . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj what is your pleasure , madam ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj you know , xxmaj helen , 
▁ i am a mother to you . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj mine honourable mistress . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj nay , a mother . 
▁ xxmaj why not a mother ? xxmaj when i said ' a mother , ' 
▁ xxmaj methought you saw a serpent . xxmaj what 's in ' mother ' 
▁ xxmaj that you start at it ? i say i am your mother , 
▁ xxmaj and put you in the catalogue of those 
▁ xxmaj that were enwombed mine . ' tis often seen 
▁ xxmaj adoption strives with nature , and choice breeds 
▁ a native slip to us from foreign seeds . 
▁ xxmaj you ne'er oppress'd me with a mother 's groan , 
▁ xxmaj yet i express to you a mother 's care . 
▁ xxmaj god 's mercy , maiden ! does it curd thy blood 
▁ xxmaj to say i am thy mother ? xxmaj what 's the matter , 
▁ xxmaj that this distempered messenger of wet , 
▁ xxmaj the many - colour'd xxmaj iris , rounds thine eye ? 
▁ xxmaj why , that you are my daughter ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj that i am not . 
▁ xxup countess . i say i am your mother . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj pardon , madam . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon can not be my brother : 
▁ i am from humble , he from honoured name ; 
▁ xxmaj no note upon my parents , his all noble . 
▁ xxmaj my master , my dear lord he is ; and i 
▁ xxmaj his servant live , and will his vassal die . 
▁ xxmaj he must not be my brother . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj nor i your mother ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj you are my mother , madam ; would you were- 
▁ xxmaj so that my lord your son were not my brother- 
▁ xxmaj indeed my mother ! xxmaj or were you both our mothers , 
▁ i care no more for than i do for heaven , 
▁ xxmaj so i were not his sister . xxmaj ca n't no other , 
▁ xxmaj but , i your daughter , he must be my brother ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj yes , xxmaj helen , you might be my daughter - in - law . 
▁ xxmaj god shield you mean it not ! ' daughter ' and ' mother ' 
▁ xxmaj so strive upon your pulse . xxmaj what ! pale again ? 
▁ xxmaj my fear hath catch'd your fondness . xxmaj now i see 
▁ xxmaj the myst'ry of your loneliness , and find 
▁ xxmaj your salt tears ' head . xxmaj now to all sense ' tis gross 
▁ xxmaj you love my son ; invention is asham'd , 
▁ xxmaj against the proclamation of thy passion , 
▁ xxmaj to say thou dost not . xxmaj therefore tell me true ; 
▁ xxmaj but tell me then , ' tis so ; for , look , thy cheeks 
▁ xxmaj confess it , th ' one to th ' other ; and thine eyes 
▁ xxmaj see it so grossly shown in thy behaviours 
▁ xxmaj that in their kind they speak it ; only sin 
▁ xxmaj and hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue , 
▁ xxmaj that truth should be suspected . xxmaj speak , is't so ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be so , you have wound a goodly clew ; 
▁ xxmaj if it be not , forswear't ; howe'er , i charge thee , 
▁ xxmaj as heaven shall work in me for thine avail , 
▁ xxmaj to tell me truly . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj good madam , pardon me . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj do you love my son ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj your pardon , noble mistress . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj love you my son ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj do not you love him , madam ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj go not about ; my love hath in't a bond 
▁ xxmaj whereof the world takes note . xxmaj come , come , disclose 
▁ xxmaj the state of your affection ; for your passions 
▁ xxmaj have to the full appeach'd . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj then i confess , 
▁ xxmaj here on my knee , before high heaven and you , 
▁ xxmaj that before you , and next unto high heaven , 
▁ i love your son . 
▁ xxmaj my friends were poor , but honest ; so 's my love . 
▁ xxmaj be not offended , for it hurts not him 
▁ xxmaj that he is lov'd of me ; i follow him not 
▁ xxmaj by any token of presumptuous suit , 
▁ xxmaj nor would i have him till i do deserve him ; 
▁ xxmaj yet never know how that desert should be . 
▁ i know i love in vain , strive against hope ; 
▁ xxmaj yet in this captious and intenible sieve 
▁ i still pour in the waters of my love , 
▁ xxmaj and lack not to lose still . xxmaj thus , xxmaj indian - like , 
▁ xxmaj religious in mine error , i adore 
▁ xxmaj the sun that looks upon his worshipper 
▁ xxmaj but knows of him no more . xxmaj my dearest madam , 
▁ xxmaj let not your hate encounter with my love , 
▁ xxmaj for loving where you do ; but if yourself , 
▁ xxmaj whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth , 
▁ xxmaj did ever in so true a flame of liking 
▁ xxmaj wish chastely and love dearly that your xxmaj dian 
▁ xxmaj was both herself and xxmaj love ; xxup o , then , give pity 
▁ xxmaj to her whose state is such that can not choose 
▁ xxmaj but lend and give where she is sure to lose ; 
▁ xxmaj that seeks not to find that her search implies , 
▁ xxmaj but , riddle - like , lives sweetly where she dies ! 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj had you not lately an intent - speak truly- 
▁ xxmaj to go to xxmaj paris ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj madam , i had . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj wherefore ? xxmaj tell true . 
▁ xxup helena . i will tell truth ; by grace itself i swear . 
▁ xxmaj you know my father left me some prescriptions 
▁ xxmaj of rare and prov'd effects , such as his reading 
▁ xxmaj and manifest experience had collected 
▁ xxmaj for general sovereignty ; and that he will'd me 
▁ xxmaj in heedfull'st reservation to bestow them , 
▁ xxmaj as notes whose faculties inclusive were 
▁ xxmaj more than they were in note . xxmaj amongst the rest 
▁ xxmaj there is a remedy , approv'd , set down , 
▁ xxmaj to cure the desperate languishings whereof 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is render'd lost . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj this was your motive 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj paris , was it ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj my lord your son made me to think of this , 
▁ xxmaj else xxmaj paris , and the medicine , and the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj had from the conversation of my thoughts 
▁ xxmaj haply been absent then . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj but think you , xxmaj helen , 
▁ xxmaj if you should tender your supposed aid , 
▁ xxmaj he would receive it ? xxmaj he and his physicians 
▁ xxmaj are of a mind : he , that they can not help him ; 
▁ xxmaj they , that they can not help . xxmaj how shall they credit 
▁ a poor unlearned virgin , when the schools , 
▁ xxmaj embowell'd of their doctrine , have let off 
▁ xxmaj the danger to itself ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj there 's something in't 
▁ xxmaj more than my father 's skill , which was the great'st 
▁ xxmaj of his profession , that his good receipt 
▁ xxmaj shall for my legacy be sanctified 
▁ xxmaj by th ' luckiest stars in heaven ; and , would your honour 
▁ xxmaj but give me leave to try success , xxmaj i 'd venture 
▁ xxmaj the well - lost life of mine on his xxmaj grace 's cure . 
▁ xxmaj by such a day and hour . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj dost thou believe't ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay , madam , knowingly . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj why , xxmaj helen , thou shalt have my leave and love , 
▁ xxmaj means and attendants , and my loving greetings 
▁ xxmaj to those of mine in court . xxmaj i 'll stay at home , 
▁ xxmaj and pray xxmaj god 's blessing into thy attempt . 
▁ xxmaj be gone to - morrow ; and be sure of this , 
▁ xxmaj what i can help thee to thou shalt not miss . xxmaj exeunt 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj paris . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj flourish of cornets . xxmaj enter the xxup king with divers young xxup lords taking leave 
 for the xxmaj florentine war ; xxup bertram and xxup parolles ; xxup attendants 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj farewell , young lords ; these war - like principles 
▁ xxmaj do not throw from you . xxmaj and you , my lords , farewell ; 
▁ xxmaj share the advice betwixt you ; if both gain all , 
▁ xxmaj the gift doth stretch itself as ' tis receiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj and is enough for both . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . ' tis our hope , sir , 
▁ xxmaj after well - ent'red soldiers , to return 
▁ xxmaj and find your xxmaj grace in health . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no , no , it can not be ; and yet my heart 
▁ xxmaj will not confess he owes the malady 
▁ xxmaj that doth my life besiege . xxmaj farewell , young lords ; 
▁ xxmaj whether i live or die , be you the sons 
▁ xxmaj of worthy xxmaj frenchmen ; let higher xxmaj italy- 
▁ xxmaj those bated that inherit but the fall 
▁ xxmaj of the last monarchy - see that you come 
▁ xxmaj not to woo honour , but to we d it ; when 
▁ xxmaj the bravest questant shrinks , find what you seek , 
▁ xxmaj that fame may cry you aloud . i say farewell . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj health , at your bidding , serve your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj those girls of xxmaj italy , take heed of them ; 
▁ xxmaj they say our xxmaj french lack language to deny , 
▁ xxmaj if they demand ; beware of being captives 
▁ xxmaj before you serve . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj our hearts receive your warnings . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj farewell . [ to xxup attendants ] xxmaj come hither to me . 
▁ xxmaj the xxup king retires attended 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . o my sweet lord , that you will stay behind us ! 
▁ xxup parolles . ' tis not his fault , the spark . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxup o , ' tis brave wars ! 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj most admirable ! i have seen those wars . 
▁ xxup bertram . i am commanded here and kept a coil with 
▁ ' too young ' and next year ' and " tis too early . ' 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj an thy mind stand to ' t , boy , steal away bravely . 
▁ xxup bertram . i shall stay here the forehorse to a smock , 
▁ xxmaj creaking my shoes on the plain masonry , 
▁ xxmaj till honour be bought up , and no sword worn 
▁ xxmaj but one to dance with . xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj i 'll steal away . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj there 's honour in the theft . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj commit it , xxmaj count . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i am your accessary ; and so farewell . 
▁ xxup bertram . i grow to you , and our parting is a tortur'd body . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj sweet xxmaj monsieur xxmaj parolles ! 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj noble heroes , my sword and yours are kin . xxmaj good sparks and 
▁ lustrous , a word , good metals : you shall find in the regiment of 
▁ the xxmaj spinii one xxmaj captain xxmaj spurio , with his cicatrice , an emblem of 
▁ war , here on his sinister cheek ; it was this very sword 
▁ entrench'd it . xxmaj say to him i live ; and observe his reports for me . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj we shall , noble xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj mars dote on you for his novices ! xxmaj exeunt xxup lords 
▁ xxmaj what will ye do ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the xxup king 

▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj stay ; the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj use a more spacious ceremony to the noble lords ; you have 
▁ restrain'd yourself within the list of too cold an adieu . xxmaj be more 
▁ expressive to them ; for they wear themselves in the cap of the 
▁ time ; there do muster true gait ; eat , speak , and move , under the 
▁ influence of the most receiv'd star ; and though the devil lead 
▁ the measure , such are to be followed . xxmaj after them , and take a more 
▁ dilated farewell . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj and i will do so . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj worthy fellows ; and like to prove most sinewy sword - men . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup bertram and xxup parolles 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lafeu 

▁ xxup lafeu . [ kneeling ] xxmaj pardon , my lord , for me and for my tidings . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj i 'll fee thee to stand up . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj then here 's a man stands that has brought his pardon . 
▁ i would you had kneel'd , my lord , to ask me mercy ; 
▁ xxmaj and that at my bidding you could so stand up . 
▁ xxup king . i would i had ; so i had broke thy pate , 
▁ xxmaj and ask'd thee mercy for't . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj good faith , across ! 
▁ xxmaj but , my good lord , ' tis thus : will you be cur'd 
▁ xxmaj of your infirmity ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxup o , will you eat 
▁ xxmaj no grapes , my royal fox ? xxmaj yes , but you will 
▁ xxmaj my noble grapes , an if my royal fox 
▁ xxmaj could reach them : i have seen a medicine 
▁ xxmaj that 's able to breathe life into a stone , 
▁ xxmaj quicken a rock , and make you dance canary 
▁ xxmaj with spritely fire and motion ; whose simple touch 
▁ xxmaj is powerful to araise xxmaj king xxmaj pepin , nay , 
▁ xxmaj to give great xxmaj charlemain a pen in 's hand 
▁ xxmaj and write to her a love - line . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what her is this ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj why , xxmaj doctor xxmaj she ! xxmaj my lord , there 's one arriv'd , 
▁ xxmaj if you will see her . xxmaj now , by my faith and honour , 
▁ xxmaj if seriously i may convey my thoughts 
▁ xxmaj in this my light deliverance , i have spoke 
▁ xxmaj with one that in her sex , her years , profession , 
▁ xxmaj wisdom , and constancy , hath amaz'd me more 
▁ xxmaj than i dare blame my weakness . xxmaj will you see her , 
▁ xxmaj for that is her demand , and know her business ? 
▁ xxmaj that done , laugh well at me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj now , good xxmaj lafeu , 
▁ xxmaj bring in the admiration , that we with the 
▁ xxmaj may spend our wonder too , or take off thine 
▁ xxmaj by wond'ring how thou took'st it . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll fit you , 
▁ xxmaj and not be all day neither . xxmaj exit xxup lafeu 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thus he his special nothing ever prologues . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lafeu with xxup helena 

▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj nay , come your ways . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj this haste hath wings indeed . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj nay , come your ways ; 
▁ xxmaj this is his xxmaj majesty ; say your mind to him . 
▁ a traitor you do look like ; but such traitors 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj majesty seldom fears . i am xxmaj cressid 's uncle , 
▁ xxmaj that dare leave two together . xxmaj fare you well . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj now , fair one , does your business follow us ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj gerard de xxmaj narbon was my father , 
▁ xxmaj in what he did profess , well found . 
▁ xxup king . i knew him . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj the rather will i spare my praises towards him ; 
▁ xxmaj knowing him is enough . xxmaj on 's bed of death 
▁ xxmaj many receipts he gave me ; chiefly one , 
▁ xxmaj which , as the dearest issue of his practice , 
▁ xxmaj and of his old experience th ' only darling , 
▁ xxmaj he bade me store up as a triple eye , 
▁ xxmaj safer than mine own two , more dear . i have so : 
▁ xxmaj and , hearing your high xxmaj majesty is touch'd 
▁ xxmaj with that malignant cause wherein the honour 
▁ xxmaj of my dear father 's gift stands chief in power , 
▁ i come to tender it , and my appliance , 
▁ xxmaj with all bound humbleness . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj we thank you , maiden ; 
▁ xxmaj but may not be so credulous of cure , 
▁ xxmaj when our most learned doctors leave us , and 
▁ xxmaj the congregated college have concluded 
▁ xxmaj that labouring art can never ransom nature 
▁ xxmaj from her inaidable estate - i say we must not 
▁ xxmaj so stain our judgment , or corrupt our hope , 
▁ xxmaj to prostitute our past - cure malady 
▁ xxmaj to empirics ; or to dissever so 
▁ xxmaj our great self and our credit to esteem 
▁ a senseless help , when help past sense we deem . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj my duty then shall pay me for my pains . 
▁ i will no more enforce mine office on you ; 
▁ xxmaj humbly entreating from your royal thoughts 
▁ a modest one to bear me back again . 
▁ xxup king . i can not give thee less , to be call'd grateful . 
▁ xxmaj thou thought'st to help me ; and such thanks i give 
▁ xxmaj as one near death to those that wish him live . 
▁ xxmaj but what at full i know , thou know'st no part ; 
▁ i knowing all my peril , thou no art . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj what i can do can do no hurt to try , 
▁ xxmaj since you set up your rest ' gainst remedy . 
▁ xxmaj he that of greatest works is finisher 
▁ xxmaj oft does them by the weakest minister . 
▁ xxmaj so holy writ in babes hath judgment shown , 
▁ xxmaj when judges have been babes . xxmaj great floods have flown 
▁ xxmaj from simple sources , and great seas have dried 
▁ xxmaj when miracles have by the greatest been denied . 
▁ xxmaj oft expectation fails , and most oft there 
▁ xxmaj where most it promises ; and oft it hits 
▁ xxmaj where hope is coldest , and despair most fits . 
▁ xxup king . i must not hear thee . xxmaj fare thee well , kind maid ; 
▁ xxmaj thy pains , not us'd , must by thyself be paid ; 
▁ xxmaj proffers not took reap thanks for their reward . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj inspired merit so by breath is barr'd . 
▁ xxmaj it is not so with xxmaj him that all things knows , 
▁ xxmaj as ' tis with us that square our guess by shows ; 
▁ xxmaj but most it is presumption in us when 
▁ xxmaj the help of heaven we count the act of men . 
▁ xxmaj dear sir , to my endeavours give consent ; 
▁ xxmaj of heaven , not me , make an experiment . 
▁ i am not an impostor , that proclaim 
▁ xxmaj myself against the level of mine aim ; 
▁ xxmaj but know i think , and think i know most sure , 
▁ xxmaj my art is not past power nor you past cure . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj art thou so confident ? xxmaj within what space 
▁ xxmaj hop'st thou my cure ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj the greatest xxmaj grace lending grace . 
▁ xxmaj ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring 
▁ xxmaj their fiery torcher his diurnal ring , 
▁ xxmaj ere twice in murk and occidental damp 
▁ xxmaj moist xxmaj hesperus hath quench'd his sleepy lamp , 
▁ xxmaj or four and twenty times the pilot 's glass 
▁ xxmaj hath told the thievish minutes how they pass , 
▁ xxmaj what is infirm from your sound parts shall fly , 
▁ xxmaj health shall live free , and sickness freely die . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj upon thy certainty and confidence 
▁ xxmaj what dar'st thou venture ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj tax of impudence , 
▁ a strumpet 's boldness , a divulged shame , 
▁ xxmaj traduc'd by odious ballads ; my maiden 's name 
▁ xxmaj sear'd otherwise ; ne worse of worst - extended 
▁ xxmaj with vilest torture let my life be ended . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak 
▁ xxmaj his powerful sound within an organ weak ; 
▁ xxmaj and what impossibility would slay 
▁ xxmaj in common sense , sense saves another way . 
▁ xxmaj thy life is dear ; for all that life can rate 
▁ xxmaj worth name of life in thee hath estimate : 
▁ xxmaj youth , beauty , wisdom , courage , all 
▁ xxmaj that happiness and prime can happy call . 
▁ xxmaj thou this to hazard needs must intimate 
▁ xxmaj skill infinite or monstrous desperate . 
▁ xxmaj sweet practiser , thy physic i will try , 
▁ xxmaj that ministers thine own death if i die . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj if i break time , or flinch in property 
▁ xxmaj of what i spoke , unpitied let me die ; 
▁ xxmaj and well deserv'd . xxmaj not helping , death 's my fee ; 
▁ xxmaj but , if i help , what do you promise me ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj make thy demand . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj but will you make it even ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ay , by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand 
▁ xxmaj what husband in thy power i will command . 
▁ xxmaj exempted be from me the arrogance 
▁ xxmaj to choose from forth the royal blood of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj my low and humble name to propagate 
▁ xxmaj with any branch or image of thy state ; 
▁ xxmaj but such a one , thy vassal , whom i know 
▁ xxmaj is free for me to ask , thee to bestow . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj here is my hand ; the premises observ'd , 
▁ xxmaj thy will by my performance shall be serv'd . 
▁ xxmaj so make the choice of thy own time , for xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj thy resolv'd patient , on thee still rely . 
▁ xxmaj more should i question thee , and more i must , 
▁ xxmaj though more to know could not be more to trust , 
▁ xxmaj from whence thou cam'st , how tended on . xxmaj but rest 
▁ xxmaj unquestion'd welcome and undoubted blest . 
▁ xxmaj give me some help here , ho ! xxmaj if thou proceed 
▁ xxmaj as high as word , my deed shall match thy deed . 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj exeunt ] 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup countess and xxup clown 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj come on , sir ; i shall now put you to the height of your 
▁ breeding . 
▁ xxup clown . i will show myself highly fed and lowly taught . i know my 
▁ business is but to the court . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj to the court ! xxmaj why , what place make you special , when you 
▁ put off that with such contempt ? xxmaj but to the court ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , madam , if xxmaj god have lent a man any manners , he may 
▁ easily put it off at court . xxmaj he that can not make a leg , put off 's 
▁ cap , kiss his hand , and say nothing , has neither leg , hands , lip , 
▁ nor cap ; and indeed such a fellow , to say precisely , were not for 
▁ the court ; but for me , i have an answer will serve all men . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj marry , that 's a bountiful answer that fits all questions . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj it is like a barber 's chair , that fits all buttocks - the pin 
▁ buttock , the quatch buttock , the brawn buttock , or any buttock . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj will your answer serve fit to all questions ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj as fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney , as your 
▁ xxmaj french crown for your taffety punk , as xxmaj tib 's rush for xxmaj tom 's 
▁ forefinger , as a pancake for xxmaj shrove xxmaj tuesday , a morris for xxmaj mayday , 
▁ as the nail to his hole , the cuckold to his horn , as a scolding 
▁ quean to a wrangling knave , as the nun 's lip to the friar 's 
▁ mouth ; nay , as the pudding to his skin . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj have you , xxup i , say , an answer of such fitness for all 
▁ questions ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj from below your duke to beneath your constable , it will fit 
▁ any question . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj it must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit 
▁ all demands . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj but a trifle neither , in good faith , if the learned should 
▁ speak truth of it . xxmaj here it is , and all that belongs to't . xxmaj ask me 
▁ if i am a courtier : it shall do you no harm to learn . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj to be young again , if we could , i will be a fool in 
▁ question , hoping to be the wiser by your answer . i pray you , sir , 
▁ are you a courtier ? 
▁ xxup clown . o xxmaj lord , sir!-there 's a simple putting off . xxmaj more , more , a 
▁ hundred of them . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj sir , i am a poor friend of yours , that loves you . 
▁ xxup clown . o xxmaj lord , sir!-thick , thick ; spare not me . 
▁ xxup countess . i think , sir , you can eat none of this homely meat . 
▁ xxup clown . o xxmaj lord , sir!-nay , put me to't , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj you were lately whipp'd , sir , as i think . 
▁ xxup clown . o xxmaj lord , sir!-spare not me . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj do you cry ' o xxmaj lord , sir ! ' at your whipping , and ' spare 
▁ not me ' ? xxmaj indeed your ' o xxmaj lord , sir ! ' is very sequent to your 
▁ whipping . xxmaj you would answer very well to a whipping , if you were 
▁ but bound to't . 
▁ xxup clown . i ne'er had worse luck in my life in my ' o xxmaj lord , sir ! ' i see 
▁ thing 's may serve long , but not serve ever . 
▁ xxup countess . i play the noble housewife with the time , 
▁ xxmaj to entertain it so merrily with a fool . 
▁ xxup clown . o xxmaj lord , sir!-why , there't serves well again . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj an end , sir ! xxmaj to your business : give xxmaj helen this , 
▁ xxmaj and urge her to a present answer back ; 
▁ xxmaj commend me to my kinsmen and my son . xxmaj this is not much . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj not much commendation to them ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj not much employment for you . xxmaj you understand me ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj most fruitfully ; i am there before my legs . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj haste you again . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj paris . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup bertram , xxup lafeu , and xxup parolles 

▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj they say miracles are past ; and we have our philosophical 
▁ persons to make modern and familiar things supernatural and 
▁ causeless . xxmaj hence is it that we make trifles of terrors , 
▁ ensconcing ourselves into seeming knowledge when we should submit 
▁ ourselves to an unknown fear . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why , ' tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath shot 
▁ out in our latter times . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj and so ' tis . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj to be relinquish'd of the artists- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj so i say - both of xxmaj galen and xxmaj paracelsus . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj of all the learned and authentic fellows- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj right ; so i say . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj that gave him out incurable- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why , there ' tis ; so say i too . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj not to be help'd- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj right ; as ' twere a man assur'd of a- 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj uncertain life and sure death . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj just ; you say well ; so would i have said . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i may truly say it is a novelty to the world . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj it is indeed . xxmaj if you will have it in showing , you shall 
▁ read it in what - do - ye - call't here . 
▁ xxup lafeu . [ reading the ballad title ] ' a xxmaj showing of a xxmaj heavenly 
▁ xxmaj effect in an xxmaj earthly xxmaj actor . ' 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj that 's it ; i would have said the very same . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj why , your dolphin is not lustier . ' fore me , i speak in 
▁ respect- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj nay , ' tis strange , ' tis very strange ; that is the brief 
▁ and the tedious of it ; and he 's of a most facinerious spirit that 
▁ will not acknowledge it to be the- 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj very hand of heaven . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj ay ; so i say . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj in a most weak- 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj and debile minister , great power , great transcendence ; 
▁ which should , indeed , give us a further use to be made than alone 
▁ the recov'ry of the xxmaj king , as to be- 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj generally thankful . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup king , xxup helena , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup parolles . i would have said it ; you say well . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj lustig , as the xxmaj dutchman says . xxmaj i 'll like a maid the better , 
▁ whilst i have a tooth in my head . xxmaj why , he 's able to lead her a 
▁ coranto . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj mort du vinaigre ! xxmaj is not this xxmaj helen ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . ' fore xxmaj god , i think so . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj go , call before me all the lords in court . 
▁ xxmaj exit an xxup attendant 
▁ xxmaj sit , my preserver , by thy patient 's side ; 
▁ xxmaj and with this healthful hand , whose banish'd sense 
▁ xxmaj thou has repeal'd , a second time receive 
▁ xxmaj the confirmation of my promis'd gift , 
▁ xxmaj which but attends thy naming . 

▁ xxmaj enter three or four xxup lords 

▁ xxmaj fair maid , send forth thine eye . xxmaj this youthful parcel 
▁ xxmaj of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing , 
▁ xxmaj o'er whom both sovereign power and father 's voice 
▁ i have to use . xxmaj thy frank election make ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast power to choose , and they none to forsake . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj to each of you one fair and virtuous mistress 
▁ xxmaj fall , when love please . xxmaj marry , to each but one ! 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj i 'd give bay xxmaj curtal and his furniture 
▁ xxmaj my mouth no more were broken than these boys ' , 
▁ xxmaj and writ as little beard . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj peruse them well . 
▁ xxmaj not one of those but had a noble father . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj heaven hath through me restor'd the xxmaj king to health . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj we understand it , and thank heaven for you . 
▁ xxup helena . i am a simple maid , and therein wealthiest 
▁ xxmaj that i protest i simply am a maid . 
▁ xxmaj please it your xxmaj majesty , i have done already . 
▁ xxmaj the blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me : 
▁ ' we blush that thou shouldst choose ; but , be refused , 
▁ xxmaj let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll ne'er come there again . ' 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj make choice and see : 
▁ xxmaj who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj now , xxmaj dian , from thy altar do i fly , 
▁ xxmaj and to imperial xxmaj love , that god most high , 
▁ xxmaj do my sighs stream . xxmaj sir , will you hear my suit ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj and grant it . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj thanks , sir ; all the rest is mute . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i had rather be in this choice than throw ames - ace for my 
▁ life . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj the honour , sir , that flames in your fair eyes , 
▁ xxmaj before i speak , too threat'ningly replies . 
▁ xxmaj love make your fortunes twenty times above 
▁ xxmaj her that so wishes , and her humble love ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj no better , if you please . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj my wish receive , 
▁ xxmaj which great xxmaj love grant ; and so i take my leave . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj do all they deny her ? xxmaj an they were sons of mine xxmaj i 'd have 
▁ them whipt ; or i would send them to th ' xxmaj turk to make eunuchs of . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj be not afraid that i your hand should take ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll never do you wrong for your own sake . 
▁ xxmaj blessing upon your vows ; and in your bed 
▁ xxmaj find fairer fortune , if you ever we d ! 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj these boys are boys of ice ; they 'll none have her . 
▁ xxmaj sure , they are bastards to the xxmaj english ; the xxmaj french ne'er got 'em . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj you are too young , too happy , and too good , 
▁ xxmaj to make yourself a son out of my blood . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup lord . xxmaj fair one , i think not so . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj there 's one grape yet ; i am sure thy father drunk wine - but 
▁ if thou be'st not an ass , i am a youth of fourteen ; i have known 
▁ thee already . 
▁ xxup helena . [ to xxup bertram ] i dare not say i take you ; but i give 
▁ xxmaj me and my service , ever whilst i live , 
▁ xxmaj into your guiding power . xxmaj this is the man . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj why , then , young xxmaj bertram , take her ; she 's thy wife . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my wife , my liege ! i shall beseech your xxmaj highness , 
▁ xxmaj in such a business give me leave to use 
▁ xxmaj the help of mine own eyes . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj know'st thou not , xxmaj bertram , 
▁ xxmaj what she has done for me ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj yes , my good lord ; 
▁ xxmaj but never hope to know why i should marry her . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thou know'st she has rais'd me from my sickly bed . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj but follows it , my lord , to bring me down 
▁ xxmaj must answer for your raising ? i know her well : 
▁ xxmaj she had her breeding at my father 's charge . 
▁ a poor physician 's daughter my wife ! xxmaj disdain 
▁ xxmaj rather corrupt me ever ! 
▁ xxup king . ' tis only title thou disdain'st in her , the which 
▁ i can build up . xxmaj strange is it that our bloods , 
▁ xxmaj of colour , weight , and heat , pour'd all together , 
▁ xxmaj would quite confound distinction , yet stand off 
▁ xxmaj in differences so mighty . xxmaj if she be 
▁ xxmaj all that is virtuous - save what thou dislik'st , 
▁ a poor physician 's daughter - thou dislik'st 
▁ xxmaj of virtue for the name ; but do not so . 
▁ xxmaj from lowest place when virtuous things proceed , 
▁ xxmaj the place is dignified by the doer 's deed ; 
▁ xxmaj where great additions swell 's , and virtue none , 
▁ xxmaj it is a dropsied honour . xxmaj good alone 
▁ xxmaj is good without a name . xxmaj vileness is so : 
▁ xxmaj the property by what it is should go , 
▁ xxmaj not by the title . xxmaj she is young , wise , fair ; 
▁ xxmaj in these to nature she 's immediate heir ; 
▁ xxmaj and these breed honour . xxmaj that is honour 's scorn 
▁ xxmaj which challenges itself as honour 's born 
▁ xxmaj and is not like the sire . xxmaj honours thrive 
▁ xxmaj when rather from our acts we them derive 
▁ xxmaj than our fore - goers . xxmaj the mere word 's a slave , 
▁ xxmaj debauch'd on every tomb , on every grave 
▁ a lying trophy ; and as oft is dumb 
▁ xxmaj where dust and damn'd oblivion is the tomb 
▁ xxmaj of honour'd bones indeed . xxmaj what should be said ? 
▁ xxmaj if thou canst like this creature as a maid , 
▁ i can create the rest . xxmaj virtue and she 
▁ xxmaj is her own dower ; honour and wealth from me .