xxbos xxup bertram . i can not love her , nor will strive to do ' t. 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thou wrong'st thyself , if thou shouldst strive to choose . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj that you are well restor'd , my lord , xxmaj i 'm glad . 
▁ xxmaj let the rest go . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my honour 's at the stake ; which to defeat , 
▁ i must produce my power . xxmaj here , take her hand , 
▁ xxmaj proud scornful boy , unworthy this good gift , 
▁ xxmaj that dost in vile misprision shackle up 
▁ xxmaj my love and her desert ; that canst not dream 
▁ xxmaj we , poising us in her defective scale , 
▁ xxmaj shall weigh thee to the beam ; that wilt not know 
▁ xxmaj it is in us to plant thine honour where 
▁ xxmaj we please to have it grow . xxmaj check thy contempt ; 
▁ xxmaj obey our will , which travails in thy good ; 
▁ xxmaj believe not thy disdain , but presently 
▁ xxmaj do thine own fortunes that obedient right 
▁ xxmaj which both thy duty owes and our power claims ; 
▁ xxmaj or i will throw thee from my care for ever 
▁ xxmaj into the staggers and the careless lapse 
▁ xxmaj of youth and ignorance ; both my revenge and hate 
▁ xxmaj loosing upon thee in the name of justice , 
▁ xxmaj without all terms of pity . xxmaj speak ; thine answer . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj pardon , my gracious lord ; for i submit 
▁ xxmaj my fancy to your eyes . xxmaj when i consider 
▁ xxmaj what great creation and what dole of honour 
▁ xxmaj flies where you bid it , i find that she which late 
▁ xxmaj was in my nobler thoughts most base is now 
▁ xxmaj the praised of the xxmaj king ; who , so ennobled , 
▁ xxmaj is as ' twere born so . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj take her by the hand , 
▁ xxmaj and tell her she is thine ; to whom i promise 
▁ a counterpoise , if not to thy estate 
▁ a balance more replete . 
▁ xxup bertram . i take her hand . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj good fortune and the favour of the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj smile upon this contract ; whose ceremony 
▁ xxmaj shall seem expedient on the now - born brief , 
▁ xxmaj and be perform'd to - night . xxmaj the solemn feast 
▁ xxmaj shall more attend upon the coming space , 
▁ xxmaj expecting absent friends . xxmaj as thou lov'st her , 
▁ xxmaj thy love 's to me religious ; else , does err . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup lafeu and xxup parolles who stay behind , 
▁ commenting of this wedding 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj do you hear , monsieur ? a word with you . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj your pleasure , sir ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj your lord and master did well to make his recantation . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj recantation ! xxmaj my xxmaj lord ! my master ! 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj ay ; is it not a language i speak ? 
▁ xxup parolles . a most harsh one , and not to be understood without bloody 
▁ succeeding . xxmaj my master ! 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj are you companion to the xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj to any count ; to all counts ; to what is man . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj to what is count 's man : count 's master is of another style . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj you are too old , sir ; let it satisfy you , you are too 
▁ old . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i must tell thee , sirrah , i write man ; to which title age 
▁ can not bring thee . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj what i dare too well do , i dare not do . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i did think thee , for two ordinaries , to be a pretty wise 
▁ fellow ; thou didst make tolerable vent of thy travel ; it might 
▁ pass . xxmaj yet the scarfs and the bannerets about thee did manifoldly 
▁ dissuade me from believing thee a vessel of too great a burden . i 
▁ have now found thee ; when i lose thee again i care not ; yet art 
▁ thou good for nothing but taking up ; and that thou'rt scarce 
▁ worth . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee- 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj do not plunge thyself too far in anger , lest thou hasten thy 
▁ trial ; which if - lord have mercy on thee for a hen ! xxmaj so , my good 
▁ window of lattice , fare thee well ; thy casement i need not open , 
▁ for i look through thee . xxmaj give me thy hand . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj my lord , you give me most egregious indignity . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj ay , with all my heart ; and thou art worthy of it . 
▁ xxup parolles . i have not , my lord , deserv'd it . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj yes , good faith , ev'ry dram of it ; and i will not bate thee 
▁ a scruple . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj well , i shall be wiser . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj ev'n as soon as thou canst , for thou hast to pull at a smack 
▁ o ' th ' contrary . xxmaj if ever thou be'st bound in thy scarf and 
▁ beaten , thou shalt find what it is to be proud of thy bondage . i 
▁ have a desire to hold my acquaintance with thee , or rather my 
▁ knowledge , that i may say in the default ' he is a man i know . ' 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj my lord , you do me most insupportable vexation . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i would it were hell pains for thy sake , and my poor doing 
▁ eternal ; for doing i am past , as i will by thee , in what motion 
▁ age will give me leave . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj well , thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off me : 
▁ scurvy , old , filthy , scurvy lord ! xxmaj well , i must be patient ; there 
▁ is no fettering of authority . xxmaj i 'll beat him , by my life , if i can 
▁ meet him with any convenience , an he were double and double a 
▁ lord . xxmaj i 'll have no more pity of his age than i would have of- 
▁ xxmaj i 'll beat him , and if i could but meet him again . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lafeu 

▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj sirrah , your lord and master 's married ; there 's news for 
▁ you ; you have a new mistress . 
▁ xxup parolles . i most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make some 
▁ reservation of your wrongs . xxmaj he is my good lord : whom i serve 
▁ above is my master . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj who ? xxmaj god ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj ay , sir . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj the devil it is that 's thy master . xxmaj why dost thou garter up 
▁ thy arms o ' this fashion ? xxmaj dost make hose of thy sleeves ? xxmaj do other 
▁ servants so ? xxmaj thou wert best set thy lower part where thy nose 
▁ stands . xxmaj by mine honour , if i were but two hours younger , xxmaj i 'd beat 
▁ thee . xxmaj methink'st thou art a general offence , and every man should 
▁ beat thee . i think thou wast created for men to breathe 
▁ themselves upon thee . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj this is hard and undeserved measure , my lord . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj go to , sir ; you were beaten in xxmaj italy for picking a kernel 
▁ out of a pomegranate ; you are a vagabond , and no true traveller ; 
▁ you are more saucy with lords and honourable personages than the 
▁ commission of your birth and virtue gives you heraldry . xxmaj you are 
▁ not worth another word , else xxmaj i 'd call you knave . i leave you . 
▁ xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bertram 

▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj good , very , good , it is so then . xxmaj good , very good ; let it 
▁ be conceal'd awhile . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj undone , and forfeited to cares for ever ! 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj what 's the matter , sweetheart ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj although before the solemn priest i have sworn , 
▁ i will not bed her . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj what , what , sweetheart ? 
▁ xxup bertram . o my xxmaj parolles , they have married me ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj tuscan wars , and never bed her . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj france is a dog - hole , and it no more merits 
▁ xxmaj the tread of a man 's foot . xxmaj to th ' wars ! 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj there 's letters from my mother ; what th ' import is i know 
▁ not yet . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj ay , that would be known . xxmaj to th ' wars , my boy , to th ' 
▁ wars ! 
▁ xxmaj he wears his honour in a box unseen 
▁ xxmaj that hugs his kicky - wicky here at home , 
▁ xxmaj spending his manly marrow in her arms , 
▁ xxmaj which should sustain the bound and high curvet 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj mars 's fiery steed . xxmaj to other regions ! 
▁ xxmaj france is a stable ; we that dwell in't jades ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , to th ' war ! 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj it shall be so ; xxmaj i 'll send her to my house , 
▁ xxmaj acquaint my mother with my hate to her , 
▁ xxmaj and wherefore i am fled ; write to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj that which i durst not speak . xxmaj his present gift 
▁ xxmaj shall furnish me to those xxmaj italian fields 
▁ xxmaj where noble fellows strike . xxmaj war is no strife 
▁ xxmaj to the dark house and the detested wife . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj will this capriccio hold in thee , art sure ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj go with me to my chamber and advise me . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send her straight away . xxmaj to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the wars , she to her single sorrow . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why , these balls bound ; there 's noise in it . ' tis hard : 
▁ a young man married is a man that 's marr'd . 
▁ xxmaj therefore away , and leave her bravely ; go . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king has done you wrong ; but , hush , ' tis so . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj paris . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup helena and xxup clown 

▁ xxup helena . xxmaj my mother greets me kindly ; is she well ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj she is not well , but yet she has her health ; she 's very 
▁ merry , but yet she is not well . xxmaj but thanks be given , she 's very 
▁ well , and wants nothing i ' th ' world ; but yet she is not well . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj if she be very well , what does she ail that she 's not very 
▁ well ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , she 's very well indeed , but for two things . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj what two things ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj one , that she 's not in heaven , whither xxmaj god send her quickly ! 
▁ xxmaj the other , that she 's in earth , from whence xxmaj god send her quickly ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles 

▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj bless you , my fortunate lady ! 
▁ xxup helena . i hope , sir , i have your good will to have mine own good 
▁ fortunes . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj you had my prayers to lead them on ; and to keep them on , 
▁ have them still . xxup o , my knave , how does my old lady ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj so that you had her wrinkles and i her money , i would she 
▁ did as you say . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why , i say nothing . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj marry , you are the wiser man ; for many a man 's tongue shakes 
▁ out his master 's undoing . xxmaj to say nothing , to do nothing , to know 
▁ nothing , and to have nothing , is to be a great part of your 
▁ title , which is within a very little of nothing . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj away ! th'art a knave . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you should have said , sir , ' before a knave th'art a knave ' ; 
▁ that 's ' before me th'art a knave . ' xxmaj this had been truth , sir . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj go to , thou art a witty fool ; i have found thee . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj did you find me in yourself , sir , or were you taught to find 
▁ me ? xxmaj the search , sir , was profitable ; and much fool may you find 
▁ in you , even to the world 's pleasure and the increase of 
▁ laughter . 
▁ xxup parolles . a good knave , i ' faith , and well fed . 
▁ xxmaj madam , my lord will go away to - night : 
▁ a very serious business calls on him . 
▁ xxmaj the great prerogative and rite of love , 
▁ xxmaj which , as your due , time claims , he does acknowledge ; 
▁ xxmaj but puts it off to a compell'd restraint ; 
▁ xxmaj whose want , and whose delay , is strew'd with sweets , 
▁ xxmaj which they distil now in the curbed time , 
▁ xxmaj to make the coming hour o'erflow with joy 
▁ xxmaj and pleasure drown the brim . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj what 's his else ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj that you will take your instant leave o ' th ' xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and make this haste as your own good proceeding , 
▁ xxmaj strength'ned with what apology you think 
▁ xxmaj may make it probable need . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj what more commands he ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj that , having this obtain'd , you presently 
▁ xxmaj attend his further pleasure . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj in everything i wait upon his will . 
▁ xxup parolles . i shall report it so . 
▁ xxup helena . i pray you . xxmaj exit xxup parolles 
▁ xxmaj come , sirrah . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 5 . 
 xxmaj paris . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup lafeu and xxup bertram 

▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj but i hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj yes , my lord , and of very valiant approof . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj you have it from his own deliverance . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj and by other warranted testimony . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj then my dial goes not true ; i took this lark for a bunting . 
▁ xxup bertram . i do assure you , my lord , he is very great in knowledge , 
▁ and accordingly valiant . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i have then sinn'd against his experience and transgress'd 
▁ against his valour ; and my state that way is dangerous , since i 
▁ can not yet find in my heart to repent . xxmaj here he comes ; i pray you 
▁ make us friends ; i will pursue the amity 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles 

▁ xxup parolles . [ to xxup bertram ] xxmaj these things shall be done , sir . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj pray you , sir , who 's his tailor ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj sir ! 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxup o , i know him well . xxmaj ay , sir ; he , sir , 's a good workman , a 
▁ very good tailor . 
▁ xxup bertram . [ aside to xxup parolles ] xxmaj is she gone to the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj she is . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj will she away to - night ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj as you 'll have her . 
▁ xxup bertram . i have writ my letters , casketed my treasure , 
▁ xxmaj given order for our horses ; and to - night , 
▁ xxmaj when i should take possession of the bride , 
▁ xxmaj end ere i do begin . 
▁ xxup lafeu . a good traveller is something at the latter end of a dinner ; 
▁ but one that lies three - thirds and uses a known truth to pass a 
▁ thousand nothings with , should be once heard and thrice beaten . 
▁ xxmaj god save you , xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj is there any unkindness between my lord and you , monsieur ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i know not how i have deserved to run into my lord 's 
▁ displeasure . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj you have made shift to run into ' t , boots and spurs and all , 
▁ like him that leapt into the custard ; and out of it you 'll run 
▁ again , rather than suffer question for your residence . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj it may be you have mistaken him , my lord . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj and shall do so ever , though i took him at 's prayers . 
▁ xxmaj fare you well , my lord ; and believe this of me : there can be no 
▁ kernal in this light nut ; the soul of this man is his clothes ; 
▁ trust him not in matter of heavy consequence ; i have kept of them 
▁ tame , and know their natures . xxmaj farewell , monsieur ; i have spoken 
▁ better of you than you have or will to deserve at my hand ; but we 
▁ must do good against evil . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj an idle lord , i swear . 
▁ xxup bertram . i think so . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj why , do you not know him ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj yes , i do know him well ; and common speech 
▁ xxmaj gives him a worthy pass . xxmaj here comes my clog . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup helena 

▁ xxup helena . i have , sir , as i was commanded from you , 
▁ xxmaj spoke with the xxmaj king , and have procur'd his leave 
▁ xxmaj for present parting ; only he desires 
▁ xxmaj some private speech with you . 
▁ xxup bertram . i shall obey his will . 
▁ xxmaj you must not marvel , xxmaj helen , at my course , 
▁ xxmaj which holds not colour with the time , nor does 
▁ xxmaj the ministration and required office 
▁ xxmaj on my particular . xxmaj prepar'd i was not 
▁ xxmaj for such a business ; therefore am i found 
▁ xxmaj so much unsettled . xxmaj this drives me to entreat you 
▁ xxmaj that presently you take your way for home , 
▁ xxmaj and rather muse than ask why i entreat you ; 
▁ xxmaj for my respects are better than they seem , 
▁ xxmaj and my appointments have in them a need 
▁ xxmaj greater than shows itself at the first view 
▁ xxmaj to you that know them not . xxmaj this to my mother . 
▁ [ giving a letter ] 
▁ ' twill be two days ere i shall see you ; so 
▁ i leave you to your wisdom . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj sir , i can nothing say 
▁ xxmaj but that i am your most obedient servant . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj come , come , no more of that . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and ever shall 
▁ xxmaj with true observance seek to eke out that 
▁ xxmaj wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd 
▁ xxmaj to equal my great fortune . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj let that go . 
▁ xxmaj my haste is very great . xxmaj farewell ; hie home . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj pray , sir , your pardon . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj well , what would you say ? 
▁ xxup helena . i am not worthy of the wealth i owe , 
▁ xxmaj nor dare i say ' tis mine , and yet it is ; 
▁ xxmaj but , like a timorous thief , most fain would steal 
▁ xxmaj what law does vouch mine own . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj what would you have ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj something ; and scarce so much ; nothing , indeed . 
▁ i would not tell you what i would , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj faith , yes : 
▁ xxmaj strangers and foes do sunder and not kiss . 
▁ xxup bertram . i pray you , stay not , but in haste to horse . 
▁ xxup helena . i shall not break your bidding , good my lord . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj where are my other men , monsieur ? 
▁ xxmaj farewell ! xxmaj exit xxup helena 
▁ xxmaj go thou toward home , where i will never come 
▁ xxmaj whilst i can shake my sword or hear the drum . 
▁ xxmaj away , and for our flight . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj bravely , coragio ! xxmaj exeunt 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj florence . xxmaj the duke 's palace 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup florence , attended ; two 
▁ xxup french xxup lords , with a xxup troop xxup of xxup soldiers 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj so that , from point to point , now have you hear 
▁ xxmaj the fundamental reasons of this war ; 
▁ xxmaj whose great decision hath much blood let forth 
▁ xxmaj and more thirsts after . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj holy seems the quarrel 
▁ xxmaj upon your xxmaj grace 's part ; black and fearful 
▁ xxmaj on the opposer . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj therefore we marvel much our cousin xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj would in so just a business shut his bosom 
▁ xxmaj against our borrowing prayers . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj the reasons of our state i can not yield , 
▁ xxmaj but like a common and an outward man 
▁ xxmaj that the great figure of a council frames 
▁ xxmaj by self - unable motion ; therefore dare not 
▁ xxmaj say what i think of it , since i have found 
▁ xxmaj myself in my incertain grounds to fail 
▁ xxmaj as often as i guess'd . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be it his pleasure . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj but i am sure the younger of our nature , 
▁ xxmaj that surfeit on their ease , will day by day 
▁ xxmaj come here for physic . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj welcome shall they be 
▁ xxmaj and all the honours that can fly from us 
▁ xxmaj shall on them settle . xxmaj you know your places well ; 
▁ xxmaj when better fall , for your avails they fell . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow to th ' field . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup countess and xxup clown 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj it hath happen'd all as i would have had it , save that he 
▁ comes not along with her . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj by my troth , i take my young lord to be a very melancholy 
▁ man . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj by what observance , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj why , he will look upon his boot and sing ; mend the ruff and 
▁ sing ; ask questions and sing ; pick his teeth and sing . i know a 
▁ man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a 
▁ song . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj let me see what he writes , and when he means to come . 
▁ [ opening a letter ] 
▁ xxup clown . i have no mind to xxmaj isbel since i was at court . xxmaj our old ling 
▁ and our xxmaj isbels o ' th ' country are nothing like your old ling and 
▁ your xxmaj isbels o ' th ' court . xxmaj the brains of my xxmaj cupid 's knock'd out ; 
▁ and i begin to love , as an old man loves money , with no stomach . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what have we here ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj e'en that you have there . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup countess . [ reads ] ' i have sent you a daughter - in - law ; she hath 
▁ recovered the xxmaj king and undone me . i have wedded her , not bedded 
▁ her ; and sworn to make the " not " eternal . xxmaj you shall hear i am run 
▁ away ; know it before the report come . xxmaj if there be breadth enough 
▁ in the world , i will hold a long distance . xxmaj my duty to you . 
▁ xxmaj your unfortunate son , 
▁ xxup bertram . ' 
▁ xxmaj this is not well , rash and unbridled boy , 
▁ xxmaj to fly the favours of so good a king , 
▁ xxmaj to pluck his indignation on thy head 
▁ xxmaj by the misprizing of a maid too virtuous 
▁ xxmaj for the contempt of empire . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup clown 

▁ xxup clown . o madam , yonder is heavy news within between two soldiers 
▁ and my young lady . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what is the -matter ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj nay , there is some comfort in the news , some comfort ; your 
▁ son will not be kill'd so soon as i thought he would . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj why should he be kill'd ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj so say xxup i , madam , if he run away , as i hear he does the 
▁ danger is in standing to ' t ; that 's the loss of men , though it be 
▁ the getting of children . xxmaj here they come will tell you more . xxmaj for my 
▁ part , i only hear your son was run away . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup helena and the two xxup french xxup gentlemen 

▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj save you , good madam . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj madam , my lord is gone , for ever gone . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj do not say so . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj think upon patience . xxmaj pray you , gentlemen- 
▁ i have felt so many quirks of joy and grief 
▁ xxmaj that the first face of neither , on the start , 
▁ xxmaj can woman me unto ' t. xxmaj where is my son , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj madam , he 's gone to serve the xxmaj duke of xxmaj florence . 
▁ xxmaj we met him thitherward ; for thence we came , 
▁ xxmaj and , after some dispatch in hand at court , 
▁ xxmaj thither we bend again . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj look on this letter , madam ; here 's my passport . 
▁ [ reads ] ' when thou canst get the ring upon my finger , which 
▁ never shall come off , and show me a child begotten of thy body 
▁ that i am father to , then call me husband ; but in such a " then " i 
▁ write a " never . " 
▁ xxmaj this is a dreadful sentence . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj brought you this letter , gentlemen ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj ay , madam ; 
▁ xxmaj and for the contents ' sake are sorry for our pains . 
▁ xxup countess . i prithee , lady , have a better cheer ; 
▁ xxmaj if thou engrossest all the griefs are thine , 
▁ xxmaj thou robb'st me of a moiety . xxmaj he was my son ; 
▁ xxmaj but i do wash his name out of my blood , 
▁ xxmaj and thou art all my child . xxmaj towards xxmaj florence is he ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj ay , madam . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj and to be a soldier ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj such is his noble purpose ; and , believe ' t , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke will lay upon him all the honour 
▁ xxmaj that good convenience claims . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj return you thither ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj ay , madam , with the swiftest wing of speed . 
▁ xxup helena . [ reads ] ' till i have no wife , i have nothing in xxmaj france . ' 
▁ ' tis bitter . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj find you that there ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay , madam . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . ' tis but the boldness of his hand haply , which 
▁ his heart was not consenting to . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj nothing in xxmaj france until he have no wife ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's nothing here that is too good for him 
▁ xxmaj but only she ; and she deserves a lord 
▁ xxmaj that twenty such rude boys might tend upon , 
▁ xxmaj and call her hourly mistress . xxmaj who was with him ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . a servant only , and a gentleman 
▁ xxmaj which i have sometime known . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj parolles , was it not ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj ay , my good lady , he . 
▁ xxup countess . a very tainted fellow , and full of wickedness . 
▁ xxmaj my son corrupts a well - derived nature 
▁ xxmaj with his inducement . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj indeed , good lady , 
▁ xxmaj the fellow has a deal of that too much 
▁ xxmaj which holds him much to have . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj y'are welcome , gentlemen . 
▁ i will entreat you , when you see my son , 
▁ xxmaj to tell him that his sword can never win 
▁ xxmaj the honour that he loses . xxmaj more xxmaj i 'll entreat you 
▁ xxmaj written to bear along . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj we serve you , madam , 
▁ xxmaj in that and all your worthiest affairs . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj not so , but as we change our courtesies . 
▁ xxmaj will you draw near ? xxmaj exeunt xxup countess and xxup gentlemen 
▁ xxup helena . ' till i have no wife , i have nothing in xxmaj france . ' 
▁ xxmaj nothing in xxmaj france until he has no wife ! 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt have none , xxmaj rousillon , none in xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj then hast thou all again . xxmaj poor lord ! is't 
▁ xxmaj that chase thee from thy country , and expose 
▁ xxmaj those tender limbs of thine to the event 
▁ xxmaj of the non - sparing war ? xxmaj and is it i 
▁ xxmaj that drive thee from the sportive court , where thou 
▁ xxmaj wast shot at with fair eyes , to be the mark 
▁ xxmaj of smoky muskets ? o you leaden messengers , 
▁ xxmaj that ride upon the violent speed of fire , 
▁ xxmaj fly with false aim ; move the still - piecing air , 
▁ xxmaj that sings with piercing ; do not touch my lord . 
▁ xxmaj whoever shoots at him , i set him there ; 
▁ xxmaj whoever charges on his forward breast , 
▁ i am the caitiff that do hold him to't ; 
▁ xxmaj and though i kill him not , i am the cause 
▁ xxmaj his death was so effected . xxmaj better ' twere 
▁ i met the ravin lion when he roar'd 
▁ xxmaj with sharp constraint of hunger ; better ' twere 
▁ xxmaj that all the miseries which nature owes 
▁ xxmaj were mine at once . xxmaj no ; come thou home , xxmaj rousillon , 
▁ xxmaj whence honour but of danger wins a scar , 
▁ xxmaj as oft it loses all . i will be gone . 
▁ xxmaj my being here it is that holds thee hence . 
▁ xxmaj shall i stay here to do ' t ? xxmaj no , no , although 
▁ xxmaj the air of paradise did fan the house , 
▁ xxmaj and angels offic'd all . i will be gone , 
▁ xxmaj that pitiful rumour may report my flight 
▁ xxmaj to consolate thine ear . xxmaj come , night ; end , day . 
▁ xxmaj for with the dark , poor thief , xxmaj i 'll steal away . xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj florence . xxmaj before the duke 's palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup florence , xxup bertram , xxup parolles , xxup soldiers , 
 drum and trumpets 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the xxmaj general of our xxmaj horse thou art ; and we , 
▁ xxmaj great in our hope , lay our best love and credence 
▁ xxmaj upon thy promising fortune . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj sir , it is 
▁ a charge too heavy for my strength ; but yet 
▁ xxmaj we 'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake 
▁ xxmaj to th ' extreme edge of hazard . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj then go thou forth ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj fortune play upon thy prosperous helm , 
▁ xxmaj as thy auspicious mistress ! 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj this very day , 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj mars , i put myself into thy file ; 
▁ xxmaj make me but like my thoughts , and i shall prove 
▁ a lover of thy drum , hater of love . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup countess and xxup steward 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj alas ! and would you take the letter of her ? 
▁ xxmaj might you not know she would do as she has done 
▁ xxmaj by sending me a letter ? xxmaj read it again . 
▁ xxup steward . [ reads ] ' i am xxmaj saint xxmaj jaques ' pilgrim , thither gone . 
▁ xxmaj ambitious love hath so in me offended 
▁ xxmaj that barefoot plod i the cold ground upon , 
▁ xxmaj with sainted vow my faults to have amended . 
▁ xxmaj write , write , that from the bloody course of war 
▁ xxmaj my dearest master , your dear son , may hie . 
▁ xxmaj bless him at home in peace , whilst i from far 
▁ xxmaj his name with zealous fervour sanctify . 
▁ xxmaj his taken labours bid him me forgive ; 
▁ xxup i , his despiteful xxmaj juno , sent him forth 
▁ xxmaj from courtly friends , with camping foes to live , 
▁ xxmaj where death and danger dogs the heels of worth . 
▁ xxmaj he is too good and fair for death and me ; 
▁ xxmaj whom i myself embrace to set him free . ' 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj ah , what sharp stings are in her mildest words ! 
▁ xxmaj rinaldo , you did never lack advice so much 
▁ xxmaj as letting her pass so ; had i spoke with her , 
▁ i could have well diverted her intents , 
▁ xxmaj which thus she hath prevented . 
▁ xxup steward . xxmaj pardon me , madam ; 
▁ xxmaj if i had given you this at over - night , 
▁ xxmaj she might have been o'er ta'en ; and yet she writes 
▁ xxmaj pursuit would be but vain . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what angel shall 
▁ xxmaj bless this unworthy husband ? xxmaj he can not thrive , 
▁ xxmaj unless her prayers , whom heaven delights to hear 
▁ xxmaj and loves to grant , reprieve him from the wrath 
▁ xxmaj of greatest justice . xxmaj write , write , xxmaj rinaldo , 
▁ xxmaj to this unworthy husband of his wife ; 
▁ xxmaj let every word weigh heavy of her worth 
▁ xxmaj that he does weigh too light . xxmaj my greatest grief , 
▁ xxmaj though little he do feel it , set down sharply . 
▁ xxmaj dispatch the most convenient messenger . 
▁ xxmaj when haply he shall hear that she is gone 
▁ xxmaj he will return ; and hope i may that she , 
▁ xxmaj hearing so much , will speed her foot again , 
▁ xxmaj led hither by pure love . xxmaj which of them both 
▁ xxmaj is dearest to me i have no skill in sense 
▁ xxmaj to make distinction . xxmaj provide this messenger . 
▁ xxmaj my heart is heavy , and mine age is weak ; 
▁ xxmaj grief would have tears , and sorrow bids me speak . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj without the walls of xxmaj florence 
 a tucket afar off . xxmaj enter an old xxup widow xxup of xxup florence , her daughter xxup diana , 
 xxup violenta , and xxup mariana , with other xxup citizens 

▁ xxup widow . xxmaj nay , come ; for if they do approach the city we shall lose 
▁ all the sight . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj they say the xxmaj french count has done most honourable service . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj it is reported that he has taken their great'st commander ; 
▁ and that with his own hand he slew the xxmaj duke 's brother . [ tucket ] 
▁ xxmaj we have lost our labour ; they are gone a contrary way . xxmaj hark ! you 
▁ may know by their trumpets . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj come , let 's return again , and suffice ourselves with the 
▁ report of it . xxmaj well , xxmaj diana , take heed of this xxmaj french earl ; the 
▁ honour of a maid is her name , and no legacy is so rich as 
▁ honesty . 
▁ xxup widow . i have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a 
▁ gentleman his companion . 
▁ xxup mariana . i know that knave , hang him ! one xxmaj parolles ; a filthy 
▁ officer he is in those suggestions for the young earl . xxmaj beware of 
▁ them , xxmaj diana : their promises , enticements , oaths , tokens , and all 
▁ these engines of lust , are not the things they go under ; many a 
▁ maid hath been seduced by them ; and the misery is , example , that 
▁ so terrible shows in the wreck of maidenhood , can not for all that 
▁ dissuade succession , but that they are limed with the twigs that 
▁ threatens them . i hope i need not to advise you further ; but i 
▁ hope your own grace will keep you where you are , though there 
▁ were no further danger known but the modesty which is so lost . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj you shall not need to fear me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup helena in the dress of a pilgrim 

▁ xxup widow . i hope so . xxmaj look , here comes a pilgrim . i know she will lie 
▁ at my house : thither they send one another . xxmaj i 'll question her . 
▁ xxmaj god save you , pilgrim ! xxmaj whither are bound ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj to xxmaj saint xxmaj jaques le xxmaj grand . 
▁ xxmaj where do the palmers lodge , i do beseech you ? 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj at the xxmaj saint xxmaj francis here , beside the port . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj is this the way ? 
▁ [ a march afar ] 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj ay , marry , is't . xxmaj hark you ! xxmaj they come this way . 
▁ xxmaj if you will tarry , holy pilgrim , 
▁ xxmaj but till the troops come by , 
▁ i will conduct you where you shall be lodg'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the rather for i think i know your hostess 
▁ xxmaj as ample as myself . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj is it yourself ? 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj if you shall please so , pilgrim . 
▁ xxup helena . i thank you , and will stay upon your leisure . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj you came , i think , from xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup helena . i did so . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj here you shall see a countryman of yours 
▁ xxmaj that has done worthy service . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj his name , i pray you . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj the xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj know you such a one ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj but by the ear , that hears most nobly of him ; 
▁ xxmaj his face i know not . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj what some'er he is , 
▁ xxmaj he 's bravely taken here . xxmaj he stole from xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj as ' tis reported , for the xxmaj king had married him 
▁ xxmaj against his liking . xxmaj think you it is so ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay , surely , mere the truth ; i know his lady . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj there is a gentleman that serves the xxmaj count 
▁ xxmaj reports but coarsely of her . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj what 's his name ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj monsieur xxmaj parolles . 
▁ xxup helena . xxup o , i believe with him , 
▁ xxmaj in argument of praise , or to the worth 
▁ xxmaj of the great xxmaj count himself , she is too mean 
▁ xxmaj to have her name repeated ; all her deserving 
▁ xxmaj is a reserved honesty , and that 
▁ i have not heard examin'd . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj alas , poor lady ! 
▁ ' tis a hard bondage to become the wife 
▁ xxmaj of a detesting lord . 
▁ xxup widow . i sweet , good creature , wheresoe'er she is 
▁ xxmaj her heart weighs sadly . xxmaj this young maid might do her 
▁ a shrewd turn , if she pleas'd . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj how do you mean ? 
▁ xxmaj may be the amorous xxmaj count solicits her 
▁ xxmaj in the unlawful purpose . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj he does , indeed ; 
▁ xxmaj and brokes with all that can in such a suit 
▁ xxmaj corrupt the tender honour of a maid ; 
▁ xxmaj but she is arm'd for him , and keeps her guard 
▁ xxmaj in honestest defence . 

▁ xxmaj enter , with drum and colours , xxup bertram , xxup parolles , and the 
▁ whole xxup army 

▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj the gods forbid else ! 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj so , now they come . 
▁ xxmaj that is xxmaj antonio , the xxmaj duke 's eldest son ; 
▁ xxmaj that , xxmaj escalus . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj which is the xxmaj frenchman ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj he- 
▁ xxmaj that with the plume ; ' tis a most gallant fellow . 
▁ i would he lov'd his wife ; if he were honester 
▁ xxmaj he were much goodlier . xxmaj is't not a handsome gentleman ? 
▁ xxup helena . i like him well . 
▁ xxup diana . ' tis pity he is not honest . xxmaj yond 's that same knave 
▁ xxmaj that leads him to these places ; were i his lady 
▁ i would poison that vile rascal . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj which is he ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj that jack - an - apes with scarfs . xxmaj why is he melancholy ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj perchance he 's hurt i ' th ' battle . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj lose our drum ! well . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj he 's shrewdly vex'd at something . 
▁ xxmaj look , he has spied us . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj marry , hang you ! 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj and your courtesy , for a ring - carrier ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup bertram , xxup parolles , and xxup army 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj the troop is past . xxmaj come , pilgrim , i will bring you 
▁ xxmaj where you shall host . xxmaj of enjoin'd penitents 
▁ xxmaj there 's four or five , to great xxmaj saint xxmaj jaques bound , 
▁ xxmaj already at my house . 
▁ xxup helena . i humbly thank you . 
▁ xxmaj please it this matron and this gentle maid 
▁ xxmaj to eat with us to - night ; the charge and thanking 
▁ xxmaj shall be for me , and , to requite you further , 
▁ i will bestow some precepts of this virgin , 
▁ xxmaj worthy the note . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj we 'll take your offer kindly . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 6 . 
 xxmaj camp before xxmaj florence 

 xxmaj enter xxup bertram , and the two xxup french xxup lords 

▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj nay , good my lord , put him to't ; let him have his way . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj if your lordship find him not a hiding , hold me no more 
▁ in your respect . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj on my life , my lord , a bubble . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj do you think i am so far deceived in him ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj believe it , my lord , in mine own direct knowledge , 
▁ without any malice , but to speak of him as my kinsman , he 's a 
▁ most notable coward , an infinite and endless liar , an hourly 
▁ promise - breaker , the owner of no one good quality worthy your 
▁ lordship 's entertainment . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj it were fit you knew him ; lest , reposing too far in his 
▁ virtue , which he hath not , he might at some great and trusty 
▁ business in a main danger fail you . 
▁ xxup bertram . i would i knew in what particular action to try him . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj none better than to let him fetch off his drum , which 
▁ you hear him so confidently undertake to do . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i with a troop of xxmaj florentines will suddenly surprise 
▁ him ; such i will have whom i am sure he knows not from the enemy . 
▁ xxmaj we will bind and hoodwink him so that he shall suppose no other 
▁ but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries when 
▁ we bring him to our own tents . xxmaj be but your lordship present at 
▁ his examination ; if he do not , for the promise of his life and in 
▁ the highest compulsion of base fear , offer to betray you and 
▁ deliver all the intelligence in his power against you , and that 
▁ with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath , never trust my 
▁ judgment in anything . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxup o , for the love of laughter , let him fetch his drum ; he 
▁ says he has a stratagem for't . xxmaj when your lordship sees the bottom 
▁ of his success in't , and to what metal this counterfeit lump of 
▁ ore will be melted , if you give him not xxmaj john xxmaj drum 's 
▁ entertainment , your inclining can not be removed . xxmaj here he comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles 

▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxup o , for the love of laughter , hinder not the honour of 
▁ his design ; let him fetch off his drum in any hand . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj how now , monsieur ! xxmaj this drum sticks sorely in your 
▁ disposition . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . a pox on ' t ; let it go ; ' tis but a drum . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj but a drum ! xxmaj is't but a drum ? a drum so lost ! xxmaj there was 
▁ excellent command : to charge in with our horse upon our own 
▁ wings , and to rend our own soldiers ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj that was not to be blam'd in the command of the 
▁ service ; it was a disaster of war that xxmaj caesar himself could not 
▁ have prevented , if he had been there to command . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj well , we can not greatly condemn our success . 
▁ xxmaj some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum ; but it is not to 
▁ be recovered . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj it might have been recovered . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj it might , but it is not now . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj it is to be recovered . xxmaj but that the merit of service is 
▁ seldom attributed to the true and exact performer , i would have 
▁ that drum or another , or ' hic jacet . ' 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj why , if you have a stomach , to't , monsieur . xxmaj if you think 
▁ your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour 
▁ again into his native quarter , be magnanimous in the enterprise , 
▁ and go on ; i will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit . xxmaj if you 
▁ speed well in it , the xxmaj duke shall both speak of it and extend to 
▁ you what further becomes his greatness , even to the utmost 
▁ syllable of our worthiness . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj by the hand of a soldier , i will undertake it . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj but you must not now slumber in it . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj i 'll about it this evening ; and i will presently pen 
▁ down my dilemmas , encourage myself in my certainty , put myself 
▁ into my mortal preparation ; and by midnight look to hear further 
▁ from me . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj may i be bold to acquaint his xxmaj grace you are gone about it ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i know not what the success will be , my lord , but the 
▁ attempt i vow . 
▁ xxup bertram . i know th ' art valiant ; and , to the of thy soldiership , 
▁ will subscribe for thee . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup parolles . i love not many words . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj no more than a fish loves water . xxmaj is not this a strange 
▁ fellow , my lord , that so confidently seems to undertake this 
▁ business , which he knows is not to be done ; damns himself to do , 
▁ and dares better be damn'd than to do ' t. 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj you do not know him , my lord , as we do . xxmaj certain it is 
▁ that he will steal himself into a man 's favour , and for a week 
▁ escape a great deal of discoveries ; but when you find him out , 
▁ you have him ever after . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj why , do you think he will make no deed at all of this that 
▁ so seriously he does address himself unto ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj none in the world ; but return with an invention , and 
▁ clap upon you two or three probable lies . xxmaj but we have almost 
▁ emboss'd him . xxmaj you shall see his fall to - night ; for indeed he is 
▁ not for your lordship 's respect . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj we 'll make you some sport with the fox ere we case him . 
▁ xxmaj he was first smok'd by the old xxmaj lord xxmaj lafeu . xxmaj when his disguise and 
▁ he is parted , tell me what a sprat you shall find him ; which you 
▁ shall see this very night . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i must go look my twigs ; he shall be caught . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj your brother , he shall go along with me . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj as't please your lordship . xxmaj i 'll leave you . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj now will i lead you to the house , and show you 
▁ xxmaj the lass i spoke of . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj but you say she 's honest . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj that 's all the fault . i spoke with her but once , 
▁ xxmaj and found her wondrous cold ; but i sent to her , 
▁ xxmaj by this same coxcomb that we have i ' th ' wind , 
▁ xxmaj tokens and letters which she did re - send ; 
▁ xxmaj and this is all i have done . xxmaj she 's a fair creature ; 
▁ xxmaj will you go see her ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj with all my heart , my lord . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 7 . 
 xxmaj florence . xxmaj the xxup widow 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup helena and xxup widow 

▁ xxup helena . xxmaj if you misdoubt me that i am not she , 
▁ i know not how i shall assure you further 
▁ xxmaj but i shall lose the grounds i work upon . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj though my estate be fall'n , i was well born , 
▁ xxmaj nothing acquainted with these businesses ; 
▁ xxmaj and would not put my reputation now 
▁ xxmaj in any staining act . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj nor would i wish you . 
▁ xxup first give me trust the xxmaj count he is my husband , 
▁ xxmaj and what to your sworn counsel i have spoken 
▁ xxmaj is so from word to word ; and then you can not , 
▁ xxmaj by the good aid that i of you shall borrow , 
▁ xxmaj err in bestowing it . 
▁ xxup widow . i should believe you ; 
▁ xxmaj for you have show'd me that which well approves 
▁ xxmaj y'are great in fortune . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj take this purse of gold , 
▁ xxmaj and let me buy your friendly help thus far , 
▁ xxmaj which i will over - pay and pay again 
▁ xxmaj when i have found it . xxmaj the xxmaj count he woos your daughter 
▁ xxmaj lays down his wanton siege before her beauty , 
▁ xxmaj resolv'd to carry her . xxmaj let her in fine consent , 
▁ xxmaj as we 'll direct her how ' tis best to bear it . 
▁ xxmaj now his important blood will nought deny 
▁ xxmaj that she 'll demand . a ring the xxmaj county wears 
▁ xxmaj that downward hath succeeded in his house 
▁ xxmaj from son to son some four or five descents 
▁ xxmaj since the first father wore it . xxmaj this ring he holds 
▁ xxmaj in most rich choice ; yet , in his idle fire , 
▁ xxmaj to buy his will , it would not seem too dear , 
▁ xxmaj howe'er repented after . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj now i see 
▁ xxmaj the bottom of your purpose . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj you see it lawful then . xxmaj it is no more 
▁ xxmaj but that your daughter , ere she seems as won , 
▁ xxmaj desires this ring ; appoints him an encounter ; 
▁ xxmaj in fine , delivers me to fill the time , 
▁ xxmaj herself most chastely absent . xxmaj after this , 
▁ xxmaj to marry her , xxmaj i 'll add three thousand crowns 
▁ xxmaj to what is pass'd already . 
▁ xxup widow . i have yielded . 
▁ xxmaj instruct my daughter how she shall persever , 
▁ xxmaj that time and place with this deceit so lawful 
▁ xxmaj may prove coherent . xxmaj every night he comes 
▁ xxmaj with musics of all sorts , and songs compos'd 
▁ xxmaj to her unworthiness . xxmaj it nothing steads us 
▁ xxmaj to chide him from our eaves , for he persists 
▁ xxmaj as if his life lay on ' t. 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj why then to - night 
▁ xxmaj let us assay our plot ; which , if it speed , 
▁ xxmaj is wicked meaning in a lawful deed , 
▁ xxmaj and lawful meaning in a lawful act ; 
▁ xxmaj where both not sin , and yet a sinful fact . 
▁ xxmaj but let 's about it . xxmaj exeunt 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj without the xxmaj florentine camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup second xxup french xxup lord with five or six other xxup soldiers in ambush 

▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he can come no other way but by this hedge - corner . 
▁ xxmaj when you sally upon him , speak what terrible language you will ; 
▁ though you understand it not yourselves , no matter ; for we must 
▁ not seem to understand him , unless some one among us , whom we 
▁ must produce for an interpreter . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj good captain , let me be th ' interpreter . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj art not acquainted with him ? xxmaj knows he not thy voice ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj no , sir , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj but what linsey - woolsey has thou to speak to us again ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj e'en such as you speak to me . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he must think us some band of strangers i ' th ' 
▁ adversary 's entertainment . xxmaj now he hath a smack of all 
▁ neighbouring languages , therefore we must every one be a man of 
▁ his own fancy ; not to know what we speak one to another , so we 
▁ seem to know , is to know straight our purpose : choughs ' language , 
▁ gabble enough , and good enough . xxmaj as for you , interpreter , you must 
▁ seem very politic . xxmaj but couch , ho ! here he comes ; to beguile two 
▁ hours in a sleep , and then to return and swear the lies he forges . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles 

▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj ten o'clock . xxmaj within these three hours ' twill be time 
▁ enough to go home . xxmaj what shall i say i have done ? xxmaj it must be a 
▁ very plausive invention that carries it . xxmaj they begin to smoke me ; 
▁ and disgraces have of late knock'd to often at my door . i find my 
▁ tongue is too foolhardy ; but my heart hath the fear of xxmaj mars 
▁ before it , and of his creatures , not daring the reports of my 
▁ tongue . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj this is the first truth that e'er thine own tongue was 
▁ guilty of . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj what the devil should move me to undertake the recovery 
▁ of this drum , being not ignorant of the impossibility , and 
▁ knowing i had no such purpose ? i must give myself some hurts , and 
▁ say i got them in exploit . xxmaj yet slight ones will not carry it . 
▁ xxmaj they will say ' came you off with so little ? ' xxmaj and great ones i 
▁ dare not give . xxmaj wherefore , what 's the instance ? xxmaj tongue , i must put 
▁ you into a butterwoman 's mouth , and buy myself another of 
▁ xxmaj bajazet 's mule , if you prattle me into these perils . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj is it possible he should know what he is , and be that 
▁ he is ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i would the cutting of my garments would serve the turn , 
▁ or the breaking of my xxmaj spanish sword . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj we can not afford you so . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj or the baring of my beard ; and to say it was in 
▁ stratagem . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . ' twould not do . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj or to drown my clothes , and say i was stripp'd . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj hardly serve . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj though i swore i leap'd from the window of the citadel- 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj how deep ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj thirty fathom . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj three great oaths would scarce make that be believed . 
▁ xxup parolles . i would i had any drum of the enemy 's ; i would swear i 
▁ recover'd it . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj you shall hear one anon . [ alarum within ] 
▁ xxup parolles . a drum now of the enemy 's ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj throca movousus , cargo , cargo , cargo . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj cargo , cargo , cargo , villianda par corbo , cargo . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxup o , ransom , ransom ! xxmaj do not hide mine eyes . 
▁ [ they blindfold him ] 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj boskos thromuldo boskos . 
▁ xxup parolles . i know you are the xxmaj muskos ' regiment , 
▁ xxmaj and i shall lose my life for want of language . 
▁ xxmaj if there be here xxmaj german , or xxmaj dane , xxmaj low xxmaj dutch , 
▁ xxmaj italian , or xxmaj french , let him speak to me ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll discover that which shall undo the xxmaj florentine . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj boskos vauvado . i understand thee , and can speak thy 
▁ tongue . xxmaj kerely - bonto , sir , betake thee to thy faith , for 
▁ seventeen poniards are at thy bosom . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxup o ! 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxup o , pray , pray , pray ! xxmaj manka revania dulche . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj oscorbidulchos volivorco . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj the xxmaj general is content to spare thee yet ; 
▁ xxmaj and , hoodwink'd as thou art , will lead thee on 
▁ xxmaj to gather from thee . xxmaj haply thou mayst inform 
▁ xxmaj something to save thy life .