xxbos xxup parolles . xxup o , let me live , 
▁ xxmaj and all the secrets of our camp xxmaj i 'll show , 
▁ xxmaj their force , their purposes . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll speak that 
▁ xxmaj which you will wonder at . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj but wilt thou faithfully ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj if i do not , damn me . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj acordo linta . 
▁ xxmaj come on ; thou art granted space . 
▁ xxmaj exit , xxup parolles guarded . a short alarum within 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj go , tell the xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon and my brother 
▁ xxmaj we have caught the woodcock , and will keep him muffled 
▁ xxmaj till we do hear from them . 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj captain , i will . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . ' a will betray us all unto ourselves- 
▁ xxmaj inform on that . 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj so i will , sir . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj till then xxmaj i 'll keep him dark and safely lock'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj florence . xxmaj the xxup widow 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup bertram and xxup diana 

▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj they told me that your name was xxmaj fontibell . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj no , my good lord , xxmaj diana . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj titled goddess ; 
▁ xxmaj and worth it , with addition ! xxmaj but , fair soul , 
▁ xxmaj in your fine frame hath love no quality ? 
▁ xxmaj if the quick fire of youth light not your mind , 
▁ xxmaj you are no maiden , but a monument ; 
▁ xxmaj when you are dead , you should be such a one 
▁ xxmaj as you are now , for you are cold and stern ; 
▁ xxmaj and now you should be as your mother was 
▁ xxmaj when your sweet self was got . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj she then was honest . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj so should you be . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj my mother did but duty ; such , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj as you owe to your wife . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj no more o'that ! 
▁ i prithee do not strive against my vows . 
▁ i was compell'd to her ; but i love the 
▁ xxmaj by love 's own sweet constraint , and will for ever 
▁ xxmaj do thee all rights of service . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj ay , so you serve us 
▁ xxmaj till we serve you ; but when you have our roses 
▁ xxmaj you barely leave our thorns to prick ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj and mock us with our bareness . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj how have i sworn ! 
▁ xxup diana . ' tis not the many oaths that makes the truth , 
▁ xxmaj but the plain single vow that is vow'd true . 
▁ xxmaj what is not holy , that we swear not by , 
▁ xxmaj but take the xxmaj high'st to witness . xxmaj then , pray you , tell me : 
▁ xxmaj if i should swear by xxmaj jove 's great attributes 
▁ i lov'd you dearly , would you believe my oaths 
▁ xxmaj when i did love you ill ? xxmaj this has no holding , 
▁ xxmaj to swear by him whom i protest to love 
▁ xxmaj that i will work against him . xxmaj therefore your oaths 
▁ xxmaj are words and poor conditions , but unseal'd- 
▁ xxmaj at least in my opinion . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj change it , change it ; 
▁ xxmaj be not so holy - cruel . xxmaj love is holy ; 
▁ xxmaj and my integrity ne'er knew the crafts 
▁ xxmaj that you do charge men with . xxmaj stand no more off , 
▁ xxmaj but give thyself unto my sick desires , 
▁ xxmaj who then recovers . xxmaj say thou art mine , and ever 
▁ xxmaj my love as it begins shall so persever . 
▁ xxup diana . i see that men make ropes in such a scarre 
▁ xxmaj that we 'll forsake ourselves . xxmaj give me that ring . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj i 'll lend it thee , my dear , but have no power 
▁ xxmaj to give it from me . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj will you not , my lord ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj it is an honour ' longing to our house , 
▁ xxmaj bequeathed down from many ancestors ; 
▁ xxmaj which were the greatest obloquy i ' th ' world 
▁ xxmaj in me to lose . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj mine honour 's such a ring : 
▁ xxmaj my chastity 's the jewel of our house , 
▁ xxmaj bequeathed down from many ancestors ; 
▁ xxmaj which were the greatest obloquy i ' th ' world 
▁ xxmaj in me to lose . xxmaj thus your own proper wisdom 
▁ xxmaj brings in the champion xxmaj honour on my part 
▁ xxmaj against your vain assault . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj here , take my ring ; 
▁ xxmaj my house , mine honour , yea , my life , be thine , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be bid by thee . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj when midnight comes , knock at my chamber window ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll order take my mother shall not hear . 
▁ xxmaj now will i charge you in the band of truth , 
▁ xxmaj when you have conquer'd my yet maiden bed , 
▁ xxmaj remain there but an hour , nor speak to me : 
▁ xxmaj my reasons are most strong ; and you shall know them 
▁ xxmaj when back again this ring shall be deliver'd . 
▁ xxmaj and on your finger in the night xxmaj i 'll put 
▁ xxmaj another ring , that what in time proceeds 
▁ xxmaj may token to the future our past deeds . 
▁ xxmaj adieu till then ; then fail not . xxmaj you have won 
▁ a wife of me , though there my hope be done . 
▁ xxup bertram . a heaven on earth i have won by wooing thee . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj for which live long to thank both heaven and me ! 
▁ xxmaj you may so in the end . 
▁ xxmaj my mother told me just how he would woo , 
▁ xxmaj as if she sat in 's heart ; she says all men 
▁ xxmaj have the like oaths . xxmaj he had sworn to marry me 
▁ xxmaj when his wife 's dead ; therefore xxmaj i 'll lie with him 
▁ xxmaj when i am buried . xxmaj since xxmaj frenchmen are so braid , 
▁ xxmaj marry that will , i live and die a maid . 
▁ xxmaj only , in this disguise , i think't no sin 
▁ xxmaj to cozen him that would unjustly win . xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj florentine camp 

 xxmaj enter the two xxup french xxup lords , and two or three xxup soldiers 

▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj you have not given him his mother 's letter ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i have deliv'red it an hour since . xxmaj there is something 
▁ in't that stings his nature ; for on the reading it he chang'd 
▁ almost into another man . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off 
▁ so good a wife and so sweet a lady . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj especially he hath incurred the everlasting displeasure 
▁ of the xxmaj king , who had even tun'd his bounty to sing happiness to 
▁ him . i will tell you a thing , but you shall let it dwell darkly 
▁ with you . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj when you have spoken it , ' tis dead , and i am the grave 
▁ of it . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj he hath perverted a young gentlewoman here in xxmaj florence , 
▁ of a most chaste renown ; and this night he fleshes his will in 
▁ the spoil of her honour . xxmaj he hath given her his monumental ring , 
▁ and thinks himself made in the unchaste composition . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj now , xxmaj god delay our rebellion ! xxmaj as we are ourselves , 
▁ what things are we ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj merely our own traitors . xxmaj and as in the common course of 
▁ all treasons we still see them reveal themselves till they attain 
▁ to their abhorr'd ends ; so he that in this action contrives 
▁ against his own nobility , in his proper stream , o'erflows 
▁ himself . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj is it not meant damnable in us to be trumpeters of our 
▁ unlawful intents ? xxmaj we shall not then have his company to - night ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj not till after midnight ; for he is dieted to his hour . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj that approaches apace . i would gladly have him see his 
▁ company anatomiz'd , that he might take a measure of his own 
▁ judgments , wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj we will not meddle with him till he come ; for his 
▁ presence must be the whip of the other . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj in the meantime , what hear you of these wars ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i hear there is an overture of peace . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj nay , i assure you , a peace concluded . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj what will xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon do then ? xxmaj will he travel 
▁ higher , or return again into xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i perceive , by this demand , you are not altogether 
▁ of his counsel . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj let it be forbid , sir ! xxmaj so should i be a great deal 
▁ of his act . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj sir , his wife , some two months since , fled from his 
▁ house . xxmaj her pretence is a pilgrimage to xxmaj saint xxmaj jaques le xxmaj grand ; 
▁ which holy undertaking with most austere sanctimony she 
▁ accomplish'd ; and , there residing , the tenderness of her nature 
▁ became as a prey to her grief ; in fine , made a groan of her last 
▁ breath , and now she sings in heaven . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj how is this justified ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj the stronger part of it by her own letters , which 
▁ makes her story true even to the point of her death . xxmaj her death 
▁ itself , which could not be her office to say is come , was 
▁ faithfully confirm'd by the rector of the place . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj hath the xxmaj count all this intelligence ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj ay , and the particular confirmations , point from 
▁ point , to the full arming of the verity . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i am heartily sorry that he 'll be glad of this . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj how mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our 
▁ losses ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj and how mightily some other times we drown our gain in 
▁ tears ! xxmaj the great dignity that his valour hath here acquir'd for 
▁ him shall at home be encount'red with a shame as ample . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj the web of our life is of a mingled yarn , good and ill 
▁ together . xxmaj our virtues would be proud if our faults whipt them 
▁ not ; and our crimes would despair if they were not cherish'd by 
▁ our virtues . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxmaj how now ? xxmaj where 's your master ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he met the xxmaj duke in the street , sir ; of whom he hath taken 
▁ a solemn leave . xxmaj his lordship will next morning for xxmaj france . xxmaj the 
▁ xxmaj duke hath offered him letters of commendations to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj they shall be no more than needful there , if they were 
▁ more than they can commend . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj they can not be too sweet for the xxmaj king 's tartness . 
▁ xxmaj here 's his lordship now . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bertram 

▁ xxmaj how now , my lord , is't not after midnight ? 
▁ xxup bertram . i have to - night dispatch'd sixteen businesses , a month 's 
▁ length apiece ; by an abstract of success : i have congied with the 
▁ xxmaj duke , done my adieu with his nearest ; buried a wife , mourn'd for 
▁ her ; writ to my lady mother i am returning ; entertain'd my 
▁ convoy ; and between these main parcels of dispatch effected many 
▁ nicer needs . xxmaj the last was the greatest , but that i have not ended 
▁ yet . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj if the business be of any difficulty and this morning 
▁ your departure hence , it requires haste of your lordship . 
▁ xxup bertram . i mean the business is not ended , as fearing to hear of it 
▁ hereafter . xxmaj but shall we have this dialogue between the xxmaj fool and 
▁ the xxmaj soldier ? xxmaj come , bring forth this counterfeit module has 
▁ deceiv'd me like a double - meaning prophesier . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj bring him forth . [ exeunt xxup soldiers ] xxmaj has sat i ' th ' 
▁ stocks all night , poor gallant knave . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj no matter ; his heels have deserv'd it , in usurping his 
▁ spurs so long . xxmaj how does he carry himself ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i have told your lordship already the stocks carry 
▁ him . xxmaj but to answer you as you would be understood : he weeps like 
▁ a wench that had shed her milk ; he hath confess'd himself to 
▁ xxmaj morgan , whom he supposes to be a friar , from the time of his 
▁ remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i ' th ' 
▁ stocks . xxmaj and what think you he hath confess'd ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj nothing of me , has ' a ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj his confession is taken , and it shall be read to his 
▁ face ; if your lordship be in't , as i believe you are , you must 
▁ have the patience to hear it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles guarded , and 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier as interpreter 

▁ xxup bertram . a plague upon him ! muffled ! xxmaj he can say nothing of me . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj hush , hush ! xxmaj hoodman comes . xxmaj portotartarossa . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj he calls for the tortures . xxmaj what will you say without 
▁ 'em ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i will confess what i know without constraint ; if ye 
▁ pinch me like a pasty , i can say no more . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj bosko chimurcho . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj boblibindo chicurmurco . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxup you are a merciful general . xxmaj our xxmaj general bids you 
▁ answer to what i shall ask you out of a note . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj and truly , as i hope to live . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . ' first demand of him how many horse the xxmaj duke is 
▁ strong . ' xxmaj what say you to that ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj five or six thousand ; but very weak and unserviceable . 
▁ xxmaj the troops are all scattered , and the commanders very poor 
▁ rogues , upon my reputation and credit , and as i hope to live . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj shall i set down your answer so ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj do ; xxmaj i 'll take the sacrament on ' t , how and which way you 
▁ will . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj all 's one to him . xxmaj what a past - saving slave is this ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj y'are deceiv'd , my lord ; this is xxmaj monsieur xxmaj parolles , 
▁ the gallant militarist - that was his own phrase - that had the whole 
▁ theoric of war in the knot of his scarf , and the practice in the 
▁ chape of his dagger . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i will never trust a man again for keeping his sword 
▁ clean ; nor believe he can have everything in him by wearing his 
▁ apparel neatly . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj well , that 's set down . 
▁ xxup parolles . ' five or six thousand horse ' i said - i will say true- ' or 
▁ thereabouts ' set down , for xxmaj i 'll speak truth . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he 's very near the truth in this . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj but i con him no thanks for't in the nature he delivers it . 
▁ xxup parolles . ' poor rogues ' i pray you say . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj well , that 's set down . 
▁ xxup parolles . i humbly thank you , sir . a truth 's a truth - the rogues are 
▁ marvellous poor . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . ' demand of him of what strength they are a - foot . ' 
▁ xxmaj what say you to that ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj by my troth , sir , if i were to live this present hour , i 
▁ will tell true . xxmaj let me see : xxmaj spurio , a hundred and fifty ; 
▁ xxmaj sebastian , so many ; xxmaj corambus , so many ; xxmaj jaques , so many ; xxmaj guiltian , 
▁ xxmaj cosmo , xxmaj lodowick , and xxmaj gratii , two hundred fifty each ; mine own 
▁ company , xxmaj chitopher , xxmaj vaumond , xxmaj bentii , two hundred fifty each ; so 
▁ that the muster - file , rotten and sound , upon my life , amounts not 
▁ to fifteen thousand poll ; half of the which dare not shake the 
▁ snow from off their cassocks lest they shake themselves to 
▁ pieces . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj what shall be done to him ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj nothing , but let him have thanks . xxmaj demand of him my 
▁ condition , and what credit i have with the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj well , that 's set down . ' you shall demand of him 
▁ whether one xxmaj captain xxmaj dumain be i ' th ' camp , a xxmaj frenchman ; what his 
▁ reputation is with the xxmaj duke , what his valour , honesty , expertness 
▁ in wars ; or whether he thinks it were not possible , with 
▁ well - weighing sums of gold , to corrupt him to a revolt . ' xxmaj what say 
▁ you to this ? xxmaj what do you know of it ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i beseech you , let me answer to the particular of the 
▁ inter'gatories . xxmaj demand them singly . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj do you know this xxmaj captain xxmaj dumain ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i know him : ' a was a botcher 's prentice in xxmaj paris , from 
▁ whence he was whipt for getting the shrieve 's fool with child - a 
▁ dumb innocent that could not say him nay . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj nay , by your leave , hold your hands ; though i know his 
▁ brains are forfeit to the next tile that falls . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj well , is this captain in the xxmaj duke of xxmaj florence 's 
▁ camp ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj upon my knowledge , he is , and lousy . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj nay , look not so upon me ; we shall hear of your 
▁ lordship anon . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj what is his reputation with the xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj the xxmaj duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of 
▁ mine ; and writ to me this other day to turn him out o ' th ' band . 
▁ i think i have his letter in my pocket . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj marry , we 'll search . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj in good sadness , i do not know ; either it is there or it 
▁ is upon a file with the xxmaj duke 's other letters in my tent . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj here ' tis ; here 's a paper . xxmaj shall i read it to you ? 
▁ xxup parolles . i do not know if it be it or no . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj our interpreter does it well . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj excellently . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . [ reads ] ' dian , the xxmaj count 's a fool , and full of 
▁ gold . ' 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj that is not the xxmaj duke 's letter , sir ; that is an 
▁ advertisement to a proper maid in xxmaj florence , one xxmaj diana , to take 
▁ heed of the allurement of one xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon , a foolish idle 
▁ boy , but for all that very ruttish . i pray you , sir , put it up 
▁ again . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll read it first by your favour . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj my meaning in't , i protest , was very honest in the behalf 
▁ of the maid ; for i knew the young xxmaj count to be a dangerous and 
▁ lascivious boy , who is a whale to virginity , and devours up all 
▁ the fry it finds . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj damnable both - sides rogue ! 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . [ reads ] 
▁ ' when he swears oaths , bid him drop gold , and take it ; 
▁ xxmaj after he scores , he never pays the score . 
▁ xxmaj half won is match well made ; match , and well make it ; 
▁ xxmaj he ne'er pays after - debts , take it before . 
▁ xxmaj and say a soldier , xxmaj dian , told thee this : 
▁ xxmaj men are to mell with , boys are not to kiss ; 
▁ xxmaj for count of this , the xxmaj count 's a fool , i know it , 
▁ xxmaj who pays before , but not when he does owe it . 
▁ xxmaj thine , as he vow'd to thee in thine ear , 
▁ xxup parolles . ' 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj he shall be whipt through the army with this rhyme in 's 
▁ forehead . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj this is your devoted friend , sir , the manifold 
▁ linguist , and the amnipotent soldier . 
▁ xxup bertram . i could endure anything before but a cat , and now he 's a 
▁ cat to me . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . i perceive , sir , by our xxmaj general 's looks we shall be 
▁ fain to hang you . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj my life , sir , in any case ! xxmaj not that i am afraid to die , 
▁ but that , my offences being many , i would repent out the 
▁ remainder of nature . xxmaj let me live , sir , in a dungeon , i ' th ' 
▁ stocks , or anywhere , so i may live . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj we 'll see what may be done , so you confess freely ; 
▁ therefore , once more to this xxmaj captain xxmaj dumain : you have answer'd to 
▁ his reputation with the xxmaj duke , and to his valour ; what is his 
▁ honesty ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj he will steal , sir , an egg out of a cloister ; for rapes 
▁ and ravishments he parallels xxmaj nessus . xxmaj he professes not keeping of 
▁ oaths ; in breaking 'em he is stronger than xxmaj hercules . xxmaj he will lie , 
▁ sir , with such volubility that you would think truth were a fool . 
▁ xxmaj drunkenness is his best virtue , for he will be swine - drunk ; and 
▁ in his sleep he does little harm , save to his bedclothes about 
▁ him ; but they know his conditions and lay him in straw . i have 
▁ but little more to say , sir , of his honesty . xxmaj he has everything 
▁ that an honest man should not have ; what an honest man should 
▁ have he has nothing . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i begin to love him for this . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj for this description of thine honesty ? a pox upon him ! xxmaj for 
▁ me , he 's more and more a cat . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj what say you to his expertness in war ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj faith , sir , has led the drum before the xxmaj english 
▁ tragedians - to belie him i will not - and more of his soldier - ship 
▁ i know not , except in that country he had the honour to be the 
▁ officer at a place there called xxmaj mile - end to instruct for the 
▁ doubling of files - i would do the man what honour i can - but of 
▁ this i am not certain . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he hath out - villain'd villainy so far that the rarity 
▁ redeems him . 
▁ xxup bertram . a pox on him ! he 's a cat still . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj his qualities being at this poor price , i need not 
▁ to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj sir , for a cardecue he will sell the fee - simple of his 
▁ salvation , the inheritance of it ; and cut th ' entail from all 
▁ remainders and a perpetual succession for it perpetually . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj what 's his brother , the other xxmaj captain xxmaj dumain ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj why does he ask him of me ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj what 's he ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj e'en a crow o ' th ' same nest ; not altogether so great as 
▁ the first in goodness , but greater a great deal in evil . xxmaj he 
▁ excels his brother for a coward ; yet his brother is reputed one 
▁ of the best that is . xxmaj in a retreat he outruns any lackey : marry , 
▁ in coming on he has the cramp . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj if your life be saved , will you undertake to betray 
▁ the xxmaj florentine ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj ay , and the xxmaj captain of his xxmaj horse , xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj i 'll whisper with the xxmaj general , and know his 
▁ pleasure . 
▁ xxup parolles . [ aside ] xxmaj i 'll no more drumming . a plague of all drums ! 
▁ xxmaj only to seem to deserve well , and to beguile the supposition of 
▁ that lascivious young boy the xxmaj count , have i run into this danger . 
▁ xxmaj yet who would have suspected an ambush where i was taken ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj there is no remedy , sir , but you must die . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj general says you that have so traitorously discover'd the 
▁ secrets of your army , and made such pestiferous reports of men 
▁ very nobly held , can serve the world for no honest use ; therefore 
▁ you must die . xxmaj come , headsman , of with his head . 
▁ xxup parolles . o xxmaj lord , sir , let me live , or let me see my death ! 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj that shall you , and take your leave of all your 
▁ friends . [ unmuffling him ] xxmaj so look about you ; know you any here ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj good morrow , noble xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj god bless you , xxmaj captain xxmaj parolles . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj god save you , noble xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj captain , what greeting will you to my xxmaj lord xxmaj lafeu ? i am 
▁ for xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj good xxmaj captain , will you give me a copy of the sonnet 
▁ you writ to xxmaj diana in behalf of the xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon ? xxmaj an i were not 
▁ a very coward xxmaj i 'd compel it of you ; but fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup bertram and xxup lords 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj you are undone , xxmaj captain , all but your scarf ; that 
▁ has a knot on ' t yet . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj who can not be crush'd with a plot ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj if you could find out a country where but women were 
▁ that had received so much shame , you might begin an impudent 
▁ nation . xxmaj fare ye well , sir ; i am for xxmaj france too ; we shall speak of 
▁ you there . xxmaj exit with xxup soldiers 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj yet am i thankful . xxmaj if my heart were great , 
▁ ' twould burst at this . xxmaj captain xxmaj i 'll be no more ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will eat , and drink , and sleep as soft 
▁ xxmaj as captain shall . xxmaj simply the thing i am 
▁ xxmaj shall make me live . xxmaj who knows himself a braggart , 
▁ xxmaj let him fear this ; for it will come to pass 
▁ xxmaj that every braggart shall be found an ass . 
▁ xxmaj rust , sword ; cool , blushes ; and , xxmaj parolles , live 
▁ xxmaj safest in shame . xxmaj being fool'd , by fool'ry thrive . 
▁ xxmaj there 's place and means for every man alive . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll after them . xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup iv xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj the xxup widow 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup helena , xxup widow , and xxup diana 

▁ xxup helena . xxmaj that you may well perceive i have not wrong'd you ! 
▁ xxmaj one of the greatest in the xxmaj christian world 
▁ xxmaj shall be my surety ; fore whose throne ' tis needful , 
▁ xxmaj ere i can perfect mine intents , to kneel . 
▁ xxmaj time was i did him a desired office , 
▁ xxmaj dear almost as his life ; which gratitude 
▁ xxmaj through flinty xxmaj tartar 's bosom would peep forth , 
▁ xxmaj and answer ' thanks . ' i duly am inform'd 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj grace is at xxmaj marseilles , to which place 
▁ xxmaj we have convenient convoy . xxmaj you must know 
▁ i am supposed dead . xxmaj the army breaking , 
▁ xxmaj my husband hies him home ; where , heaven aiding , 
▁ xxmaj and by the leave of my good lord the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll be before our welcome . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj gentle madam , 
▁ xxmaj you never had a servant to whose trust 
▁ xxmaj your business was more welcome . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj nor you , mistress , 
▁ xxmaj ever a friend whose thoughts more truly labour 
▁ xxmaj to recompense your love . xxmaj doubt not but heaven 
▁ xxmaj hath brought me up to be your daughter 's dower , 
▁ xxmaj as it hath fated her to be my motive 
▁ xxmaj and helper to a husband . xxmaj but , o strange men ! 
▁ xxmaj that can such sweet use make of what they hate , 
▁ xxmaj when saucy trusting of the cozen'd thoughts 
▁ xxmaj defiles the pitchy night . xxmaj so lust doth play 
▁ xxmaj with what it loathes , for that which is away . 
▁ xxmaj but more of this hereafter . xxmaj you , xxmaj diana , 
▁ xxmaj under my poor instructions yet must suffer 
▁ xxmaj something in my behalf . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj let death and honesty 
▁ xxmaj go with your impositions , i am yours 
▁ xxmaj upon your will to suffer . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj yet , i pray you : 
▁ xxmaj but with the word the time will bring on summer , 
▁ xxmaj when briers shall have leaves as well as thorns 
▁ xxmaj and be as sweet as sharp . xxmaj we must away ; 
▁ xxmaj our waggon is prepar'd , and time revives us . 
▁ xxmaj all 's xxmaj well that xxmaj ends xxmaj well . xxmaj still the fine 's the crown . 
▁ xxmaj whate'er the course , the end is the renown . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv xxup scene 5 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup countess , xxup lafeu , and xxup clown 

▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj no , no , no , son was misled with a snipt - taffeta fellow 
▁ there , whose villainous saffron would have made all the unbak'd 
▁ and doughy youth of a nation in his colour . xxmaj your daughter - in - law 
▁ had been alive at this hour , and your son here at home , more 
▁ advanc'd by the xxmaj king than by that red - tail'd humble - bee i speak 
▁ of . 
▁ xxup countess . i would i had not known him . xxmaj it was the death of the most 
▁ virtuous gentlewoman that ever nature had praise for creating . xxmaj if 
▁ she had partaken of my flesh , and cost me the dearest groans of a 
▁ mother . i could not have owed her a more rooted love . 
▁ xxup lafeu . ' twas a good lady , ' twas a good lady . xxmaj we may pick a thousand 
▁ sallets ere we light on such another herb . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj indeed , sir , she was the sweet - marjoram of the sallet , or , 
▁ rather , the herb of grace . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj they are not sallet - herbs , you knave ; they are nose - herbs . 
▁ xxup clown . i am no great xxmaj nebuchadnezzar , sir ; i have not much skill in 
▁ grass . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj whether dost thou profess thyself - a knave or a fool ? 
▁ xxup clown . a fool , sir , at a woman 's service , and a knave at a man 's . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj your distinction ? 
▁ xxup clown . i would cozen the man of his wife , and do his service . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj so you were a knave at his service , indeed . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj and i would give his wife my bauble , sir , to do her service . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i will subscribe for thee ; thou art both knave and fool . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj at your service . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj no , no , no . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj why , sir , if i can not serve you , i can serve as great a 
▁ prince as you are . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj who 's that ? a xxmaj frenchman ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj faith , sir , ' a has an xxmaj english name ; but his fisnomy is more 
▁ hotter in xxmaj france than there . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj what prince is that ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj the xxmaj black xxmaj prince , sir ; alias , the xxmaj prince of xxmaj darkness ; alias , 
▁ the devil . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj hold thee , there 's my purse . i give thee not this to suggest 
▁ thee from thy master thou talk'st of ; serve him still . 
▁ xxup clown . i am a woodland fellow , sir , that always loved a great fire ; 
▁ and the master i speak of ever keeps a good fire . xxmaj but , sure , he 
▁ is the prince of the world ; let his nobility remain in 's court . i 
▁ am for the house with the narrow gate , which i take to be too 
▁ little for pomp to enter . xxmaj some that humble themselves may ; but 
▁ the many will be too chill and tender : and they 'll be for the 
▁ flow'ry way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj go thy ways , i begin to be aweary of thee ; and i tell thee 
▁ so before , because i would not fall out with thee . xxmaj go thy ways ; 
▁ let my horses be well look'd to , without any tricks . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj if i put any tricks upon 'em , sir , they shall be jades ' 
▁ tricks , which are their own right by the law of nature . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lafeu . a shrewd knave , and an unhappy . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj so ' a is . xxmaj my lord that 's gone made himself much sport 
▁ out of him . xxmaj by his authority he remains here , which he thinks is 
▁ a patent for his sauciness ; and indeed he has no pace , but runs 
▁ where he will . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i like him well ; ' tis not amiss . xxmaj and i was about to tell 
▁ you , since i heard of the good lady 's death , and that my lord 
▁ your son was upon his return home , i moved the xxmaj king my master to 
▁ speak in the behalf of my daughter ; which , in the minority of 
▁ them both , his xxmaj majesty out of a self - gracious remembrance did 
▁ first propose . xxmaj his xxmaj highness hath promis'd me to do it ; and , to 
▁ stop up the displeasure he hath conceived against your son , there 
▁ is no fitter matter . xxmaj how does your ladyship like it ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj with very much content , my lord ; and i wish it happily 
▁ effected . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj his xxmaj highness comes post from xxmaj marseilles , of as able body as 
▁ when he number'd thirty ; ' a will be here to - morrow , or i am 
▁ deceiv'd by him that in such intelligence hath seldom fail'd . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj it rejoices me that i hope i shall see him ere i die . 
▁ i have letters that my son will be here to - night . i shall beseech 
▁ your lordship to remain with me tal they meet together . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj madam , i was thinking with what manners i might safely be 
▁ admitted . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj you need but plead your honourable privilege . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj lady , of that i have made a bold charter ; but , i thank my 
▁ xxmaj god , it holds yet . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup clown 

▁ xxup clown . o madam , yonder 's my lord your son with a patch of velvet 
▁ on 's face ; whether there be a scar under ' t or no , the velvet 
▁ knows ; but ' tis a goodly patch of velvet . xxmaj his left cheek is a 
▁ cheek of two pile and a half , but his right cheek is worn bare . 
▁ xxup lafeu . a scar nobly got , or a noble scar , is a good liv'ry of 
▁ honour ; so belike is that . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj but it is your carbonado'd face . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj let us go see your son , i pray you ; 
▁ i long to talk with the young noble soldier . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj faith , there 's a dozen of 'em , with delicate fine hats , and 
▁ most courteous feathers , which bow the head and nod at every man . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj marseilles . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup helena , xxup widow , and xxup diana , with two xxup attendants 

▁ xxup helena . xxmaj but this exceeding posting day and night 
▁ xxmaj must wear your spirits low ; we can not help it . 
▁ xxmaj but since you have made the days and nights as one , 
▁ xxmaj to wear your gentle limbs in my affairs , 
▁ xxmaj be bold you do so grow in my requital 
▁ xxmaj as nothing can unroot you . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup gentleman 

▁ xxmaj in happy time ! 
▁ xxmaj this man may help me to his xxmaj majesty 's ear , 
▁ xxmaj if he would spend his power . xxmaj god save you , sir . 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj and you . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj sir , i have seen you in the court of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup gentleman . i have been sometimes there . 
▁ xxup helena . i do presume , sir , that you are not fall'n 
▁ xxmaj from the report that goes upon your goodness ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , goaded with most sharp occasions , 
▁ xxmaj which lay nice manners by , i put you to 
▁ xxmaj the use of your own virtues , for the which 
▁ i shall continue thankful . 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj what 's your will ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj that it will please you 
▁ xxmaj to give this poor petition to the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj and aid me with that store of power you have 
▁ xxmaj to come into his presence . 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj the xxmaj king 's not here . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj not here , sir ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj not indeed . 
▁ xxmaj he hence remov'd last night , and with more haste 
▁ xxmaj than is his use . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj lord , how we lose our pains ! 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj all 's xxmaj well xxmaj that xxmaj ends xxmaj well yet , 
▁ xxmaj though time seem so adverse and means unfit . 
▁ i do beseech you , whither is he gone ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj marry , as i take it , to xxmaj rousillon ; 
▁ xxmaj whither i am going . 
▁ xxup helena . i do beseech you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj since you are like to see the xxmaj king before me , 
▁ xxmaj commend the paper to his gracious hand ; 
▁ xxmaj which i presume shall render you no blame , 
▁ xxmaj but rather make you thank your pains for it . 
▁ i will come after you with what good speed 
▁ xxmaj our means will make us means . 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj this xxmaj i 'll do for you . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and you shall find yourself to be well thank'd , 
▁ xxmaj whate'er falls more . xxmaj we must to horse again ; 
▁ xxmaj go , go , provide . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act v xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the inner court of the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup clown and xxup parolles 

▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj good xxmaj monsieur xxmaj lavache , give my xxmaj lord xxmaj lafeu this letter . i 
▁ have ere now , sir , been better known to you , when i have held 
▁ familiarity with fresher clothes ; but i am now , sir , muddied in 
▁ xxmaj fortune 's mood , and smell somewhat strong of her strong 
▁ displeasure . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , xxmaj fortune 's displeasure is but sluttish , if it smell 
▁ so strongly as thou speak'st of . i will henceforth eat no fish 
▁ of xxmaj fortune 's butt'ring . xxmaj prithee , allow the wind . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj nay , you need not to stop your nose , sir ; i spake but by 
▁ a metaphor . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj indeed , sir , if your metaphor stink , i will stop my nose ; or 
▁ against any man 's metaphor . xxmaj prithee , get thee further . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj pray you , sir , deliver me this paper . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj foh ! prithee stand away . a paper from xxmaj fortune 's close - stool 
▁ to give to a nobleman ! xxmaj look here he comes himself . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lafeu 

▁ xxmaj here is a pur of xxmaj fortune 's , sir , or of xxmaj fortune 's cat , but not 
▁ a musk - cat , that has fall'n into the unclean fishpond of her 
▁ displeasure , and , as he says , is muddied withal . xxmaj pray you , sir , 
▁ use the carp as you may ; for he looks like a poor , decayed , 
▁ ingenious , foolish , rascally knave . i do pity his distress 
▁ in my similes of comfort , and leave him to your lordship . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj my lord , i am a man whom xxmaj fortune hath cruelly scratch'd . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj and what would you have me to do ? ' tis too late to pare her 
▁ nails now . xxmaj wherein have you played the knave with xxmaj fortune , that 
▁ she should scratch you , who of herself is a good lady and would 
▁ not have knaves thrive long under her ? xxmaj there 's a cardecue for 
▁ you . xxmaj let the justices make you and xxmaj fortune friends ; i am for 
▁ other business . 
▁ xxup parolles . i beseech your honour to hear me one single word . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj you beg a single penny more ; come , you shall ha't ; save your 
▁ word . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj my name , my good lord , is xxmaj parolles . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj you beg more than word then . xxmaj cox my passion ! give me your 
▁ hand . xxmaj how does your drum ? 
▁ xxup parolles . o my good lord , you were the first that found me . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj was xxup i , in sooth ? xxmaj and i was the first that lost thee . 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj it lies in you , my lord , to bring me in some grace , for 
▁ you did bring me out . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj out upon thee , knave ! xxmaj dost thou put upon me at once both the 
▁ office of xxmaj god and the devil ? xxmaj one brings the in grace , and the 
▁ other brings thee out . [ trumpets sound ] xxmaj the xxmaj king 's coming ; i 
▁ know by his trumpets . xxmaj sirrah , inquire further after me ; i had 
▁ talk of you last night . xxmaj though you are a fool and a knave , you 
▁ shall eat . xxmaj go to ; follow . 
▁ xxup parolles . i praise xxmaj god for you . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act v xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj rousillon . xxmaj the xxup count 's palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king , xxup countess , xxup lafeu , the two xxup french xxup lords , with xxup attendants 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj we lost a jewel of her , and our esteem 
▁ xxmaj was made much poorer by it ; but your son , 
▁ xxmaj as mad in folly , lack'd the sense to know 
▁ xxmaj her estimation home . 
▁ xxup countess . ' tis past , my liege ; 
▁ xxmaj and i beseech your xxmaj majesty to make it 
▁ xxmaj natural rebellion , done i ' th ' blaze of youth , 
▁ xxmaj when oil and fire , too strong for reason 's force , 
▁ xxmaj o'erbears it and burns on . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my honour'd lady , 
▁ i have forgiven and forgotten all ; 
▁ xxmaj though my revenges were high bent upon him 
▁ xxmaj and watch'd the time to shoot . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj this i must say- 
▁ xxmaj but first , i beg my pardon : the young lord 
▁ xxmaj did to his xxmaj majesty , his mother , and his lady , 
▁ xxmaj offence of mighty note ; but to himself 
▁ xxmaj the greatest wrong of all . xxmaj he lost a wife 
▁ xxmaj whose beauty did astonish the survey 
▁ xxmaj of richest eyes ; whose words all ears took captive ; 
▁ xxmaj whose dear perfection hearts that scorn'd to serve 
▁ xxmaj humbly call'd mistress . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj praising what is lost 
▁ xxmaj makes the remembrance dear . xxmaj well , call him hither ; 
▁ xxmaj we are reconcil'd , and the first view shall kill 
▁ xxmaj all repetition . xxmaj let him not ask our pardon ; 
▁ xxmaj the nature of his great offence is dead , 
▁ xxmaj and deeper than oblivion do we bury 
▁ xxmaj th ' incensing relics of it ; let him approach , 
▁ a stranger , no offender ; and inform him 
▁ xxmaj so ' tis our will he should . 
▁ xxup gentleman . i shall , my liege . xxmaj exit xxup gentleman 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what says he to your daughter ? xxmaj have you spoke ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj all that he is hath reference to your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj then shall we have a match . i have letters sent me 
▁ xxmaj that sets him high in fame . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bertram 

▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj he looks well on ' t. 
▁ xxup king . i am not a day of season , 
▁ xxmaj for thou mayst see a sunshine and a hail 
▁ xxmaj in me at once . xxmaj but to the brightest beams 
▁ xxmaj distracted clouds give way ; so stand thou forth ; 
▁ xxmaj the time is fair again . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my high - repented blames , 
▁ xxmaj dear sovereign , pardon to me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj all is whole ; 
▁ xxmaj not one word more of the consumed time . 
▁ xxmaj let 's take the instant by the forward top ; 
▁ xxmaj for we are old , and on our quick'st decrees 
▁ xxmaj th ' inaudible and noiseless foot of xxmaj time 
▁ xxmaj steals ere we can effect them . xxmaj you remember 
▁ xxmaj the daughter of this lord ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj admiringly , my liege . xxmaj at first 
▁ i stuck my choice upon her , ere my heart 
▁ xxmaj durst make too bold herald of my tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj where the impression of mine eye infixing , 
▁ xxmaj contempt his scornful perspective did lend me , 
▁ xxmaj which warp'd the line of every other favour , 
▁ xxmaj scorn'd a fair colour or express'd it stol'n , 
▁ xxmaj extended or contracted all proportions 
▁ xxmaj to a most hideous object . xxmaj thence it came 
▁ xxmaj that she whom all men prais'd , and whom myself , 
▁ xxmaj since i have lost , have lov'd , was in mine eye 
▁ xxmaj the dust that did offend it . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj well excus'd . 
▁ xxmaj that thou didst love her , strikes some scores away 
▁ xxmaj from the great compt ; but love that comes too late , 
▁ xxmaj like a remorseful pardon slowly carried , 
▁ xxmaj to the great sender turns a sour offence , 
▁ xxmaj crying ' that 's good that 's gone . ' xxmaj our rash faults 
▁ xxmaj make trivial price of serious things we have , 
▁ xxmaj not knowing them until we know their grave . 
▁ xxmaj oft our displeasures , to ourselves unjust , 
▁ xxmaj destroy our friends , and after weep their dust ; 
▁ xxmaj our own love waking cries to see what 's done , 
▁ xxmaj while shameful hate sleeps out the afternoon . 
▁ xxmaj be this sweet xxmaj helen 's knell . xxmaj and now forget her . 
▁ xxmaj send forth your amorous token for fair xxmaj maudlin . 
▁ xxmaj the main consents are had ; and here we 'll stay 
▁ xxmaj to see our widower 's second marriage - day . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj which better than the first , o dear heaven , bless ! 
▁ xxmaj or , ere they meet , in me , o nature , cesse ! 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj come on , my son , in whom my house 's name 
▁ xxmaj must be digested ; give a favour from you , 
▁ xxmaj to sparkle in the spirits of my daughter , 
▁ xxmaj that she may quickly come . 
▁ [ bertram gives a ring ] 
▁ xxmaj by my old beard , 
▁ xxmaj and ev'ry hair that 's on ' t , xxmaj helen , that 's dead , 
▁ xxmaj was a sweet creature ; such a ring as this , 
▁ xxmaj the last that e'er i took her leave at court , 
▁ i saw upon her finger . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj hers it was not . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj now , pray you , let me see it ; for mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj while i was speaking , oft was fasten'd to't . 
▁ xxmaj this ring was mine ; and when i gave it xxmaj helen 
▁ i bade her , if her fortunes ever stood 
▁ xxmaj necessitied to help , that by this token 
▁ i would relieve her . xxmaj had you that craft to reave her 
▁ xxmaj of what should stead her most ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my gracious sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj howe'er it pleases you to take it so , 
▁ xxmaj the ring was never hers . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj son , on my life , 
▁ i have seen her wear it ; and she reckon'd it 
▁ xxmaj at her life 's rate . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i am sure i saw her wear it . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj you are deceiv'd , my lord ; she never saw it . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj florence was it from a casement thrown me , 
▁ xxmaj wrapp'd in a paper , which contain'd the name 
▁ xxmaj of her that threw it . xxmaj noble she was , and thought 
▁ i stood engag'd ; but when i had subscrib'd 
▁ xxmaj to mine own fortune , and inform'd her fully 
▁ i could not answer in that course of honour 
▁ xxmaj as she had made the overture , she ceas'd , 
▁ xxmaj in heavy satisfaction , and would never 
▁ xxmaj receive the ring again . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj plutus himself , 
▁ xxmaj that knows the tinct and multiplying med'cine , 
▁ xxmaj hath not in nature 's mystery more science 
▁ xxmaj than i have in this ring . ' twas mine , ' twas xxmaj helen 's , 
▁ xxmaj whoever gave it you . xxmaj then , if you know 
▁ xxmaj that you are well acquainted with yourself , 
▁ xxmaj confess ' twas hers , and by what rough enforcement 
▁ xxmaj you got it from her . xxmaj she call'd the saints to surety 
▁ xxmaj that she would never put it from her finger 
▁ xxmaj unless she gave it to yourself in bed- 
▁ xxmaj where you have never come- or sent it us 
▁ xxmaj upon her great disaster . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj she never saw it . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thou speak'st it falsely , as i love mine honour ; 
▁ xxmaj and mak'st conjectural fears to come into me 
▁ xxmaj which i would fain shut out . xxmaj if it should prove 
▁ xxmaj that thou art so inhuman- ' twill not prove so . 
▁ xxmaj and yet i know not- thou didst hate her deadly , 
▁ xxmaj and she is dead ; which nothing , but to close 
▁ xxmaj her eyes myself , could win me to believe 
▁ xxmaj more than to see this ring . xxmaj take him away . 
▁ [ guards seize xxup bertram ] 
▁ xxmaj my fore - past proofs , howe'er the matter fall , 
▁ xxmaj shall tax my fears of little vanity , 
▁ xxmaj having vainly fear'd too little . xxmaj away with him . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll sift this matter further . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj if you shall prove 
▁ xxmaj this ring was ever hers , you shall as easy 
▁ xxmaj prove that i husbanded her bed in xxmaj florence , 
▁ xxmaj where she yet never was . xxmaj exit , guarded 
▁ xxup king . i am wrapp'd in dismal thinkings . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup gentleman 

▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj gracious sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj whether i have been to blame or no , i know not : 
▁ xxmaj here 's a petition from a xxmaj florentine , 
▁ xxmaj who hath , for four or five removes , come short 
▁ xxmaj to tender it herself . i undertook it , 
▁ xxmaj vanquish'd thereto by the fair grace and speech 
▁ xxmaj of the poor suppliant , who by this , i know , 
▁ xxmaj is here attending ; her business looks in her 
▁ xxmaj with an importing visage ; and she told me 
▁ xxmaj in a sweet verbal brief it did concern 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness with herself . 
▁ xxup king . [ reads the letter ] ' upon his many protestations to marry me 
▁ when his wife was dead , i blush to say it , he won me . xxmaj now is the 
▁ xxmaj count xxmaj rousillon a widower ; his vows are forfeited to me , and my 
▁ honour 's paid to him . xxmaj he stole from xxmaj florence , taking no leave , 
▁ and i follow him to his country for justice . xxmaj grant it me , o xxmaj king ! 
▁ in you it best lies ; otherwise a seducer flourishes , and a poor 
▁ maid is undone . 
▁ xxup diana xxup capilet . ' 
▁ xxup lafeu . i will buy me a son - in - law in a fair , and toll for this . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll none of him . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the heavens have thought well on thee , xxmaj lafeu , 
▁ xxmaj to bring forth this discov'ry . xxmaj seek these suitors . 
▁ xxmaj go speedily , and bring again the xxmaj count . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup attendants 
▁ i am afeard the life of xxmaj helen , lady , 
▁ xxmaj was foully snatch'd . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj now , justice on the doers ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bertram , guarded 

▁ xxup king . i wonder , sir , sith wives are monsters to you . 
▁ xxmaj and that you fly them as you swear them lordship , 
▁ xxmaj yet you desire to marry . 
▁ xxmaj enter xxup widow and xxup diana 
▁ xxmaj what woman 's that ? 
▁ xxup diana . i am , my lord , a wretched xxmaj florentine , 
▁ xxmaj derived from the ancient xxmaj capilet . 
▁ xxmaj my suit , as i do understand , you know , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore know how far i may be pitied . 
▁ xxup widow . i am her mother , sir , whose age and honour 
▁ xxmaj both suffer under this complaint we bring , 
▁ xxmaj and both shall cease , without your remedy . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj count ; do you know these women ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my lord , i neither can nor will deny 
▁ xxmaj but that i know them . xxmaj do they charge me further ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj why do you look so strange upon your wife ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj she 's none of mine , my lord . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj if you shall marry , 
▁ xxmaj you give away this hand , and that is mine ; 
▁ xxmaj you give away heaven 's vows , and those are mine ; 
▁ xxmaj you give away myself , which is known mine ; 
▁ xxmaj for i by vow am so embodied yours 
▁ xxmaj that she which marries you must marry me , 
▁ xxmaj either both or none . 
▁ xxup lafeu . [ to xxup bertram ] xxmaj your reputation comes too short for 
▁ my daughter ; you are no husband for her . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my lord , this is a fond and desp'rate creature 
▁ xxmaj whom sometime i have laugh'd with . xxmaj let your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj lay a more noble thought upon mine honour 
▁ xxmaj than for to think that i would sink it here . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj sir , for my thoughts , you have them ill to friend 
▁ xxmaj till your deeds gain them . xxmaj fairer prove your honour 
▁ xxmaj than in my thought it lies ! 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj ask him upon his oath if he does think 
▁ xxmaj he had not my virginity . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what say'st thou to her ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj she 's impudent , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj and was a common gamester to the camp . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj he does me wrong , my lord ; if i were so 
▁ xxmaj he might have bought me at a common price . 
▁ xxmaj do not believe him . o , behold this ring , 
▁ xxmaj whose high respect and rich validity 
▁ xxmaj did lack a parallel ; yet , for all that , 
▁ xxmaj he gave it to a commoner o ' th ' camp , 
▁ xxmaj if i be one . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj he blushes , and ' tis it . 
▁ xxmaj of six preceding ancestors , that gem 
▁ xxmaj conferr'd by testament to th ' sequent issue , 
▁ xxmaj hath it been ow'd and worn . xxmaj this is his wife : 
▁ xxmaj that ring 's a thousand proofs . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj methought you said 
▁ xxmaj you saw one here in court could witness it . 
▁ xxup diana . i did , my lord , but loath am to produce 
▁ xxmaj so bad an instrument ; his name 's xxmaj parolles . 
▁ xxup lafeu . i saw the man to - day , if man he be . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj find him , and bring him hither . xxmaj exit an xxup attendant 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj what of him ? 
▁ xxmaj he 's quoted for a most perfidious slave , 
▁ xxmaj with all the spots o ' th ' world tax'd and debauch'd , 
▁ xxmaj whose nature sickens but to speak a truth . 
▁ xxmaj am i or that or this for what he 'll utter 
▁ xxmaj that will speak anything ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj she hath that ring of yours . 
▁ xxup bertram . i think she has . xxmaj certain it is i lik'd her , 
▁ xxmaj and boarded her i ' th ' wanton way of youth . 
▁ xxmaj she knew her distance , and did angle for me , 
▁ xxmaj madding my eagerness with her restraint , 
▁ xxmaj as all impediments in fancy 's course 
▁ xxmaj are motives of more fancy ; and , in fine , 
▁ xxmaj her infinite cunning with her modern grace 
▁ xxmaj subdu'd me to her rate . xxmaj she got the ring ; 
▁ xxmaj and i had that which any inferior might 
▁ xxmaj at market - price have bought . 
▁ xxup diana . i must be patient . 
▁ xxmaj you that have turn'd off a first so noble wife 
▁ xxmaj may justly diet me . i pray you yet- 
▁ xxmaj since you lack virtue , i will lose a husband- 
▁ xxmaj send for your ring , i will return it home , 
▁ xxmaj and give me mine again . 
▁ xxup bertram . i have it not . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what ring was yours , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj sir , much like 
▁ xxmaj the same upon your finger . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj know you this ring ? xxmaj this ring was his of late . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj and this was it i gave him , being abed . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the story , then , goes false you threw it him 
▁ xxmaj out of a casement . 
▁ xxup diana . i have spoke the truth . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup parolles 
▁
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj my lord , i do confess the ring was hers . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you boggle shrewdly ; every feather starts you . 
▁ xxmaj is this the man you speak of ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj tell me , sirrah - but tell me true i charge you , 
▁ xxmaj not fearing the displeasure of your master , 
▁ xxmaj which , on your just proceeding , xxmaj i 'll keep off- 
▁ xxmaj by him and by this woman here what know you ?