xxbos xxup parolles . xxmaj so please your xxmaj majesty , my master hath been an honourable 
▁ gentleman ; tricks he hath had in him , which gentlemen have . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj come , come , to th ' purpose . xxmaj did he love this woman ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj faith , sir , he did love her ; but how ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj he did love her , sir , as a gentleman loves a woman . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how is that ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj he lov'd her , sir , and lov'd her not . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj as thou art a knave and no knave . 
▁ xxmaj what an equivocal companion is this ! 
▁ xxup parolles . i am a poor man , and at your xxmaj majesty 's command . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj he 's a good drum , my lord , but a naughty orator . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj do you know he promis'd me marriage ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj faith , i know more than xxmaj i 'll speak . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj but wilt thou not speak all thou know'st ? 
▁ xxup parolles . xxmaj yes , so please your xxmaj majesty . i did go between them , as i 
▁ said ; but more than that , he loved her - for indeed he was mad for 
▁ her , and talk'd of xxmaj satan , and of xxmaj limbo , and of xxmaj furies , and i know 
▁ not what . xxmaj yet i was in that credit with them at that time that i 
▁ knew of their going to bed ; and of other motions , as promising 
▁ her marriage , and things which would derive me ill will to speak 
▁ of ; therefore i will not speak what i know . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thou hast spoken all already , unless thou canst say they are 
▁ married ; but thou art too fine in thy evidence ; therefore stand 
▁ aside . 
▁ xxmaj this ring , you say , was yours ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj where did you buy it ? xxmaj or who gave it you ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj it was not given me , nor i did not buy it . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj who lent it you ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj it was not lent me neither . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj where did you find it then ? 
▁ xxup diana . i found it not . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj if it were yours by none of all these ways , 
▁ xxmaj how could you give it him ? 
▁ xxup diana . i never gave it him . 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj this woman 's an easy glove , my lord ; she goes of and on at 
▁ pleasure . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj this ring was mine , i gave it his first wife . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj it might be yours or hers , for aught i know . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj take her away , i do not like her now ; 
▁ xxmaj to prison with her . xxmaj and away with him . 
▁ xxmaj unless thou tell'st me where thou hadst this ring , 
▁ xxmaj thou diest within this hour . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj i 'll never tell you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj take her away . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj i 'll put in bail , my liege . 
▁ xxup king . i think thee now some common customer . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj by xxmaj jove , if ever i knew man , ' twas you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj wherefore hast thou accus'd him all this while ? 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj because he 's guilty , and he is not guilty . 
▁ xxmaj he knows i am no maid , and he 'll swear to't : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll swear i am a maid , and he knows not . 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj king , i am no strumpet , by my life ; 
▁ i am either maid , or else this old man 's wife . 
▁ [ pointing to xxup lafeu ] 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj she does abuse our ears ; to prison with her . 
▁ xxup diana . xxmaj good mother , fetch my bail . xxmaj stay , royal sir ; 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup widow 
▁ xxmaj the jeweller that owes the ring is sent for , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall surety me . xxmaj but for this lord 
▁ xxmaj who hath abus'd me as he knows himself , 
▁ xxmaj though yet he never harm'd me , here i quit him . 
▁ xxmaj he knows himself my bed he hath defil'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and at that time he got his wife with child . 
▁ xxmaj dead though she be , she feels her young one kick ; 
▁ xxmaj so there 's my riddle : one that 's dead is quick- 
▁ xxmaj and now behold the meaning . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup widow with xxup helena 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj is there no exorcist 
▁ xxmaj beguiles the truer office of mine eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj is't real that i see ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj no , my good lord ; 
▁ ' tis but the shadow of a wife you see , 
▁ xxmaj the name and not the thing . 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj both , both ; o , pardon ! 
▁ xxup helena . xxup o , my good lord , when i was like this maid , 
▁ i found you wondrous kind . xxmaj there is your ring , 
▁ xxmaj and , look you , here 's your letter . xxmaj this it says : 
▁ ' when from my finger you can get this ring , 
▁ xxmaj and are by me with child , ' etc . xxmaj this is done . 
▁ xxmaj will you be mine now you are doubly won ? 
▁ xxup bertram . xxmaj if she , my liege , can make me know this clearly , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll love her dearly , ever , ever dearly . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj if it appear not plain , and prove untrue , 
▁ xxmaj deadly divorce step between me and you ! 
▁ o my dear mother , do i see you living ? 
▁ xxup lafeu . xxmaj mine eyes smell onions ; i shall weep anon . [ to xxup parolles ] 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj tom xxmaj drum , lend me a handkercher . xxmaj so , i 
▁ thank thee . xxmaj wait on me home , xxmaj i 'll make sport with thee ; 
▁ let thy curtsies alone , they are scurvy ones . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj let us from point to point this story know , 
▁ xxmaj to make the even truth in pleasure flow . 
▁ [ to xxup diana ] xxmaj if thou beest yet a fresh uncropped flower , 
▁ xxmaj choose thou thy husband , and xxmaj i 'll pay thy dower ; 
▁ xxmaj for i can guess that by thy honest aid 
▁ xxmaj thou kept'st a wife herself , thyself a maid.- 
▁ xxmaj of that and all the progress , more and less , 
▁ xxmaj resolvedly more leisure shall express . 
▁ xxmaj all yet seems well ; and if it end so meet , 
▁ xxmaj the bitter past , more welcome is the sweet . [ flourish ] 

 xxup epilogue 
▁ xxup epilogue . 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj the xxmaj king 's a beggar , now the play is done . 
▁ xxmaj all is well ended if this suit be won , 
▁ xxmaj that you express content ; which we will pay 
▁ xxmaj with strife to please you , day exceeding day . 
▁ xxmaj ours be your patience then , and yours our parts ; 
▁ xxmaj your gentle hands lend us , and take our hearts . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt omnes 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1607 

 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup antony xxup and xxup cleopatra 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup mark xxup antony , xxmaj triumvirs 
▁ xxup octavius xxup caesar , " 
▁ xxup m. xxup aemilius xxup lepidus , " 
▁ xxup sextus xxup pompeius , " 
▁ xxup domitius xxup enobarbus , friend to xxmaj antony 
▁ xxup ventidius , " " " 
▁ xxup eros , " " " 
▁ xxup scarus , " " " 
▁ xxup dercetas , " " " 
▁ xxup demetrius , " " " 
▁ xxup philo , " " " 
▁ xxup maecenas , friend to xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup agrippa , " " " 
▁ xxup dolabella , " " " 
▁ xxup proculeius , " " " 
▁ xxup thyreus , " " " 
▁ xxup gallus , " " " 
▁ xxup menas , friend to xxmaj pompey 
▁ xxup menecrates , " " " 
▁ xxup varrius , " " " 
▁ xxup taurus , lieutenant - general to xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup canidius , lieutenant - general to xxmaj antony 
▁ xxup silius , an xxmaj officer in xxmaj ventidius 's army 
▁ xxup euphronius , an xxmaj ambassador from xxmaj antony to xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup alexas , attendant on xxmaj cleopatra 
▁ xxup mardian , " " " 
▁ xxup seleucus , " " " 
▁ xxup diomedes , " " " 
▁ a xxup soothsayer 
▁ a xxup clown 

▁ xxup cleopatra , xxmaj queen of xxmaj egypt 
▁ xxup octavia , sister to xxmaj caesar and wife to xxmaj antony 
▁ xxup charmian , lady attending on xxmaj cleopatra 
▁ xxup iras , " " " " 



▁ xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj messengers , and xxmaj attendants 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj the xxmaj roman xxmaj empire 

 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup demetrius and xxup philo 

▁ xxup philo . xxmaj nay , but this dotage of our general 's 
▁ xxmaj o'erflows the measure . xxmaj those his goodly eyes , 
▁ xxmaj that o'er the files and musters of the war 
▁ xxmaj have glow'd like plated xxmaj mars , now bend , now turn , 
▁ xxmaj the office and devotion of their view 
▁ xxmaj upon a tawny front . xxmaj his captain 's heart , 
▁ xxmaj which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst 
▁ xxmaj the buckles on his breast , reneges all temper , 
▁ xxmaj and is become the bellows and the fan 
▁ xxmaj to cool a gipsy 's lust . 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup antony , xxup cleopatra , her xxup ladies , the train , 
▁ with eunuchs fanning her 

▁ xxmaj look where they come ! 
▁ xxmaj take but good note , and you shall see in him 
▁ xxmaj the triple pillar of the world transform'd 
▁ xxmaj into a strumpet 's fool . xxmaj behold and see . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj if it be love indeed , tell me how much . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj there 's beggary in the love that can be reckon'd . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj i 'll set a bourn how far to be belov'd . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj then must thou needs find out new heaven , new earth . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj news , my good lord , from xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj grates me the sum . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj nay , hear them , xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj fulvia perchance is angry ; or who knows 
▁ xxmaj if the scarce - bearded xxmaj caesar have not sent 
▁ xxmaj his pow'rful mandate to you : ' do this or this ; 
▁ xxmaj take in that kingdom and enfranchise that ; 
▁ xxmaj perform't , or else we damn thee . ' 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj how , my love ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj perchance ? xxmaj nay , and most like , 
▁ xxmaj you must not stay here longer ; your dismission 
▁ xxmaj is come from xxmaj caesar ; therefore hear it , xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj where 's xxmaj fulvia 's process ? xxmaj caesar 's i would say ? xxmaj both ? 
▁ xxmaj call in the messengers . xxmaj as i am xxmaj egypt 's xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj thou blushest , xxmaj antony , and that blood of thine 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj caesar 's homager . xxmaj else so thy cheek pays shame 
▁ xxmaj when shrill - tongu'd xxmaj fulvia scolds . xxmaj the messengers ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj let xxmaj rome in xxmaj tiber melt , and the wide arch 
▁ xxmaj of the rang'd empire fall ! xxmaj here is my space . 
▁ xxmaj kingdoms are clay ; our dungy earth alike 
▁ xxmaj feeds beast as man . xxmaj the nobleness of life 
▁ xxmaj is to do thus [ emhracing ] , when such a mutual pair 
▁ xxmaj and such a twain can do't , in which i bind , 
▁ xxmaj on pain of punishment , the world to weet 
▁ xxmaj we stand up peerless . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj excellent falsehood ! 
▁ xxmaj why did he marry xxmaj fulvia , and not love her ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll seem the fool i am not . xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj will be himself . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj but stirr'd by xxmaj cleopatra . 
▁ xxmaj now for the love of xxmaj love and her soft hours , 
▁ xxmaj let 's not confound the time with conference harsh ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a minute of our lives should stretch 
▁ xxmaj without some pleasure now . xxmaj what sport to - night ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj hear the ambassadors . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj fie , wrangling queen ! 
▁ xxmaj whom everything becomes- to chide , to laugh , 
▁ xxmaj to weep ; whose every passion fully strives 
▁ xxmaj to make itself in thee fair and admir'd . 
▁ xxmaj no messenger but thine , and all alone 
▁ xxmaj to - night we 'll wander through the streets and note 
▁ xxmaj the qualities of people . xxmaj come , my queen ; 
▁ xxmaj last night you did desire it . xxmaj speak not to us . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup antony and xxup cleopatra , with the train 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj is xxmaj caesar with xxmaj antonius priz'd so slight ? 
▁ xxup philo . xxmaj sir , sometimes when he is not xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj he comes too short of that great property 
▁ xxmaj which still should go with xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup demetrius . i am full sorry 
▁ xxmaj that he approves the common liar , who 
▁ xxmaj thus speaks of him at xxmaj rome ; but i will hope 
▁ xxmaj of better deeds to - morrow . xxmaj rest you happy ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup charmian , xxup iras , xxup alexas , and a xxup soothsayer 

▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj lord xxmaj alexas , sweet xxmaj alexas , most anything xxmaj alexas , almost 
▁ most absolute xxmaj alexas , where 's the soothsayer that you prais'd so 
▁ to th ' xxmaj queen ? o that i knew this husband , which you say must 
▁ charge his horns with garlands ! 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj soothsayer ! 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj your will ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj is this the man ? xxmaj is't you , sir , that know things ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj in nature 's infinite book of secrecy 
▁ a little i can read . 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj show him your hand . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj bring in the banquet quickly ; wine enough 
▁ xxmaj cleopatra 's health to drink . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj good , sir , give me good fortune . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . i make not , but foresee . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj pray , then , foresee me one . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj you shall be yet far fairer than you are . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj he means in flesh . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj no , you shall paint when you are old . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj wrinkles forbid ! 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj vex not his prescience ; be attentive . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj hush ! 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj you shall be more beloving than beloved . 
▁ xxup charmian . i had rather heat my liver with drinking . 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj nay , hear him . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj good now , some excellent fortune ! xxmaj let me be married to 
▁ three kings in a forenoon , and widow them all . xxmaj let me have a 
▁ child at fifty , to whom xxmaj herod of xxmaj jewry may do homage . xxmaj find me to 
▁ marry me with xxmaj octavius xxmaj caesar , and companion me with my mistress . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj you shall outlive the lady whom you serve . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxup o , excellent ! i love long life better than figs . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj you have seen and prov'd a fairer former fortune 
▁ xxmaj than that which is to approach . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj then belike my children shall have no names . 
▁ xxmaj prithee , how many boys and wenches must i have ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj if every of your wishes had a womb , 
▁ xxmaj and fertile every wish , a million . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj out , fool ! i forgive thee for a witch . 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj you think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj nay , come , tell xxmaj iras hers . 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj we 'll know all our fortunes . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj mine , and most of our fortunes , to - night , shall be- 
▁ drunk to bed . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj there 's a palm presages chastity , if nothing else . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj e'en as the o'erflowing xxmaj nilus presageth famine . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj go , you wild bedfellow , you can not soothsay . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj nay , if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication , i 
▁ can not scratch mine ear . xxmaj prithee , tell her but worky - day fortune . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj your fortunes are alike . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj but how , but how ? xxmaj give me particulars . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . i have said . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj am i not an inch of fortune better than she ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj well , if you were but an inch of fortune better than xxup i , 
▁ where would you choose it ? 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj not in my husband 's nose . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj our worser thoughts heavens mend ! xxmaj alexas- come , his 
▁ fortune , his fortune ! xxup o , let him marry a woman that can not go , 
▁ sweet xxmaj isis , i beseech thee ! xxmaj and let her die too , and give him a 
▁ worse ! xxmaj and let worse follow worse , till the worst of all follow 
▁ him laughing to his grave , fiftyfold a cuckold ! xxmaj good xxmaj isis , hear 
▁ me this prayer , though thou deny me a matter of more weight ; good 
▁ xxmaj isis , i beseech thee ! 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj amen . xxmaj dear goddess , hear that prayer of the people ! xxmaj for , as 
▁ it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose - wiv'd , so it is 
▁ a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded . xxmaj therefore , 
▁ dear xxmaj isis , keep decorum , and fortune him accordingly ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj lo now , if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold , they 
▁ would make themselves whores but they'ld do't ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj hush ! xxmaj here comes xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj not he ; the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj saw you my lord ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj no , lady . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj was he not here ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj no , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj he was dispos'd to mirth ; but on the sudden 
▁ a xxmaj roman thought hath struck him . xxmaj enobarbus ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj madam ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj seek him , and bring him hither . xxmaj where 's xxmaj alexas ? 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj here , at your service . xxmaj my lord approaches . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony , with a xxup messenger and attendants 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj we will not look upon him . xxmaj go with us . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cleopatra , xxup enobarbus , and the rest 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj fulvia thy wife first came into the field . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj against my brother xxmaj lucius ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxmaj but soon that war had end , and the time 's state 
▁ xxmaj made friends of them , jointing their force ' gainst xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj whose better issue in the war from xxmaj italy 
▁ xxmaj upon the first encounter drave them . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj well , what worst ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the nature of bad news infects the teller . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj when it concerns the fool or coward . xxmaj on ! 
▁ xxmaj things that are past are done with me . ' tis thus : 
▁ xxmaj who tells me true , though in his tale lie death , 
▁ i hear him as he flatter'd . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj labienus- 
▁ xxmaj this is stiff news- hath with his xxmaj parthian force 
▁ xxmaj extended xxmaj asia from xxmaj euphrates , 
▁ xxmaj his conquering banner shook from xxmaj syria 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj lydia and to xxmaj ionia , 
▁ xxmaj whilst- 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj antony , thou wouldst say . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxup o , my lord ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj speak to me home ; mince not the general tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj name xxmaj cleopatra as she is call'd in xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj rail thou in xxmaj fulvia 's phrase , and taunt my faults 
▁ xxmaj with such full licence as both truth and malice 
▁ xxmaj have power to utter . xxup o , then we bring forth weeds 
▁ xxmaj when our quick minds lie still , and our ills told us 
▁ xxmaj is as our earing . xxmaj fare thee well awhile . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj at your noble pleasure . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj from xxmaj sicyon , ho , the news ! xxmaj speak there ! 
▁ xxup first xxup attendant . xxmaj the man from xxmaj sicyon- is there such an one ? 
▁ xxup second xxup attendant . xxmaj he stays upon your will . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj let him appear . 
▁ xxmaj these strong xxmaj egyptian fetters i must break , 
▁ xxmaj or lose myself in dotage . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup messenger with a letter 

▁ xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj fulvia thy wife is dead . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj where died she ? 
▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj in xxmaj sicyon . 
▁ xxmaj her length of sickness , with what else more serious 
▁ xxmaj importeth thee to know , this bears . [ gives the letter ] 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj forbear me . xxmaj exit xxup messenger 
▁ xxmaj there 's a great spirit gone ! xxmaj thus did i desire it . 
▁ xxmaj what our contempts doth often hurl from us 
▁ xxmaj we wish it ours again ; the present pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj by revolution low'ring , does become 
▁ xxmaj the opposite of itself . xxmaj she 's good , being gone ; 
▁ xxmaj the hand could pluck her back that shov'd her on . 
▁ i must from this enchanting queen break off . 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand harms , more than the ills i know , 
▁ xxmaj my idleness doth hatch . xxmaj how now , xxmaj enobarbus ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj what 's your pleasure , sir ? 
▁ xxup antony . i must with haste from hence . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj why , then we kill all our women . xxmaj we see how mortal an 
▁ unkindness is to them ; if they suffer our departure , death 's the 
▁ word . 
▁ xxup antony . i must be gone . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj under a compelling occasion , let women die . xxmaj it were pity 
▁ to cast them away for nothing , though between them and a great 
▁ cause they should be esteemed nothing . xxmaj cleopatra , catching but 
▁ the least noise of this , dies instantly ; i have seen her die 
▁ twenty times upon far poorer moment . i do think there is mettle 
▁ in death , which commits some loving act upon her , she hath such a 
▁ celerity in dying . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj she is cunning past man 's thought . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj alack , sir , no ! xxmaj her passions are made of nothing but the 
▁ finest part of pure love . xxmaj we can not call her winds and waters 
▁ sighs and tears ; they are greater storms and tempests than 
▁ almanacs can report . xxmaj this can not be cunning in her ; if it be , she 
▁ makes a show'r of rain as well as xxmaj jove . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj would i had never seen her ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . o xxmaj sir , you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of 
▁ work , which not to have been blest withal would have discredited 
▁ your travel . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj fulvia is dead . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj fulvia is dead . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj fulvia ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj dead . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj why , sir , give the gods a thankful sacrifice . xxmaj when it 
▁ pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him , it 
▁ shows to man the tailors of the earth ; comforting therein that 
▁ when old robes are worn out there are members to make new . xxmaj if 
▁ there were no more women but xxmaj fulvia , then had you indeed a cut , 
▁ and the case to be lamented . xxmaj this grief is crown'd with 
▁ consolation : your old smock brings forth a new petticoat ; and 
▁ indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the business she hath broached in the state 
▁ xxmaj can not endure my absence . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj and the business you have broach'd here can not be 
▁ without you ; especially that of xxmaj cleopatra 's , which wholly depends 
▁ on your abode . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj no more light answers . xxmaj let our officers 
▁ xxmaj have notice what we purpose . i shall break 
▁ xxmaj the cause of our expedience to the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj and get her leave to part . xxmaj for not alone 
▁ xxmaj the death of xxmaj fulvia , with more urgent touches , 
▁ xxmaj do strongly speak to us ; but the letters to 
▁ xxmaj of many our contriving friends in xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj petition us at home . xxmaj sextus xxmaj pompeius 
▁ xxmaj hath given the dare to xxmaj caesar , and commands 
▁ xxmaj the empire of the sea ; our slippery people , 
▁ xxmaj whose love is never link'd to the deserver 
▁ xxmaj till his deserts are past , begin to throw 
▁ xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great and all his dignities 
▁ xxmaj upon his son ; who , high in name and power , 
▁ xxmaj higher than both in blood and life , stands up 
▁ xxmaj for the main soldier ; whose quality , going on , 
▁ xxmaj the sides o ' th ' world may danger . xxmaj much is breeding 
▁ xxmaj which , like the courser 's hair , hath yet but life 
▁ xxmaj and not a serpent 's poison . xxmaj say our pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj to such whose place is under us , requires 
▁ xxmaj our quick remove from hence . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i shall do't . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , and xxup alexas 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxup charmian . i did not see him since . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj see where he is , who 's with him , what he does . 
▁ i did not send you . xxmaj if you find him sad , 
▁ xxmaj say i am dancing ; if in mirth , report 
▁ xxmaj that i am sudden sick . xxmaj quick , and return . xxmaj exit xxup alexas 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj madam , methinks , if you did love him dearly , 
▁ xxmaj you do not hold the method to enforce 
▁ xxmaj the like from him . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what should i do i do not ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj in each thing give him way ; cross him in nothing . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj thou teachest like a fool- the way to lose him . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj tempt him not so too far ; i wish , forbear ; 
▁ xxmaj in time we hate that which we often fear . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony 
▁
▁ xxmaj but here comes xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i am sick and sullen . 
▁ xxup antony . i am sorry to give breathing to my purpose- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj help me away , dear xxmaj charmian ; i shall fall . 
▁ xxmaj it can not be thus long ; the sides of nature 
▁ xxmaj will not sustain it . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj now , my dearest queen- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj pray you , stand farther from me . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i know by that same eye there 's some good news . 
▁ xxmaj what says the married woman ? xxmaj you may go . 
▁ xxmaj would she had never given you leave to come ! 
▁ xxmaj let her not say ' tis i that keep you here- 
▁ i have no power upon you ; hers you are . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the gods best know- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o , never was there queen 
▁ xxmaj so mightily betray'd ! xxmaj yet at the first 
▁ i saw the treasons planted . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj cleopatra- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj why should i think you can be mine and true , 
▁ xxmaj though you in swearing shake the throned gods , 
▁ xxmaj who have been false to xxmaj fulvia ? xxmaj riotous madness , 
▁ xxmaj to be entangled with those mouth - made vows , 
▁ xxmaj which break themselves in swearing ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj most sweet queen- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj nay , pray you seek no colour for your going , 
▁ xxmaj but bid farewell , and go . xxmaj when you sued staying , 
▁ xxmaj then was the time for words . xxmaj no going then ! 
▁ xxmaj eternity was in our lips and eyes , 
▁ xxmaj bliss in our brows ' bent , none our parts so poor 
▁ xxmaj but was a race of heaven . xxmaj they are so still , 
▁ xxmaj or thou , the greatest soldier of the world , 
▁ xxmaj art turn'd the greatest liar . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj how now , lady ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i would i had thy inches . xxmaj thou shouldst know 
▁ xxmaj there were a heart in xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj hear me , queen : 
▁ xxmaj the strong necessity of time commands 
▁ xxmaj our services awhile ; but my full heart 
▁ xxmaj remains in use with you . xxmaj our xxmaj italy 
▁ xxmaj shines o'er with civil swords : xxmaj sextus xxmaj pompeius 
▁ xxmaj makes his approaches to the port of xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj equality of two domestic powers 
▁ xxmaj breed scrupulous faction ; the hated , grown to strength , 
▁ xxmaj are newly grown to love . xxmaj the condemn'd xxmaj pompey , 
▁ xxmaj rich in his father 's honour , creeps apace 
▁ xxmaj into the hearts of such as have not thrived 
▁ xxmaj upon the present state , whose numbers threaten ; 
▁ xxmaj and quietness , grown sick of rest , would purge 
▁ xxmaj by any desperate change . xxmaj my more particular , 
▁ xxmaj and that which most with you should safe my going , 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj fulvia 's death . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj though age from folly could not give me freedom , 
▁ xxmaj it does from childishness . xxmaj can xxmaj fulvia die ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj she 's dead , my xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj look here , and at thy sovereign leisure read 
▁ xxmaj the garboils she awak'd . xxmaj at the last , best . 
▁ xxmaj see when and where she died . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . o most false love ! 
▁ xxmaj where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill 
▁ xxmaj with sorrowful water ? xxmaj now i see , i see , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj fulvia 's death how mine receiv'd shall be . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj quarrel no more , but be prepar'd to know 
▁ xxmaj the purposes i bear ; which are , or cease , 
▁ xxmaj as you shall give th ' advice . xxmaj by the fire 
▁ xxmaj that quickens xxmaj nilus ' slime , i go from hence 
▁ xxmaj thy soldier , servant , making peace or war 
▁ xxmaj as thou affects . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj cut my lace , xxmaj charmian , come ! 
▁ xxmaj but let it be ; i am quickly ill and well- 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj antony loves . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj my precious queen , forbear , 
▁ xxmaj and give true evidence to his love , which stands 
▁ xxmaj an honourable trial . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj so xxmaj fulvia told me . 
▁ i prithee turn aside and weep for her ; 
▁ xxmaj then bid adieu to me , and say the tears 
▁ xxmaj belong to xxmaj egypt . xxmaj good now , play one scene 
▁ xxmaj of excellent dissembling , and let it look 
▁ xxmaj like perfect honour . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you 'll heat my blood ; no more . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj you can do better yet ; but this is meetly . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj now , by my sword- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj and target . xxmaj still he mends ; 
▁ xxmaj but this is not the best . xxmaj look , prithee , xxmaj charmian , 
▁ xxmaj how this xxmaj herculean xxmaj roman does become 
▁ xxmaj the carriage of his chafe . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj i 'll leave you , lady . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj courteous lord , one word . 
▁ xxmaj sir , you and i must part- but that 's not it . 
▁ xxmaj sir , you and i have lov'd- but there 's not it . 
▁ xxmaj that you know well . xxmaj something it is i would- 
▁ xxup o , my oblivion is a very xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj and i am all forgotten ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj but that your royalty 
▁ xxmaj holds idleness your subject , i should take you 
▁ xxmaj for idleness itself . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . ' tis sweating labour 
▁ xxmaj to bear such idleness so near the heart 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj cleopatra this . xxmaj but , sir , forgive me ; 
▁ xxmaj since my becomings kill me when they do not 
▁ xxmaj eye well to you . xxmaj your honour calls you hence ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly , 
▁ xxmaj and all the gods go with you ! xxmaj upon your sword 
▁ xxmaj sit laurel victory , and smooth success 
▁ xxmaj be strew'd before your feet ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj let us go . xxmaj come . 
▁ xxmaj our separation so abides and flies 
▁ xxmaj that thou , residing here , goes yet with me , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , hence fleeting , here remain with thee . 
▁ xxmaj away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rome . xxup caesar 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup octavius xxup caesar , reading a letter ; xxup lepidus , and their train 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you may see , xxmaj lepidus , and henceforth know , 
▁ xxmaj it is not xxmaj caesar 's natural vice to hate 
▁ xxmaj our great competitor . xxmaj from xxmaj alexandria 
▁ xxmaj this is the news : he fishes , drinks , and wastes 
▁ xxmaj the lamps of night in revel ; is not more manlike 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj cleopatra , nor the queen of xxmaj ptolemy 
▁ xxmaj more womanly than he ; hardly gave audience , or 
▁ xxmaj vouchsaf'd to think he had partners . xxmaj you shall find there 
▁ a man who is the abstract of all faults 
▁ xxmaj that all men follow . 
▁ xxup lepidus . i must not think there are 
▁ xxmaj evils enow to darken all his goodness . 
▁ xxmaj his faults , in him , seem as the spots of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj more fiery by night 's blackness ; hereditary 
▁ xxmaj rather than purchas'd ; what he can not change 
▁ xxmaj than what he chooses . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you are too indulgent . xxmaj let 's grant it is not 
▁ xxmaj amiss to tumble on the bed of xxmaj ptolemy , 
▁ xxmaj to give a kingdom for a mirth , to sit 
▁ xxmaj and keep the turn of tippling with a slave , 
▁ xxmaj to reel the streets at noon , and stand the buffet 
▁ xxmaj with knaves that smell of sweat . xxmaj say this becomes him- 
▁ xxmaj as his composure must be rare indeed 
▁ xxmaj whom these things can not blemish- yet must xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj no way excuse his foils when we do bear 
▁ xxmaj so great weight in his lightness . xxmaj if he fill'd 
▁ xxmaj his vacancy with his voluptuousness , 
▁ xxmaj full surfeits and the dryness of his bones 
▁ xxmaj call on him for't ! xxmaj but to confound such time 
▁ xxmaj that drums him from his sport and speaks as loud 
▁ xxmaj as his own state and ours- ' tis to be chid 
▁ xxmaj as we rate boys who , being mature in knowledge , 
▁ xxmaj pawn their experience to their present pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj and so rebel to judgment . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj here 's more news . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj thy biddings have been done ; and every hour , 
▁ xxmaj most noble xxmaj caesar , shalt thou have report 
▁ xxmaj how ' tis abroad . xxmaj pompey is strong at sea , 
▁ xxmaj and it appears he is belov'd of those 
▁ xxmaj that only have fear'd xxmaj caesar . xxmaj to the ports 
▁ xxmaj the discontents repair , and men 's reports 
▁ xxmaj give him much wrong'd . 
▁ xxup caesar . i should have known no less . 
▁ xxmaj it hath been taught us from the primal state 
▁ xxmaj that he which is was wish'd until he were ; 
▁ xxmaj and the ebb'd man , ne'er lov'd till ne'er worth love , 
▁ xxmaj comes dear'd by being lack'd . xxmaj this common body , 
▁ xxmaj like to a vagabond flag upon the stream , 
▁ xxmaj goes to and back , lackeying the varying tide , 
▁ xxmaj to rot itself with motion . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj caesar , i bring thee word 
▁ xxmaj menecrates and xxmaj menas , famous pirates , 
▁ xxmaj make the sea serve them , which they ear and wound 
▁ xxmaj with keels of every kind . xxmaj many hot inroads 
▁ xxmaj they make in xxmaj italy ; the borders maritime 
▁ xxmaj lack blood to think on't , and flush youth revolt . 
▁ xxmaj no vessel can peep forth but ' tis as soon 
▁ xxmaj taken as seen ; for xxmaj pompey 's name strikes more 
▁ xxmaj than could his war resisted . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj leave thy lascivious wassails . xxmaj when thou once 
▁ xxmaj was beaten from xxmaj modena , where thou slew'st 
▁ xxmaj hirtius and xxmaj pansa , consuls , at thy heel 
▁ xxmaj did famine follow ; whom thou fought'st against , 
▁ xxmaj though daintily brought up , with patience more 
▁ xxmaj than savages could suffer . xxmaj thou didst drink 
▁ xxmaj the stale of horses and the gilded puddle 
▁ xxmaj which beasts would cough at . xxmaj thy palate then did deign 
▁ xxmaj the roughest berry on the rudest hedge ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , like the stag when snow the pasture sheets , 
▁ xxmaj the barks of trees thou brows'd . xxmaj on the xxmaj alps 
▁ xxmaj it is reported thou didst eat strange flesh , 
▁ xxmaj which some did die to look on . xxmaj and all this- 
▁ xxmaj it wounds thine honour that i speak it now- 
▁ xxmaj was borne so like a soldier that thy cheek 
▁ xxmaj so much as lank'd not . 
▁ xxup lepidus . ' tis pity of him . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj let his shames quickly 
▁ xxmaj drive him to xxmaj rome . ' tis time we twain 
▁ xxmaj did show ourselves i ' th ' field ; and to that end 
▁ xxmaj assemble we immediate council . xxmaj pompey 
▁ xxmaj thrives in our idleness . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj to - morrow , xxmaj caesar , 
▁ i shall be furnish'd to inform you rightly 
▁ xxmaj both what by sea and land i can be able 
▁ xxmaj to front this present time . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj till which encounter 
▁ xxmaj it is my business too . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj farewell , my lord . xxmaj what you shall know meantime 
▁ xxmaj of stirs abroad , i shall beseech you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj to let me be partaker . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj doubt not , sir ; 
▁ i knew it for my bond . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , and xxup mardian 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj charmian ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj madam ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj ha , ha ! 
▁ xxmaj give me to drink mandragora . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj why , madam ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj that i might sleep out this great gap of time 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj antony is away . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj you think of him too much . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o , ' tis treason ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj madam , i trust , not so . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj thou , eunuch xxmaj mardian ! 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj what 's your xxmaj highness ' pleasure ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj not now to hear thee sing ; i take no pleasure 
▁ xxmaj in aught an eunuch has . ' tis well for thee 
▁ xxmaj that , being unseminar'd , thy freer thoughts 
▁ xxmaj may not fly forth of xxmaj egypt . xxmaj hast thou affections ? 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj yes , gracious madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj indeed ? 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj not in deed , madam ; for i can do nothing 
▁ xxmaj but what indeed is honest to be done . 
▁ xxmaj yet have i fierce affections , and think 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj venus did with xxmaj mars . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . o xxmaj charmian , 
▁ xxmaj where think'st thou he is now ? xxmaj stands he or sits he ? 
▁ xxmaj or does he walk ? or is he on his horse ? 
▁ o happy horse , to bear the weight of xxmaj antony ! 
▁ xxmaj do bravely , horse ; for wot'st thou whom thou mov'st ? 
▁ xxmaj the demi - atlas of this earth , the arm 
▁ xxmaj and burgonet of men . xxmaj he 's speaking now , 
▁ xxmaj or murmuring ' where 's my serpent of old xxmaj nile ? ' 
▁ xxmaj for so he calls me . xxmaj now i feed myself 
▁ xxmaj with most delicious poison . xxmaj think on me , 
▁ xxmaj that am with xxmaj phoebus ' amorous pinches black , 
▁ xxmaj and wrinkled deep in time ? xxmaj broad - fronted xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj when thou wast here above the ground , i was 
▁ a morsel for a monarch ; and great xxmaj pompey 
▁ xxmaj would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow ; 
▁ xxmaj there would he anchor his aspect and die 
▁ xxmaj with looking on his life . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup alexas 

▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj sovereign of xxmaj egypt , hail ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj how much unlike art thou xxmaj mark xxmaj antony ! 
▁ xxmaj yet , coming from him , that great med'cine hath 
▁ xxmaj with his tinct gilded thee . 
▁ xxmaj how goes it with my brave xxmaj mark xxmaj antony ? 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj last thing he did , dear xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj he kiss'd- the last of many doubled kisses- 
▁ xxmaj this orient pearl . xxmaj his speech sticks in my heart . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj mine ear must pluck it thence . 
▁ xxup alexas . ' good friend , ' quoth he 
▁ ' say the firm xxmaj roman to great xxmaj egypt sends 
▁ xxmaj this treasure of an oyster ; at whose foot , 
▁ xxmaj to mend the petty present , i will piece 
▁ xxmaj her opulent throne with kingdoms . xxmaj all the xxmaj east , 
▁ xxmaj say thou , shall call her mistress . ' xxmaj so he nodded , 
▁ xxmaj and soberly did mount an arm - gaunt steed , 
▁ xxmaj who neigh'd so high that what i would have spoke 
▁ xxmaj was beastly dumb'd by him . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what , was he sad or merry ? 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj like to the time o ' th ' year between the extremes 
▁ xxmaj of hot and cold ; he was nor sad nor merry . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . o well - divided disposition ! xxmaj note him , 
▁ xxmaj note him , good xxmaj charmian ; ' tis the man ; but note him ! 
▁ xxmaj he was not sad , for he would shine on those 
▁ xxmaj that make their looks by his ; he was not merry , 
▁ xxmaj which seem'd to tell them his remembrance lay 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj egypt with his joy ; but between both . 
▁ o heavenly mingle ! xxmaj be'st thou sad or merry , 
▁ xxmaj the violence of either thee becomes , 
▁ xxmaj so does it no man else . xxmaj met'st thou my posts ? 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj ay , madam , twenty several messengers . 
▁ xxmaj why do you send so thick ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj who 's born that day 
▁ xxmaj when i forget to send to xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj shall die a beggar . xxmaj ink and paper , xxmaj charmian . 
▁ xxmaj welcome , my good xxmaj alexas . xxmaj did xxup i , xxmaj charmian , 
▁ xxmaj ever love xxmaj caesar so ? 
▁ xxup charmian . o that brave xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj be chok'd with such another emphasis ! 
▁ xxmaj say ' the brave xxmaj antony . ' 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj the valiant xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj by xxmaj isis , i will give thee bloody teeth 
▁ xxmaj if thou with xxmaj caesar paragon again 
▁ xxmaj my man of men . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj by your most gracious pardon , 
▁ i sing but after you . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj my salad days , 
▁ xxmaj when i was green in judgment , cold in blood , 
▁ xxmaj to say as i said then . xxmaj but come , away ! 
▁ xxmaj get me ink and paper . 
▁ xxmaj he shall have every day a several greeting , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj i 'll unpeople xxmaj egypt . xxmaj exeunt 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj messina . xxup pompey 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup pompey , xxup menecrates , and xxup menas , in warlike manner 

▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj if the great gods be just , they shall assist 
▁ xxmaj the deeds of justest men . 
▁ xxup menecrates . xxmaj know , worthy xxmaj pompey , 
▁ xxmaj that what they do delay they not deny . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj whiles we are suitors to their throne , decays 
▁ xxmaj the thing we sue for . 
▁ xxup menecrates . xxmaj we , ignorant of ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj beg often our own harms , which the wise pow'rs 
▁ xxmaj deny us for our good ; so find we profit 
▁ xxmaj by losing of our prayers . 
▁ xxup pompey . i shall do well . 
▁ xxmaj the people love me , and the sea is mine ; 
▁ xxmaj my powers are crescent , and my auguring hope 
▁ xxmaj says it will come to th ' full . xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj egypt sits at dinner , and will make 
▁ xxmaj no wars without doors . xxmaj caesar gets money where 
▁ xxmaj he loses hearts . xxmaj lepidus flatters both , 
▁ xxmaj of both is flatter'd ; but he neither loves , 
▁ xxmaj nor either cares for him . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj caesar and xxmaj lepidus 
▁ xxmaj are in the field . a mighty strength they carry . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj where have you this ? ' tis false . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj from xxmaj silvius , sir . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj he dreams . i know they are in xxmaj rome together , 
▁ xxmaj looking for xxmaj antony . xxmaj but all the charms of love , 
▁ xxmaj salt xxmaj cleopatra , soften thy wan'd lip ! 
▁ xxmaj let witchcraft join with beauty , lust with both ; 
▁ xxmaj tie up the libertine in a field of feasts , 
▁ xxmaj keep his brain fuming . xxmaj epicurean cooks 
▁ xxmaj sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite , 
▁ xxmaj that sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour 
▁ xxmaj even till a xxmaj lethe'd dullness- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup varrius 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj varrius ! 
▁ xxup varrius . xxmaj this is most certain that i shall deliver : 
▁ xxmaj mark xxmaj antony is every hour in xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj expected . xxmaj since he went from xxmaj egypt ' tis 
▁ a space for farther travel . 
▁ xxup pompey . i could have given less matter 
▁ a better ear . xxmaj menas , i did not think 
▁ xxmaj this amorous surfeiter would have donn'd his helm 
▁ xxmaj for such a petty war ; his soldiership 
▁ xxmaj is twice the other twain . xxmaj but let us rear 
▁ xxmaj the higher our opinion , that our stirring 
▁ xxmaj can from the lap of xxmaj egypt 's widow pluck 
▁ xxmaj the ne'er - lust - wearied xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup menas . i can not hope 
▁ xxmaj caesar and xxmaj antony shall well greet together . 
▁ xxmaj his wife that 's dead did trespasses to xxmaj caesar ; 
▁ xxmaj his brother warr'd upon him ; although , i think , 
▁ xxmaj not mov'd by xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup pompey . i know not , xxmaj menas , 
▁ xxmaj how lesser enmities may give way to greater . 
▁ xxmaj were't not that we stand up against them all , 
▁ ' twere pregnant they should square between themselves ; 
▁ xxmaj for they have entertained cause enough 
▁ xxmaj to draw their swords . xxmaj but how the fear of us 
▁ xxmaj may cement their divisions , and bind up 
▁ xxmaj the petty difference we yet not know . 
▁ xxmaj be't as our gods will have't ! xxmaj it only stands 
▁ xxmaj our lives upon to use our strongest hands . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj menas . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj the house of xxup lepidus 

 xxmaj enter xxup enobarbus and xxup lepidus 

▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj good xxmaj enobarbus , ' tis a worthy deed , 
▁ xxmaj and shall become you well , to entreat your captain 
▁ xxmaj to soft and gentle speech . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i shall entreat him 
▁ xxmaj to answer like himself . xxmaj if xxmaj caesar move him , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj antony look over xxmaj caesar 's head 
▁ xxmaj and speak as loud as xxmaj mars . xxmaj by xxmaj jupiter , 
▁ xxmaj were i the wearer of xxmaj antonius ' beard , 
▁ i would not shave't to - day . 
▁ xxup lepidus . ' tis not a time 
▁ xxmaj for private stomaching . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj every time 
▁ xxmaj serves for the matter that is then born in't . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj but small to greater matters must give way . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj not if the small come first . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj your speech is passion ; 
▁ xxmaj but pray you stir no embers up . xxmaj here comes 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj antony . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup ventidius 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj and yonder , xxmaj caesar . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup maecenas , and xxup agrippa 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj if we compose well here , to xxmaj parthia . 
▁ xxmaj hark , xxmaj ventidius . 
▁ xxup caesar . i do not know , xxmaj maecenas . xxmaj ask xxmaj agrippa . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj noble friends , 
▁ xxmaj that which combin'd us was most great , and let not 
▁ a leaner action rend us . xxmaj what 's amiss , 
▁ xxmaj may it be gently heard . xxmaj when we debate 
▁ xxmaj our trivial difference loud , we do commit 
▁ xxmaj murder in healing wounds . xxmaj then , noble partners , 
▁ xxmaj the rather for i earnestly beseech , 
▁ xxmaj touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms , 
▁ xxmaj nor curstness grow to th ' matter . 
▁ xxup antony . ' tis spoken well . 
▁ xxmaj were we before our arinies , and to fight , 
▁ i should do thus . [ flourish ] 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj welcome to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj thank you . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj sit . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj sit , sir . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj nay , then . [ they sit ] 
▁ xxup antony . i learn you take things ill which are not so , 
▁ xxmaj or being , concern you not . 
▁ xxup caesar . i must be laugh'd at 
▁ xxmaj if , or for nothing or a little , 
▁ xxmaj should say myself offended , and with you 
▁ xxmaj chiefly i ' the world ; more laugh'd at that i should 
▁ xxmaj once name you derogately when to sound your name 
▁ xxmaj it not concern'd me . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj my being in xxmaj egypt , xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj what was't to you ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj no more than my residing here at xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj might be to you in xxmaj egypt . xxmaj yet , if you there 
▁ xxmaj did practise on my state , your being in xxmaj egypt 
▁ xxmaj might be my question . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj how intend you- practis'd ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you may be pleas'd to catch at mine intent