xxbos xxmaj by what did here befall me . xxmaj your wife and brother 
▁ xxmaj made wars upon me , and their contestation 
▁ xxmaj was theme for you ; you were the word of war . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you do mistake your business ; my brother never 
▁ xxmaj did urge me in his act . i did inquire it , 
▁ xxmaj and have my learning from some true reports 
▁ xxmaj that drew their swords with you . xxmaj did he not rather 
▁ xxmaj discredit my authority with yours , 
▁ xxmaj and make the wars alike against my stomach , 
▁ xxmaj having alike your cause ? xxmaj of this my letters 
▁ xxmaj before did satisfy you . xxmaj if you 'll patch a quarrel , 
▁ xxmaj as matter whole you have not to make it with , 
▁ xxmaj it must not be with this . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you praise yourself 
▁ xxmaj by laying defects of judgment to me ; but 
▁ xxmaj you patch'd up your excuses . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj not so , not so ; 
▁ i know you could not lack , i am certain on't , 
▁ xxmaj very necessity of this thought , that xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj your partner in the cause ' gainst which he fought , 
▁ xxmaj could not with graceful eyes attend those wars 
▁ xxmaj which fronted mine own peace . xxmaj as for my wife , 
▁ i would you had her spirit in such another ! 
▁ xxmaj the third o ' th ' world is yours , which with a snaffle 
▁ xxmaj you may pace easy , but not such a wife . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj would we had all such wives , that the men might go to 
▁ wars with the women ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj so much uncurbable , her garboils , xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj made out of her impatience- which not wanted 
▁ xxmaj shrewdness of policy too- i grieving grant 
▁ xxmaj did you too much disquiet . xxmaj for that you must 
▁ xxmaj but say i could not help it . 
▁ xxup caesar . i wrote to you 
▁ xxmaj when rioting in xxmaj alexandria ; you 
▁ xxmaj did pocket up my letters , and with taunts 
▁ xxmaj did gibe my missive out of audience . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj he fell upon me ere admitted . xxmaj then 
▁ xxmaj three kings i had newly feasted , and did want 
▁ xxmaj of what i was i ' th ' morning ; but next day 
▁ i told him of myself , which was as much 
▁ xxmaj as to have ask'd him pardon . xxmaj let this fellow 
▁ xxmaj be nothing of our strife ; if we contend , 
▁ xxmaj out of our question wipe him . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you have broken 
▁ xxmaj the article of your oath , which you shall never 
▁ xxmaj have tongue to charge me with . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj soft , xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj no ; 
▁ xxmaj lepidus , let him speak . 
▁ xxmaj the honour is sacred which he talks on now , 
▁ xxmaj supposing that i lack'd it . xxmaj but on , xxmaj caesar : 
▁ xxmaj the article of my oath- 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj to lend me arms and aid when i requir'd them , 
▁ xxmaj the which you both denied . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj neglected , rather ; 
▁ xxmaj and then when poisoned hours had bound me up 
▁ xxmaj from mine own knowledge . xxmaj as nearly as i may , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll play the penitent to you ; but mine honesty 
▁ xxmaj shall not make poor my greatness , nor my power 
▁ xxmaj work without it . xxmaj truth is , that xxmaj fulvia , 
▁ xxmaj to have me out of xxmaj egypt , made wars here ; 
▁ xxmaj for which myself , the ignorant motive , do 
▁ xxmaj so far ask pardon as befits mine honour 
▁ xxmaj to stoop in such a case . 
▁ xxup lepidus . ' tis noble spoken . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj if it might please you to enforce no further 
▁ xxmaj the griefs between ye- to forget them quite 
▁ xxmaj were to remember that the present need 
▁ xxmaj speaks to atone you . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj worthily spoken , xxmaj maecenas . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj or , if you borrow one another 's love for the instant , 
▁ you may , when you hear no more words of xxmaj pompey , return it again . 
▁ xxmaj you shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to 
▁ do . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj thou art a soldier only . xxmaj speak no more . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj that truth should be silent i had almost forgot . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you wrong this presence ; therefore speak no more . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj go to , then- your considerate stone ! 
▁ xxup caesar . i do not much dislike the matter , but 
▁ xxmaj the manner of his speech ; for't can not be 
▁ xxmaj we shall remain in friendship , our conditions 
▁ xxmaj so diff'ring in their acts . xxmaj yet if i knew 
▁ xxmaj what hoop should hold us stanch , from edge to edge 
▁ xxup o ' th ' world , i would pursue it . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj give me leave , xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj speak , xxmaj agrippa . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj thou hast a sister by the mother 's side , 
▁ xxmaj admir'd xxmaj octavia . xxmaj great xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj is now a widower . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj say not so , xxmaj agrippa . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj cleopatra heard you , your reproof 
▁ xxmaj were well deserv'd of rashness . 
▁ xxup antony . i am not married , xxmaj caesar . xxmaj let me hear 
▁ xxmaj agrippa further speak . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj to hold you in perpetual amity , 
▁ xxmaj to make you brothers , and to knit your hearts 
▁ xxmaj with an unslipping knot , take xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj octavia to his wife ; whose beauty claims 
▁ xxmaj no worse a husband than the best of men ; 
▁ xxmaj whose virtue and whose general graces speak 
▁ xxmaj that which none else can utter . xxmaj by this marriage 
▁ xxmaj all little jealousies , which now seem great , 
▁ xxmaj and all great fears , which now import their dangers , 
▁ xxmaj would then be nothing . xxmaj truths would be tales , 
▁ xxmaj where now half tales be truths . xxmaj her love to both 
▁ xxmaj would each to other , and all loves to both , 
▁ xxmaj draw after her . xxmaj pardon what i have spoke ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a studied , not a present thought , 
▁ xxmaj by duty ruminated . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj will xxmaj caesar speak ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj not till he hears how xxmaj antony is touch'd 
▁ xxmaj with what is spoke already . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj what power is in xxmaj agrippa , 
▁ xxmaj if i would say ' agrippa , be it so , ' 
▁ xxmaj to make this good ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the power of xxmaj caesar , and 
▁ xxmaj his power unto xxmaj octavia . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj may i never 
▁ xxmaj to this good purpose , that so fairly shows , 
▁ xxmaj dream of impediment ! xxmaj let me have thy hand . 
▁ xxmaj further this act of grace ; and from this hour 
▁ xxmaj the heart of brothers govern in our loves 
▁ xxmaj and sway our great designs ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj there is my hand . 
▁ a sister i bequeath you , whom no brother 
▁ xxmaj did ever love so dearly . xxmaj let her live 
▁ xxmaj to join our kingdoms and our hearts ; and never 
▁ xxmaj fly off our loves again ! 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj happily , amen ! 
▁ xxup antony . i did not think to draw my sword ' gainst xxmaj pompey ; 
▁ xxmaj for he hath laid strange courtesies and great 
▁ xxmaj of late upon me . i must thank him only , 
▁ xxmaj lest my remembrance suffer ill report ; 
▁ xxmaj at heel of that , defy him . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj time calls upon 's . 
▁ xxmaj of us must xxmaj pompey presently be sought , 
▁ xxmaj or else he seeks out us . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj where lies he ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj about the xxmaj mount xxmaj misenum . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj what is his strength by land ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj great and increasing ; but by sea 
▁ xxmaj he is an absolute master . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj so is the fame . 
▁ xxmaj would we had spoke together ! xxmaj haste we for it . 
▁ xxmaj yet , ere we put ourselves in arms , dispatch we 
▁ xxmaj the business we have talk'd of . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj with most gladness ; 
▁ xxmaj and do invite you to my sister 's view , 
▁ xxmaj whither straight xxmaj i 'll lead you . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj let us , xxmaj lepidus , 
▁ xxmaj not lack your company . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj noble xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj not sickness should detain me . [ flourish ] 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup enobarbus , xxup agrippa , xxup maecenas 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj welcome from xxmaj egypt , sir . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj half the heart of xxmaj caesar , worthy xxmaj maecenas ! xxmaj my honourable 
▁ friend , xxmaj agrippa ! 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj good xxmaj enobarbus ! 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj we have cause to be glad that matters are so well 
▁ digested . xxmaj you stay'd well by't in xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj ay , sir ; we did sleep day out of countenance and made 
▁ the night light with drinking . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast , and but 
▁ twelve persons there . xxmaj is this true ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj this was but as a fly by an eagle . xxmaj we had much more 
▁ monstrous matter of feast , which worthily deserved noting . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj she 's a most triumphant lady , if report be square to her . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj when she first met xxmaj mark xxmaj antony she purs'd up his heart , 
▁ upon the river of xxmaj cydnus . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj there she appear'd indeed ! xxmaj or my reporter devis'd well for 
▁ her . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i will tell you . 
▁ xxmaj the barge she sat in , like a burnish'd throne , 
▁ xxmaj burn'd on the water . xxmaj the poop was beaten gold ; 
▁ xxmaj purple the sails , and so perfumed that 
▁ xxmaj the winds were love - sick with them ; the oars were silver , 
▁ xxmaj which to the tune of flutes kept stroke , and made 
▁ xxmaj the water which they beat to follow faster , 
▁ xxmaj as amorous of their strokes . xxmaj for her own person , 
▁ xxmaj it beggar'd all description . xxmaj she did lie 
▁ xxmaj in her pavilion , cloth - of - gold , of tissue , 
▁ xxmaj o'erpicturing that xxmaj venus where we see 
▁ xxmaj the fancy out - work nature . xxmaj on each side her 
▁ xxmaj stood pretty dimpled boys , like smiling xxmaj cupids , 
▁ xxmaj with divers - colour'd fans , whose wind did seem 
▁ xxmaj to glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool , 
▁ xxmaj and what they undid did . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxup o , rare for xxmaj antony ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj her gentlewomen , like the xxmaj nereides , 
▁ xxmaj so many mermaids , tended her i ' th ' eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and made their bends adornings . xxmaj at the helm 
▁ a seeming mermaid steers . xxmaj the silken tackle 
▁ xxmaj swell with the touches of those flower - soft hands 
▁ xxmaj that yarely frame the office . xxmaj from the barge 
▁ a strange invisible perfume hits the sense 
▁ xxmaj of the adjacent wharfs . xxmaj the city cast 
▁ xxmaj her people out upon her ; and xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj enthron'd i ' th ' market - place , did sit alone , 
▁ xxmaj whistling to th ' air ; which , but for vacancy , 
▁ xxmaj had gone to gaze on xxmaj cleopatra too , 
▁ xxmaj and made a gap in nature . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj rare xxmaj egyptian ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj upon her landing , xxmaj antony sent to her , 
▁ xxmaj invited her to supper . xxmaj she replied 
▁ xxmaj it should be better he became her guest ; 
▁ xxmaj which she entreated . xxmaj our courteous xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj whom ne'er the word of ' no ' woman heard speak , 
▁ xxmaj being barber'd ten times o'er , goes to the feast , 
▁ xxmaj and for his ordinary pays his heart 
▁ xxmaj for what his eyes eat only . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj royal wench ! 
▁ xxmaj she made great xxmaj caesar lay his sword to bed . 
▁ xxmaj he ploughed her , and she cropp'd . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i saw her once 
▁ xxmaj hop forty paces through the public street ; 
▁ xxmaj and , having lost her breath , she spoke , and panted , 
▁ xxmaj that she did make defect perfection , 
▁ xxmaj and , breathless , pow'r breathe forth . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj now xxmaj antony must leave her utterly . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj never ! xxmaj he will not . 
▁ xxmaj age can not wither her , nor custom stale 
▁ xxmaj her infinite variety . xxmaj other women cloy 
▁ xxmaj the appetites they feed , but she makes hungry 
▁ xxmaj where most she satisfies ; for vilest things 
▁ xxmaj become themselves in her , that the holy priests 
▁ xxmaj bless her when she is riggish . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj if beauty , wisdom , modesty , can settle 
▁ xxmaj the heart of xxmaj antony , xxmaj octavia is 
▁ a blessed lottery to him . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj let us go . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj enobarbus , make yourself my guest 
▁ xxmaj whilst you abide here . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj humbly , sir , i thank you . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj rome . xxup caesar 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup antony , xxup caesar , xxup octavia between them 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the world and my great office will sometimes 
▁ xxmaj divide me from your bosom . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj all which time 
▁ xxmaj before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers 
▁ xxmaj to them for you . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj good night , sir . xxmaj my xxmaj octavia , 
▁ xxmaj read not my blemishes in the world 's report . 
▁ i have not kept my square ; but that to come 
▁ xxmaj shall all be done by th ' rule . xxmaj good night , dear lady . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj good night , sir . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj good night . xxmaj exeunt xxup caesar and xxup octavia 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup soothsayer 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj now , sirrah , you do wish yourself in xxmaj egypt ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj would i had never come from thence , nor you thither ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj if you can- your reason . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . i see it in my motion , have it not in my tongue ; but 
▁ yet hie you to xxmaj egypt again . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj say to me , 
▁ xxmaj whose fortunes shall rise higher , xxmaj caesar 's or mine ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj caesar 's . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , o xxmaj antony , stay not by his side . 
▁ xxmaj thy daemon , that thy spirit which keeps thee , is 
▁ xxmaj noble , courageous , high , unmatchable , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj caesar 's is not ; but near him thy angel 
▁ xxmaj becomes a fear , as being o'erpow'r'd . xxmaj therefore 
▁ xxmaj make space enough between you . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj speak this no more . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj to none but thee ; no more but when to thee . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost play with him at any game , 
▁ xxmaj thou art sure to lose ; and of that natural luck 
▁ xxmaj he beats thee ' gainst the odds . xxmaj thy lustre thickens 
▁ xxmaj when he shines by . i say again , thy spirit 
▁ xxmaj is all afraid to govern thee near him ; 
▁ xxmaj but , he away , ' tis noble . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj get thee gone . 
▁ xxmaj say to xxmaj ventidius i would speak with him . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup soothsayer 
▁ xxmaj he shall to xxmaj parthia.- xxmaj be it art or hap , 
▁ xxmaj he hath spoken true . xxmaj the very dice obey him ; 
▁ xxmaj and in our sports my better cunning faints 
▁ xxmaj under his chance . xxmaj if we draw lots , he speeds ; 
▁ xxmaj his cocks do win the battle still of mine , 
▁ xxmaj when it is all to nought , and his quails ever 
▁ xxmaj beat mine , inhoop'd , at odds . i will to xxmaj egypt ; 
▁ xxmaj and though i make this marriage for my peace , 
▁ xxup i ' th ' xxmaj east my pleasure lies . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ventidius 

▁ xxup o , come , xxmaj ventidius , 
▁ xxmaj you must to xxmaj parthia . xxmaj your commission 's ready ; 
▁ xxmaj follow me and receive't . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rome . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup lepidus , xxup maecenas , and xxup agrippa 

▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj trouble yourselves no further . xxmaj pray you hasten 
▁ xxmaj your generals after . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj sir , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj will e'en but kiss xxmaj octavia , and we 'll follow . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj till i shall see you in your soldier 's dress , 
▁ xxmaj which will become you both , farewell . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj we shall , 
▁ xxmaj as i conceive the journey , be at th ' xxmaj mount 
▁ xxmaj before you , xxmaj lepidus . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj your way is shorter ; 
▁ xxmaj my purposes do draw me much about . 
▁ xxmaj you 'll win two days upon me . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj sir , good success ! 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , and xxup alexas 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj give me some music- music , moody food 
▁ xxmaj of us that trade in love . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj the music , ho ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mardian the eunuch 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj let it alone ! xxmaj let 's to billiards . xxmaj come , xxmaj charmian . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj my arm is sore ; best play with xxmaj mardian . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj as well a woman with an eunuch play'd 
▁ xxmaj as with a woman . xxmaj come , you 'll play with me , sir ? 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj as well as i can , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj and when good will is show'd , though't come too short , 
▁ xxmaj the actor may plead pardon . xxmaj i 'll none now . 
▁ xxmaj give me mine angle- we 'll to th ' river . xxmaj there , 
▁ xxmaj my music playing far off , i will betray 
▁ xxmaj tawny - finn'd fishes ; my bended hook shall pierce 
▁ xxmaj their slimy jaws ; and as i draw them up 
▁ xxmaj i 'll think them every one an xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' ah ha ! xxmaj y'are caught . ' 
▁ xxup charmian . ' twas merry when 
▁ xxmaj you wager'd on your angling ; when your diver 
▁ xxmaj did hang a salt fish on his hook , which he 
▁ xxmaj with fervency drew up . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj that time ? o times 
▁ i laughed him out of patience ; and that night 
▁ i laugh'd him into patience ; and next morn , 
▁ xxmaj ere the ninth hour , i drunk him to his bed , 
▁ xxmaj then put my tires and mantles on him , whilst 
▁ i wore his sword xxmaj philippan . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup o ! from xxmaj italy ? 
▁ xxmaj ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears , 
▁ xxmaj that long time have been barren . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , madam- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj antony 's dead ! xxmaj if thou say so , villain , 
▁ xxmaj thou kill'st thy mistress ; but well and free , 
▁ xxmaj if thou so yield him , there is gold , and here 
▁ xxmaj my bluest veins to kiss- a hand that kings 
▁ xxmaj have lipp'd , and trembled kissing . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj first , madam , he is well . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj why , there 's more gold . 
▁ xxmaj but , sirrah , mark , we use 
▁ xxmaj to say the dead are well . xxmaj bring it to that , 
▁ xxmaj the gold i give thee will i melt and pour 
▁ xxmaj down thy ill - uttering throat . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj good madam , hear me . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj well , go to , i will . 
▁ xxmaj but there 's no goodness in thy face . xxmaj if xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj be free and healthful- why so tart a favour 
▁ xxmaj to trumpet such good tidings ? xxmaj if not well , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst come like a xxmaj fury crown'd with snakes , 
▁ xxmaj not like a formal man . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj will't please you hear me ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st . 
▁ xxmaj yet , if thou say xxmaj antony lives , is well , 
▁ xxmaj or friends with xxmaj caesar , or not captive to him , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll set thee in a shower of gold , and hail 
▁ xxmaj rich pearls upon thee . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , he 's well . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj well said . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj and friends with xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj th'art an honest man . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj caesar and he are greater friends than ever . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj make thee a fortune from me . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj but yet , madam- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i do not like ' but yet . ' xxmaj it does allay 
▁ xxmaj the good precedence ; fie upon ' but yet ' ! 
▁ ' but yet ' is as a gaoler to bring forth 
▁ xxmaj some monstrous malefactor . xxmaj prithee , friend , 
▁ xxmaj pour out the pack of matter to mine ear , 
▁ xxmaj the good and bad together . xxmaj he 's friends with xxmaj caesar ; 
▁ xxmaj in state of health , thou say'st ; and , thou say'st , free . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj free , madam ! xxmaj no ; i made no such report . 
▁ xxmaj he 's bound unto xxmaj octavia . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj for what good turn ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj for the best turn i ' th ' bed . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i am pale , xxmaj charmian . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , he 's married to xxmaj octavia . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj the most infectious pestilence upon thee ! 
▁ [ strikes him down ] 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj good madam , patience . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what say you ? xxmaj hence , [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxmaj horrible villain ! or xxmaj i 'll spurn thine eyes 
▁ xxmaj like balls before me ; xxmaj i 'll unhair thy head ; 
▁ [ she hales him up and down ] 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be whipp'd with wire and stew'd in brine , 
▁ xxmaj smarting in ling'ring pickle . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj gracious madam , 
▁ i that do bring the news made not the match . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj say ' tis not so , a province i will give thee , 
▁ xxmaj and make thy fortunes proud . xxmaj the blow thou hadst 
▁ xxmaj shall make thy peace for moving me to rage ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will boot thee with what gift beside 
▁ xxmaj thy modesty can beg . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj he 's married , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj rogue , thou hast liv'd too long . [ draws a knife ] 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj nay , then xxmaj i 'll run . 
▁ xxmaj what mean you , madam ? i have made no fault . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj good madam , keep yourself within yourself : 
▁ xxmaj the man is innocent . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj some innocents scape not the thunderbolt . 
▁ xxmaj melt xxmaj egypt into xxmaj nile ! and kindly creatures 
▁ xxmaj turn all to serpents ! xxmaj call the slave again . 
▁ xxmaj though i am mad , i will not bite him . xxmaj call ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj he is afear'd to come . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i will not hurt him . 
▁ xxmaj these hands do lack nobility , that they strike 
▁ a meaner than myself ; since i myself 
▁ xxmaj have given myself the cause . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup messenger again 

▁ xxmaj come hither , sir . 
▁ xxmaj though it be honest , it is never good 
▁ xxmaj to bring bad news . xxmaj give to a gracious message 
▁ xxmaj an host of tongues ; but let ill tidings tell 
▁ xxmaj themselves when they be felt . 
▁ xxup messenger . i have done my duty . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj is he married ? 
▁ i can not hate thee worser than i do 
▁ xxmaj if thou again say ' yes . ' 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj he 's married , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj the gods confound thee ! xxmaj dost thou hold there still ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj should i lie , madam ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o , i would thou didst , 
▁ xxmaj so half my xxmaj egypt were submerg'd and made 
▁ a cistern for scal'd snakes ! xxmaj go , get thee hence . 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou xxmaj narcissus in thy face , to me 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst appear most ugly . xxmaj he is married ? 
▁ xxup messenger . i crave your xxmaj highness ' pardon . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj he is married ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj take no offence that i would not offend you ; 
▁ xxmaj to punish me for what you make me do 
▁ xxmaj seems much unequal . xxmaj he 's married to xxmaj octavia . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o , that his fault should make a knave of thee 
▁ xxmaj that art not what th'art sure of ! xxmaj get thee hence . 
▁ xxmaj the merchandise which thou hast brought from xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj are all too dear for me . xxmaj lie they upon thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj and be undone by 'em ! xxmaj exit xxup messenger 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj good your xxmaj highness , patience . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj in praising xxmaj antony i have disprais'd xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj many times , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i am paid for't now . xxmaj lead me from hence , 
▁ i faint . o xxmaj iras , xxmaj charmian ! ' tis no matter . 
▁ xxmaj go to the fellow , good xxmaj alexas ; bid him 
▁ xxmaj report the feature of xxmaj octavia , her years , 
▁ xxmaj her inclination ; let him not leave out 
▁ xxmaj the colour of her hair . xxmaj bring me word quickly . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup alexas 
▁ xxmaj let him for ever go- let him not , xxmaj charmian- 
▁ xxmaj though he be painted one way like a xxmaj gorgon , 
▁ xxmaj the other way 's a xxmaj mars . [ to xxup mardian ] 
▁ xxmaj bid you xxmaj alexas 
▁ xxmaj bring me word how tall she is.- xxmaj pity me , xxmaj charmian , 
▁ xxmaj but do not speak to me . xxmaj lead me to my chamber . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj near xxmaj misenum 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup pompey and xxup menas at one door , with drum and trumpet ; 
 at another , xxup caesar , xxup antony , xxup lepidus , xxup enobarbus , xxup maecenas , xxup agrippa , 
 with soldiers marching 

▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj your hostages i have , so have you mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and we shall talk before we fight . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj most meet 
▁ xxmaj that first we come to words ; and therefore have we 
▁ xxmaj our written purposes before us sent ; 
▁ xxmaj which if thou hast considered , let us know 
▁ xxmaj if ' twill tie up thy discontented sword 
▁ xxmaj and carry back to xxmaj sicily much tall youth 
▁ xxmaj that else must perish here . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj to you all three , 
▁ xxmaj the senators alone of this great world , 
▁ xxmaj chief factors for the gods : i do not know 
▁ xxmaj wherefore my father should revengers want , 
▁ xxmaj having a son and friends , since xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj who at xxmaj philippi the good xxmaj brutus ghosted , 
▁ xxmaj there saw you labouring for him . xxmaj what was't 
▁ xxmaj that mov'd pale xxmaj cassius to conspire ? and what 
▁ xxmaj made the all - honour'd honest xxmaj roman , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj with the arm'd rest , courtiers of beauteous freedom , 
▁ xxmaj to drench the xxmaj capitol , but that they would 
▁ xxmaj have one man but a man ? xxmaj and that is it 
▁ xxmaj hath made me rig my navy , at whose burden 
▁ xxmaj the anger'd ocean foams ; with which i meant 
▁ xxmaj to scourge th ' ingratitude that despiteful xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj cast on my noble father . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj take your time . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj thou canst not fear us , xxmaj pompey , with thy sails ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll speak with thee at sea ; at land thou know'st 
▁ xxmaj how much we do o'er - count thee . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj at land , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost o'er - count me of my father 's house . 
▁ xxmaj but since the cuckoo builds not for himself , 
▁ xxmaj remain in't as thou mayst . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj be pleas'd to tell us- 
▁ xxmaj for this is from the present- how you take 
▁ xxmaj the offers we have sent you . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj there 's the point . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj which do not be entreated to , but weigh 
▁ xxmaj what it is worth embrac'd . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj and what may follow , 
▁ xxmaj to try a larger fortune . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj you have made me offer 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj sicily , xxmaj sardinia ; and i must 
▁ xxmaj rid all the sea of pirates ; then to send 
▁ xxmaj measures of wheat to xxmaj rome ; this ' greed upon , 
▁ xxmaj to part with unhack'd edges and bear back 
▁ xxmaj our targes undinted . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj that 's our offer . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj know , then , 
▁ i came before you here a man prepar'd 
▁ xxmaj to take this offer ; but xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj put me to some impatience . xxmaj though i lose 
▁ xxmaj the praise of it by telling , you must know , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj caesar and your brother were at blows , 
▁ xxmaj your mother came to xxmaj sicily and did find 
▁ xxmaj her welcome friendly . 
▁ xxup antony . i have heard it , xxmaj pompey , 
▁ xxmaj and am well studied for a liberal thanks 
▁ xxmaj which i do owe you . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj let me have your hand . 
▁ i did not think , sir , to have met you here . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the beds i ' th ' xxmaj east are soft ; and thanks to you , 
▁ xxmaj that call'd me timelier than my purpose hither ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have gained by't . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj since i saw you last 
▁ xxmaj there is a change upon you . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj well , i know not 
▁ xxmaj what counts harsh fortune casts upon my face ; 
▁ xxmaj but in my bosom shall she never come 
▁ xxmaj to make my heart her vassal . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj well met here . 
▁ xxup pompey . i hope so , xxmaj lepidus . xxmaj thus we are agreed . 
▁ i crave our composition may be written , 
▁ xxmaj and seal'd between us . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj that 's the next to do . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj we 'll feast each other ere we part , and let 's 
▁ xxmaj draw lots who shall begin . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj that will xxup i , xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj no , xxmaj antony , take the lot ; 
▁ xxmaj but , first or last , your fine xxmaj egyptian cookery 
▁ xxmaj shall have the fame . i have heard that xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj grew fat with feasting there . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you have heard much . 
▁ xxup pompey . i have fair meanings , sir . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj and fair words to them . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj then so much have i heard ; 
▁ xxmaj and i have heard xxmaj apollodorus carried- 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj no more of that ! xxmaj he did so . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj what , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . a certain queen to xxmaj caesar in a mattress . 
▁ xxup pompey . i know thee now . xxmaj how far'st thou , soldier ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj well ; 
▁ xxmaj and well am like to do , for i perceive 
▁ xxmaj four feasts are toward . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj let me shake thy hand . 
▁ i never hated thee ; i have seen thee fight , 
▁ xxmaj when i have envied thy behaviour . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj sir , 
▁ i never lov'd you much ; but i ha ' prais'd ye 
▁ xxmaj when you have well deserv'd ten times as much 
▁ xxmaj as i have said you did . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj enjoy thy plainness ; 
▁ xxmaj it nothing ill becomes thee . 
▁ xxmaj aboard my galley i invite you all . 
▁ xxmaj will you lead , lords ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj show 's the way , sir . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj come . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup enobarbus and xxup menas 
▁ xxup menas . [ aside ] xxmaj thy father , xxmaj pompey , would ne'er have made this 
▁ treaty.- xxmaj you and i have known , sir . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj at sea , i think . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj we have , sir . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj you have done well by water . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj and you by land . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i xxmaj will praise any man that will praise me ; though it 
▁ can not be denied what i have done by land . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj nor what i have done by water . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj yes , something you can deny for your own safety : you 
▁ have been a great thief by sea . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj and you by land . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj there i deny my land service . xxmaj but give me your hand , 
▁ xxmaj menas ; if our eyes had authority , here they might take two 
▁ thieves kissing . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj all men 's faces are true , whatsome'er their hands are . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj but there is never a fair woman has a true face . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj no slander : they steal hearts . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj we came hither to fight with you . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj for my part , i am sorry it is turn'd to a drinking . 
▁ xxmaj pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj if he do , sure he can not weep't back again . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj y'have said , sir . xxmaj we look'd not for xxmaj mark xxmaj antony here . xxmaj pray 
▁ you , is he married to xxmaj cleopatra ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj caesar ' sister is call'd xxmaj octavia . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj true , sir ; she was the wife of xxmaj caius xxmaj marcellus . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj but she is now the wife of xxmaj marcus xxmaj antonius . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj pray ye , sir ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . ' tis true . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj then is xxmaj caesar and he for ever knit together . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj if i were bound to divine of this unity , i would not 
▁ prophesy so . 
▁ xxup menas . i think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage 
▁ than the love of the parties . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i think so too . xxmaj but you shall find the band that seems 
▁ to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of 
▁ their amity : xxmaj octavia is of a holy , cold , and still conversation . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj who would not have his wife so ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj not he that himself is not so ; which is xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . xxmaj he 
▁ will to his xxmaj egyptian dish again ; then shall the sighs of xxmaj octavia 
▁ blow the fire up in xxmaj caesar , and , as i said before , that which is 
▁ the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of 
▁ their variance . xxmaj antony will use his affection where it is ; he 
▁ married but his occasion here . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj and thus it may be . xxmaj come , sir , will you aboard ? i have a 
▁ health for you . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i shall take it , sir . xxmaj we have us'd our throats in xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj come , let 's away . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_2|sc_7 
▁ xxup scene xxup vii . 
▁ xxmaj on board xxup pompey 's galley , off xxmaj misenum 

▁ xxmaj music plays . xxmaj enter two or three xxup servants with a banquet 

▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj here they 'll be , man . xxmaj some o ' their plants are 
▁ ill - rooted already ; the least wind i ' th ' world will blow them 
▁ down . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj lepidus is high - colour'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj they have made him drink alms - drink . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj as they pinch one another by the disposition , he 
▁ cries out ' no more ! ' ; reconciles them to his entreaty and himself 
▁ to th ' drink . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj but it raises the greater war between him and his 
▁ discretion . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj why , this it is to have a name in great men 's 
▁ fellowship . i had as lief have a reed that will do me no service 
▁ as a partizan i could not heave . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj to be call'd into a huge sphere , and not to be seen 
▁ to move in't , are the holes where eyes should be , which pitifully 
▁ disaster the cheeks . 
▁
▁ a sennet sounded . xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup antony , xxup lepidus , 
▁ xxup pompey , xxup agrippa , xxup maecenas , xxup enobarbus , xxup menas , 
▁ with other xxup captains 

▁ xxup antony . [ to xxup caesar ] xxmaj thus do they , sir : they take the flow o ' th ' 
▁ xxmaj nile 
▁ xxmaj by certain scales i ' th ' pyramid ; they know 
▁ xxmaj by th ' height , the lowness , or the mean , if dearth 
▁ xxmaj or foison follow . xxmaj the higher xxmaj nilus swells 
▁ xxmaj the more it promises ; as it ebbs , the seedsman 
▁ xxmaj upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain , 
▁ xxmaj and shortly comes to harvest . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj y'have strange serpents there . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj ay , xxmaj lepidus . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj your serpent of xxmaj egypt is bred now of your mud by the 
▁ operation of your sun ; so is your crocodile . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj they are so . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sit- and some wine ! a health to xxmaj lepidus ! 
▁ xxup lepidus . i am not so well as i should be , but xxmaj i 'll ne'er out . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj not till you have slept . i fear me you 'll be in till 
▁ then . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj nay , certainly , i have heard the xxmaj ptolemies ' pyramises are 
▁ very goodly things . xxmaj without contradiction i have heard that . 
▁ xxup menas . [ aside to xxup pompey ] xxmaj pompey , a word . 
▁ xxup pompey . [ aside to xxup menas ] xxmaj say in mine ear ; what is't ? 
▁ xxup menas . [ aside to xxup pompey ] xxmaj forsake thy seat , i do beseech thee , 
▁ xxmaj captain , 
▁ xxmaj and hear me speak a word . 
▁ xxup pompey . [ xxmaj whispers in 's ear ] xxmaj forbear me till anon- 
▁ xxmaj this wine for xxmaj lepidus ! 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj what manner o ' thing is your crocodile ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj it is shap'd , sir , like itself , and it is as broad as it 
▁ hath breadth ; it is just so high as it is , and moves with it own 
▁ organs . xxmaj it lives by that which nourisheth it , and the elements 
▁ once out of it , it transmigrates . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj what colour is it of ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj of it own colour too . 
▁ xxup lepidus . ' tis a strange serpent . 
▁ xxup antony . ' tis so . xxmaj and the tears of it are wet . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj will this description satisfy him ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj with the health that xxmaj pompey gives him , else he is a very 
▁ epicure . 
▁ xxup pompey . [ aside to xxup menas ] xxmaj go , hang , sir , hang ! xxmaj tell me of that ! 
▁ xxmaj away ! 
▁ xxmaj do as i bid you.- xxmaj where 's this cup i call'd for ? 
▁ xxup menas . [ aside to xxup pompey ] xxmaj if for the sake of merit thou wilt hear 
▁ me , 
▁ xxmaj rise from thy stool . 
▁ xxup pompey . [ aside to xxup menas ] i think th'art mad . [ rises and walks 
▁ aside ] xxmaj the matter ? 
▁ xxup menas . i have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj thou hast serv'd me with much faith . xxmaj what 's else to say?- 
▁ xxmaj be jolly , lords . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj these quicksands , xxmaj lepidus , 
▁ xxmaj keep off them , for you sink . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj wilt thou be lord of all the world ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj what say'st thou ? 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj wilt thou be lord of the whole world ? xxmaj that 's twice . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj how should that be ? 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj but entertain it , 
▁ xxmaj and though you think me poor , i am the man 
▁ xxmaj will give thee all the world . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj hast thou drunk well ? 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj no , xxmaj pompey , i have kept me from the cup . 
▁ xxmaj thou art , if thou dar'st be , the earthly xxmaj jove ; 
▁ xxmaj whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips 
▁ xxmaj is thine , if thou wilt ha't . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj show me which way . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj these three world - sharers , these competitors , 
▁ xxmaj are in thy vessel . xxmaj let me cut the cable ; 
▁ xxmaj and when we are put off , fall to their throats . 
▁ xxmaj all there is thine . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj ah , this thou shouldst have done , 
▁ xxmaj and not have spoke on't . xxmaj in me ' tis villainy : 
▁ xxmaj in thee't had been good service . xxmaj thou must know 
▁ ' tis not my profit that does lead mine honour : 
▁ xxmaj mine honour , it . xxmaj repent that e'er thy tongue 
▁ xxmaj hath so betray'd thine act . xxmaj being done unknown , 
▁ i should have found it afterwards well done , 
▁ xxmaj but must condemn it now . xxmaj desist , and drink . 
▁ xxup menas . [ aside ] xxmaj for this , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll never follow thy pall'd fortunes more . 
▁ xxmaj who seeks , and will not take when once ' tis offer'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall never find it more . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj this health to xxmaj lepidus ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj bear him ashore . xxmaj i 'll pledge it for him , xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj here 's to thee , xxmaj menas ! 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj enobarbus , welcome ! 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj fill till the cup be hid . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj there 's a strong fellow , xxmaj menas . 
▁ [ pointing to the servant who carries off xxup lepidus ] 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . ' a bears the third part of the world , man ; see'st not ? 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj the third part , then , is drunk . xxmaj would it were all , 
▁ xxmaj that it might go on wheels ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj drink thou ; increase the reels . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj come . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj this is not yet an xxmaj alexandrian feast . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj it ripens towards it . xxmaj strike the vessels , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj here 's to xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup caesar . i could well forbear't . 
▁ xxmaj it 's monstrous labour when i wash my brain 
▁ xxmaj and it grows fouler . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj be a child o ' th ' time . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj possess it , xxmaj i 'll make answer . 
▁ xxmaj but i had rather fast from all four days 
▁ xxmaj than drink so much in one . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ to xxup antony ] xxmaj ha , my brave emperor ! 
▁ xxmaj shall we dance now the xxmaj egyptian xxmaj bacchanals 
▁ xxmaj and celebrate our drink ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj let 's ha't , good soldier . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj come , let 's all take hands , 
▁ xxmaj till that the conquering wine hath steep'd our sense 
▁ xxmaj in soft and delicate xxmaj lethe . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj all take hands . 
▁ xxmaj make battery to our ears with the loud music , 
▁ xxmaj the while xxmaj i 'll place you ; then the boy shall sing ; 
▁ xxmaj the holding every man shall bear as loud 
▁ xxmaj as his strong sides can volley . 
▁ [ music plays . xxup enobarbus places them hand in hand ] 

▁ xxup the xxup song 
▁ xxmaj come , thou monarch of the vine , 
▁ xxmaj plumpy xxmaj bacchus with pink eyne ! 
▁ xxmaj in thy fats our cares be drown'd , 
▁ xxmaj with thy grapes our hairs be crown'd . 
▁ xxmaj cup us till the world go round , 
▁ xxmaj cup us till the world go round ! 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what would you more ? xxmaj pompey , good night . xxmaj good brother , 
▁ xxmaj let me request you off ; our graver business 
▁ xxmaj frowns at this levity . xxmaj gentle lords , let 's part ; 
▁ xxmaj you see we have burnt our cheeks . xxmaj strong xxmaj enobarb 
▁ xxmaj is weaker than the wine , and mine own tongue 
▁ xxmaj splits what it speaks . xxmaj the wild disguise hath almost 
▁ xxmaj antick'd us all . xxmaj what needs more words ? xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj antony , your hand . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj i 'll try you on the shore . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj and shall , sir . xxmaj give 's your hand . 
▁ xxup pompey . o xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj you have my father 's house- but what ? xxmaj we are friends . 
▁ xxmaj come , down into the boat . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj take heed you fall not . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup enobarbus and xxup menas 
▁ xxmaj menas , xxmaj i 'll not on shore . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj no , to my cabin . 
▁ xxmaj these drums ! these trumpets , flutes ! what ! 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj neptune hear we bid a loud farewell 
▁ xxmaj to these great fellows . xxmaj sound and be hang'd , sound out ! 
▁ [ sound a flourish , with drums ] 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj hoo ! says ' a. xxmaj there 's my cap . 
▁ xxup menas . xxmaj hoo ! xxmaj noble xxmaj captain , come . xxmaj exeunt 
 xxup act_3|sc_1 
▁ xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
▁ a plain in xxmaj syria 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ventidius , as it were in triumph , with xxup silius 
▁ and other xxmaj romans , xxup officers and soldiers ; the dead body 
▁ of xxup pacorus borne before him 

▁ xxup ventidius . xxmaj now , darting xxmaj parthia , art thou struck , and now 
▁ xxmaj pleas'd fortune does of xxmaj marcus xxmaj crassus ' death 
▁ xxmaj make me revenger . xxmaj bear the xxmaj king 's son 's body 
▁ xxmaj before our army . xxmaj thy xxmaj pacorus , xxmaj orodes , 
▁ xxmaj pays this for xxmaj marcus xxmaj crassus . 
▁ xxup silius . xxmaj noble xxmaj ventidius , 
▁ xxmaj whilst yet with xxmaj parthian blood thy sword is warm 
▁ xxmaj the fugitive xxmaj parthians follow ; spur through xxmaj media , 
▁ xxmaj mesopotamia , and the shelters whither 
▁ xxmaj the routed fly . xxmaj so thy grand captain , xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj shall set thee on triumphant chariots and 
▁ xxmaj put garlands on thy head . 
▁ xxup ventidius . o xxmaj silius , xxmaj silius , 
▁ i have done enough . a lower place , note well , 
▁ xxmaj may make too great an act ; for learn this , xxmaj silius : 
▁ xxmaj better to leave undone than by our deed 
▁ xxmaj acquire too high a fame when him we serve 's away . 
▁ xxmaj caesar and xxmaj antony have ever won 
▁ xxmaj more in their officer , than person . xxmaj sossius , 
▁ xxmaj one of my place in xxmaj syria , his lieutenant , 
▁ xxmaj for quick accumulation of renown , 
▁ xxmaj which he achiev'd by th ' minute , lost his favour . 
▁ xxmaj who does i ' th ' wars more than his captain can 
▁ xxmaj becomes his captain 's captain ; and ambition , 
▁ xxmaj the soldier 's virtue , rather makes choice of loss 
▁ xxmaj than gain which darkens him . 
▁ i could do more to do xxmaj antonius good , 
▁ xxmaj but ' twould offend him ; and in his offence 
▁ xxmaj should my performance perish . 
▁ xxup silius . xxmaj thou hast , xxmaj ventidius , that 
▁ xxmaj without the which a soldier and his sword 
▁ xxmaj grants scarce distinction . xxmaj thou wilt write to xxmaj antony ? 
▁ xxup ventidius . xxmaj i 'll humbly signify what in his name , 
▁ xxmaj that magical word of war , we have effected ; 
▁ xxmaj how , with his banners , and his well - paid ranks , 
▁ xxmaj the ne'er - yet - beaten horse of xxmaj parthia 
▁ xxmaj we have jaded out o ' th ' field . 
▁ xxup silius . xxmaj where is he now ? 
▁ xxup ventidius . xxmaj he purposeth to xxmaj athens ; whither , with what haste 
▁ xxmaj the weight we must convey with 's will permit , 
▁ xxmaj we shall appear before him.- xxmaj on , there ; pass along . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_2 
▁ xxup scene xxup ii . xxmaj rome . xxup caesar 's house 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup agrippa at one door , xxup enobarbus at another 

▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj what , are the brothers parted ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj they have dispatch'd with xxmaj pompey ; he is gone ; 
▁ xxmaj the other three are sealing . xxmaj octavia weeps 
▁ xxmaj to part from xxmaj rome ; xxmaj caesar is sad ; and xxmaj lepidus , 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj pompey 's feast , as xxmaj menas says , is troubled 
▁ xxmaj with the green sickness . 
▁ xxup agrippa . ' tis a noble xxmaj lepidus . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . a very fine one . xxup o , how he loves xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj nay , but how dearly he adores xxmaj mark xxmaj antony ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj caesar ? xxmaj why he 's the xxmaj jupiter of men . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj what 's xxmaj antony ? xxmaj the god of xxmaj jupiter . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj spake you of xxmaj caesar ? xxmaj how ! the nonpareil ! 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxup o , xxmaj antony ! o thou xxmaj arabian bird ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj would you praise xxmaj caesar , say ' caesar'- go no further . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj indeed , he plied them both with excellent praises . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj but he loves xxmaj caesar best . xxmaj yet he loves xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj hoo ! hearts , tongues , figures , scribes , bards , poets , can not 
▁ xxmaj think , speak , cast , write , sing , number- hoo!- 
▁ xxmaj his love to xxmaj antony . xxmaj but as for xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj kneel down , kneel down , and wonder . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj both he loves . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj they are his shards , and he their beetle . [ trumpets 
▁ within ] xxmaj so- 
▁ xxmaj this is to horse . xxmaj adieu , noble xxmaj agrippa . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj good fortune , worthy soldier , and farewell . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup antony , xxup lepidus , and xxup octavia 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj no further , sir . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you take from me a great part of myself ; 
▁ xxmaj use me well in't . xxmaj sister , prove such a wife 
▁ xxmaj as my thoughts make thee , and as my farthest band 
▁ xxmaj shall pass on thy approof . xxmaj most noble xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj let not the piece of virtue which is set 
▁ xxmaj betwixt us as the cement of our love 
▁ xxmaj to keep it builded be the ram to batter 
▁ xxmaj the fortress of it ; for better might we 
▁ xxmaj have lov'd without this mean , if on both parts 
▁ xxmaj this be not cherish'd . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj make me not offended 
▁ xxmaj in your distrust . 
▁ xxup caesar . i have said . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you shall not find , 
▁ xxmaj though you be therein curious , the least cause 
▁ xxmaj for what you seem to fear . xxmaj so the gods keep you , 
▁ xxmaj and make the hearts of xxmaj romans serve your ends ! 
▁ xxmaj we will here part . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj farewell , my dearest sister , fare thee well . 
▁ xxmaj the elements be kind to thee and make 
▁ xxmaj thy spirits all of comfort ! xxmaj fare thee well . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj my noble brother ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the xxmaj april 's in her eyes . xxmaj it is love 's spring , 
▁ xxmaj and these the showers to bring it on . xxmaj be cheerful . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj sir , look well to my husband 's house ; and- 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what , xxmaj octavia ? 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj i 'll tell you in your ear . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj her tongue will not obey her heart , nor can 
▁ xxmaj her heart inform her tongue- the swan 's down feather , 
▁ xxmaj that stands upon the swell at the full of tide , 
▁ xxmaj and neither way inclines . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside to xxup agrippa ] xxmaj will xxmaj caesar weep ? 
▁ xxup agrippa . [ aside to xxup enobarbus ] xxmaj he has a cloud in 's face . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside to xxup agrippa ] xxmaj he were the worse for that , were he a 
▁ horse ; 
▁ xxmaj so is he , being a man . 
▁ xxup agrippa . [ aside to xxup enobarbus ] xxmaj why , xxmaj enobarbus , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj antony found xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar dead , 
▁ xxmaj he cried almost to roaring ; and he wept 
▁ xxmaj when at xxmaj philippi he found xxmaj brutus slain . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside to xxup agrippa ] xxmaj that year , indeed , he was troubled 
▁ with a rheum ; 
▁ xxmaj what willingly he did confound he wail'd , 
▁ xxmaj believe't- till i weep too . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj no , sweet xxmaj octavia , 
▁ xxmaj you shall hear from me still ; the time shall not 
▁ xxmaj out - go my thinking on you . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj come , sir , come ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll wrestle with you in my strength of love . 
▁ xxmaj look , here i have you ; thus i let you go , 
▁ xxmaj and give you to the gods . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj adieu ; be happy ! 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj let all the number of the stars give light 
▁ xxmaj to thy fair way ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj farewell , farewell ! [ kisses xxup octavia ] 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj farewell ! xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_3 
▁ xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , and xxup alexas 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj where is the fellow ? 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj half afeard to come . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj go to , go to . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup messenger as before 

▁ xxmaj come hither , sir . 
▁ xxup alexas . xxmaj good xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj herod of xxmaj jewry dare not look upon you 
▁ xxmaj but when you are well pleas'd . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj that xxmaj herod 's head 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have . xxmaj but how , when xxmaj antony is gone , 
▁ xxmaj through whom i might command it ? xxmaj come thou near . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj most gracious xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj didst thou behold xxmaj octavia ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj ay , dread xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , in xxmaj rome 
▁ i look'd her in the face , and saw her led 
▁ xxmaj between her brother and xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj is she as tall as me ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj she is not , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj didst hear her speak ? xxmaj is she shrill - tongu'd or low ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , i heard her speak : she is low - voic'd .