xxbos xxup cleopatra . xxmaj that 's not so good . xxmaj he can not like her long . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj like her ? o xxmaj isis ! ' tis impossible . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i think so , xxmaj charmian . xxmaj dull of tongue and dwarfish ! 
▁ xxmaj what majesty is in her gait ? xxmaj remember , 
▁ xxmaj if e'er thou look'dst on majesty . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj she creeps . 
▁ xxmaj her motion and her station are as one ; 
▁ xxmaj she shows a body rather than a life , 
▁ a statue than a breather . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj is this certain ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj or i have no observance . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj three in xxmaj egypt 
▁ xxmaj can not make better note . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj he 's very knowing ; 
▁ i do perceive't . xxmaj there 's nothing in her yet . 
▁ xxmaj the fellow has good judgment . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj excellent . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj guess at her years , i prithee . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , 
▁ xxmaj she was a widow . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj widow ? xxmaj charmian , hark ! 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj and i do think she 's thirty . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj bear'st thou her face in mind ? xxmaj is't long or round ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj round even to faultiness . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj for the most part , too , they are foolish that are so . 
▁ xxmaj her hair , what colour ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj brown , madam ; and her forehead 
▁ xxmaj as low as she would wish it . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj there 's gold for thee . 
▁ xxmaj thou must not take my former sharpness ill . 
▁ i will employ thee back again ; i find thee 
▁ xxmaj most fit for business . xxmaj go make thee ready ; 
▁ xxmaj our letters are prepar'd . xxmaj exeunt xxup messenger 
▁ xxup charmian . a proper man . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj indeed , he is so . i repent me much 
▁ xxmaj that so i harried him . xxmaj why , methinks , by him , 
▁ xxmaj this creature 's no such thing . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj nothing , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj the man hath seen some majesty , and should know . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj hath he seen majesty ? xxmaj isis else defend , 
▁ xxmaj and serving you so long ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i have one thing more to ask him yet , good xxmaj charmian . 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis no matter ; thou shalt bring him to me 
▁ xxmaj where i will write . xxmaj all may be well enough . 
▁ xxup charmian . i warrant you , madam . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_4 
▁ xxup scene xxup iv . 
▁ xxmaj athens . xxup antony 's house 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup octavia 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj nay , nay , xxmaj octavia , not only that- 
▁ xxmaj that were excusable , that and thousands more 
▁ xxmaj of semblable import- but he hath wag'd 
▁ xxmaj new wars ' gainst xxmaj pompey ; made his will , and read it 
▁ xxmaj to public ear ; 
▁ xxmaj spoke scandy of me ; when perforce he could not 
▁ xxmaj but pay me terms of honour , cold and sickly 
▁ xxmaj he vented them , most narrow measure lent me ; 
▁ xxmaj when the best hint was given him , he not took't , 
▁ xxmaj or did it from his teeth . 
▁ xxup octavia . o my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj believe not all ; or if you must believe , 
▁ xxmaj stomach not all . a more unhappy lady , 
▁ xxmaj if this division chance , ne'er stood between , 
▁ xxmaj praying for both parts . 
▁ xxmaj the good gods will mock me presently 
▁ xxmaj when i shall pray ' o , bless my lord and husband ! ' 
▁ xxmaj undo that prayer by crying out as loud 
▁ ' o , bless my brother ! ' xxmaj husband win , win brother , 
▁ xxmaj prays , and destroys the prayer ; no mid - way 
▁ ' twixt these extremes at all . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj gentle xxmaj octavia , 
▁ xxmaj let your best love draw to that point which seeks 
▁ xxmaj best to preserve it . xxmaj if i lose mine honour , 
▁ i lose myself ; better i were not yours 
▁ xxmaj than yours so branchless . xxmaj but , as you requested , 
▁ xxmaj yourself shall go between 's . xxmaj the meantime , lady , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll raise the preparation of a war 
▁ xxmaj shall stain your brother . xxmaj make your soonest haste ; 
▁ xxmaj so your desires are yours . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj thanks to my lord . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj jove of power make me , most weak , most weak , 
▁ xxmaj your reconciler ! xxmaj wars ' twixt you twain would be 
▁ xxmaj as if the world should cleave , and that slain men 
▁ xxmaj should solder up the rift . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj when it appears to you where this begins , 
▁ xxmaj turn your displeasure that way , for our faults 
▁ xxmaj can never be so equal that your love 
▁ xxmaj can equally move with them . xxmaj provide your going ; 
▁ xxmaj choose your own company , and command what cost 
▁ xxmaj your heart has mind to . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_5 
▁ xxup scene xxup v. 
▁ xxmaj athens . xxup antony 's house 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup enobarbus and xxup eros , meeting 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj how now , friend xxmaj eros ! 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj there 's strange news come , sir . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj what , man ? 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj caesar and xxmaj lepidus have made wars upon xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj this is old . xxmaj what is the success ? 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj caesar , having made use of him in the wars ' gainst xxmaj pompey , 
▁ presently denied him rivality , would not let him partake in the 
▁ glory of the action ; and not resting here , accuses him of letters 
▁ he had formerly wrote to xxmaj pompey ; upon his own appeal , seizes him . 
▁ xxmaj so the poor third is up , till death enlarge his confine . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj then , world , thou hast a pair of chaps- no more ; 
▁ xxmaj and throw between them all the food thou hast , 
▁ xxmaj they 'll grind the one the other . xxmaj where 's xxmaj antony ? 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj he 's walking in the garden- thus , and spurns 
▁ xxmaj the rush that lies before him ; cries ' fool xxmaj lepidus ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and threats the throat of that his officer 
▁ xxmaj that murd'red xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj our great navy 's rigg'd . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj for xxmaj italy and xxmaj caesar . xxmaj more , xxmaj domitius : 
▁ xxmaj my lord desires you presently ; my news 
▁ i might have told hereafter . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . ' twill be naught ; 
▁ xxmaj but let it be . xxmaj bring me to xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj come , sir . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_6 
▁ xxup scene xxup vi . 
▁ xxmaj rome . xxup caesar 's house 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup agrippa , and xxup maecenas 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj contemning xxmaj rome , he has done all this and more 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj alexandria . xxmaj here 's the manner of't : 
▁ xxup i ' th ' market - place , on a tribunal silver'd , 
▁ xxmaj cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold 
▁ xxmaj were publicly enthron'd ; at the feet sat 
▁ xxmaj caesarion , whom they call my father 's son , 
▁ xxmaj and all the unlawful issue that their lust 
▁ xxmaj since then hath made between them . xxmaj unto her 
▁ xxmaj he gave the stablishment of xxmaj egypt ; made her 
▁ xxmaj of lower xxmaj syria , xxmaj cyprus , xxmaj lydia , 
▁ xxmaj absolute queen . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj this in the public eye ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxup i ' th ' common show - place , where they exercise . 
▁ xxmaj his sons he there proclaim'd the kings of kings : 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj media , xxmaj parthia , and xxmaj armenia , 
▁ xxmaj he gave to xxmaj alexander ; to xxmaj ptolemy he assign'd 
▁ xxmaj syria , xxmaj cilicia , and xxmaj phoenicia . xxmaj she 
▁ xxmaj in th ' habiliments of the goddess xxmaj isis 
▁ xxmaj that day appear'd ; and oft before gave audience , 
▁ xxmaj as ' tis reported , so . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj let xxmaj rome be thus 
▁ xxmaj inform'd . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj who , queasy with his insolence 
▁ xxmaj already , will their good thoughts call from him . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the people knows it , and have now receiv'd 
▁ xxmaj his accusations . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj who does he accuse ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj caesar ; and that , having in xxmaj sicily 
▁ xxmaj sextus xxmaj pompeius spoil'd , we had not rated him 
▁ xxmaj his part o ' th ' isle . xxmaj then does he say he lent me 
▁ xxmaj some shipping , unrestor'd . xxmaj lastly , he frets 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj lepidus of the triumvirate 
▁ xxmaj should be depos'd ; and , being , that we detain 
▁ xxmaj all his revenue . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj sir , this should be answer'd . 
▁ xxup caesar . ' tis done already , and messenger gone . 
▁ i have told him xxmaj lepidus was grown too cruel , 
▁ xxmaj that he his high authority abus'd , 
▁ xxmaj and did deserve his change . xxmaj for what i have conquer'd 
▁ i grant him part ; but then , in his xxmaj armenia 
▁ xxmaj and other of his conquer'd kingdoms , 
▁ xxmaj demand the like . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj he 'll never yield to that . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj nor must not then be yielded to in this . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup octavia , with her train 

▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj hail , xxmaj caesar , and my lord ! hail , most dear xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj that ever i should call thee cast - away ! 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj you have not call'd me so , nor have you cause . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj why have you stol'n upon us thus ? xxmaj you come not 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj caesar 's sister . xxmaj the wife of xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj should have an army for an usher , and 
▁ xxmaj the neighs of horse to tell of her approach 
▁ xxmaj long ere she did appear . xxmaj the trees by th ' way 
▁ xxmaj should have borne men , and expectation fainted , 
▁ xxmaj longing for what it had not . xxmaj nay , the dust 
▁ xxmaj should have ascended to the roof of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj rais'd by your populous troops . xxmaj but you are come 
▁ a market - maid to xxmaj rome , and have prevented 
▁ xxmaj the ostentation of our love , which left unshown 
▁ xxmaj is often left unlov'd . xxmaj we should have met you 
▁ xxmaj by sea and land , supplying every stage 
▁ xxmaj with an augmented greeting . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj to come thus was i not constrain'd , but did it 
▁ xxmaj on my free will . xxmaj my lord , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj hearing that you prepar'd for war , acquainted 
▁ xxmaj my grieved ear withal ; whereon i begg'd 
▁ xxmaj his pardon for return . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj which soon he granted , 
▁ xxmaj being an obstruct ' tween his lust and him . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj do not say so , my lord . 
▁ xxup caesar . i have eyes upon him , 
▁ xxmaj and his affairs come to me on the wind . 
▁ xxmaj where is he now ? 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj my lord , in xxmaj athens . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj no , my most wronged sister : xxmaj cleopatra 
▁ xxmaj hath nodded him to her . xxmaj he hath given his empire 
▁ xxmaj up to a whore , who now are levying 
▁ xxmaj the kings o ' th ' earth for war . xxmaj he hath assembled 
▁ xxmaj bocchus , the king of xxmaj libya ; xxmaj archelaus 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj cappadocia ; xxmaj philadelphos , king 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj paphlagonia ; the xxmaj thracian king , xxmaj adallas ; 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj manchus of xxmaj arabia ; xxmaj king of xxmaj pont ; 
▁ xxmaj herod of xxmaj jewry ; xxmaj mithridates , king 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj comagene ; xxmaj polemon and xxmaj amyntas , 
▁ xxmaj the kings of xxmaj mede and xxmaj lycaonia , with 
▁ xxmaj more larger list of sceptres . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj ay me most wretched , 
▁ xxmaj that have my heart parted betwixt two friends , 
▁ xxmaj that does afflict each other ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj welcome hither . 
▁ xxmaj your letters did withhold our breaking forth , 
▁ xxmaj till we perceiv'd both how you were wrong led 
▁ xxmaj and we in negligent danger . xxmaj cheer your heart ; 
▁ xxmaj be you not troubled with the time , which drives 
▁ xxmaj o'er your content these strong necessities , 
▁ xxmaj but let determin'd things to destiny 
▁ xxmaj hold unbewail'd their way . xxmaj welcome to xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj nothing more dear to me . xxmaj you are abus'd 
▁ xxmaj beyond the mark of thought , and the high gods , 
▁ xxmaj to do you justice , make their ministers 
▁ xxmaj of us and those that love you . xxmaj best of comfort , 
▁ xxmaj and ever welcome to us . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj welcome , lady . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj welcome , dear madam . 
▁ xxmaj each heart in xxmaj rome does love and pity you ; 
▁ xxmaj only th ' adulterous xxmaj antony , most large 
▁ xxmaj in his abominations , turns you off , 
▁ xxmaj and gives his potent regiment to a trull 
▁ xxmaj that noises it against us . 
▁ xxup octavia . xxmaj is it so , sir ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj most certain . xxmaj sister , welcome . xxmaj pray you 
▁ xxmaj be ever known to patience . xxmaj my dear'st sister ! xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_7 
▁ xxup scene xxup vii . 
▁ xxup antony 's camp near xxmaj actium 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra and xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup cleopatra . i will be even with thee , doubt it not . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj but why , why , 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj thou hast forspoke my being in these wars , 
▁ xxmaj and say'st it is not fit . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj well , is it , is it ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj is't not denounc'd against us ? xxmaj why should not we 
▁ xxmaj be there in person ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside ] xxmaj well , i could reply : 
▁ xxmaj if we should serve with horse and mares together 
▁ xxmaj the horse were merely lost ; the mares would bear 
▁ a soldier and his horse . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what is't you say ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj your presence needs must puzzle xxmaj antony ; 
▁ xxmaj take from his heart , take from his brain , from 's time , 
▁ xxmaj what should not then be spar'd . xxmaj he is already 
▁ xxmaj traduc'd for levity ; and ' tis said in xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj photinus an eunuch and your maids 
▁ xxmaj manage this war . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj sink xxmaj rome , and their tongues rot 
▁ xxmaj that speak against us ! a charge we bear i ' th ' war , 
▁ xxmaj and , as the president of my kingdom , will 
▁ xxmaj appear there for a man . xxmaj speak not against it ; 
▁ i will not stay behind . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup canidius 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj nay , i have done . 
▁ xxmaj here comes the xxmaj emperor . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj is it not strange , xxmaj canidius , 
▁ xxmaj that from xxmaj tarentum and xxmaj brundusium 
▁ xxmaj he could so quickly cut the xxmaj ionian sea , 
▁ xxmaj and take in xxmaj toryne?- xxmaj you have heard on't , sweet ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj celerity is never more admir'd 
▁ xxmaj than by the negligent . 
▁ xxup antony . a good rebuke , 
▁ xxmaj which might have well becom'd the best of men 
▁ xxmaj to taunt at slackness . xxmaj canidius , we 
▁ xxmaj will fight with him by sea . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj by sea ! xxmaj what else ? 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj why will my lord do so ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj for that he dares us to't . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj so hath my lord dar'd him to single fight . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj ay , and to wage this battle at xxmaj pharsalia , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj caesar fought with xxmaj pompey . xxmaj but these offers , 
▁ xxmaj which serve not for his vantage , he shakes off ; 
▁ xxmaj and so should you . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj your ships are not well mann'd ; 
▁ xxmaj your mariners are muleteers , reapers , people 
▁ xxmaj ingross'd by swift impress . xxmaj in xxmaj caesar 's fleet 
▁ xxmaj are those that often have ' gainst xxmaj pompey fought ; 
▁ xxmaj their ships are yare ; yours heavy . xxmaj no disgrace 
▁ xxmaj shall fall you for refusing him at sea , 
▁ xxmaj being prepar'd for land . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj by sea , by sea . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj most worthy sir , you therein throw away 
▁ xxmaj the absolute soldiership you have by land ; 
▁ xxmaj distract your army , which doth most consist 
▁ xxmaj of war - mark'd footmen ; leave unexecuted 
▁ xxmaj your own renowned knowledge ; quite forgo 
▁ xxmaj the way which promises assurance ; and 
▁ xxmaj give up yourself merely to chance and hazard 
▁ xxmaj from firm security . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj i 'll fight at sea . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i have sixty sails , xxmaj caesar none better . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj our overplus of shipping will we burn , 
▁ xxmaj and , with the rest full - mann'd , from th ' head of xxmaj actium 
▁ xxmaj beat th ' approaching xxmaj caesar . xxmaj but if we fail , 
▁ xxmaj we then can do't at land . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxmaj thy business ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the news is true , my lord : he is descried ; 
▁ xxmaj caesar has taken xxmaj toryne . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj can he be there in person ? ' tis impossible- 
▁ xxmaj strange that his power should be . xxmaj canidius , 
▁ xxmaj our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land , 
▁ xxmaj and our twelve thousand horse . xxmaj we 'll to our ship . 
▁ xxmaj away , my xxmaj thetis ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup soldier 

▁ xxmaj how now , worthy soldier ? 
▁ xxup soldier . o noble xxmaj emperor , do not fight by sea ; 
▁ xxmaj trust not to rotten planks . xxmaj do you misdoubt 
▁ xxmaj this sword and these my wounds ? xxmaj let th ' xxmaj egyptians 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj phoenicians go a - ducking ; we 
▁ xxmaj have us'd to conquer standing on the earth 
▁ xxmaj and fighting foot to foot . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj well , well- away . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup antony , xxup cleopatra , and xxup enobarbus 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj by xxmaj hercules , i think i am i ' th ' right . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj soldier , thou art ; but his whole action grows 
▁ xxmaj not in the power on't . xxmaj so our leader 's led , 
▁ xxmaj and we are women 's men . 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj you keep by land 
▁ xxmaj the legions and the horse whole , do you not ? 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj marcus xxmaj octavius , xxmaj marcus xxmaj justeius , 
▁ xxmaj publicola , and xxmaj caelius are for sea ; 
▁ xxmaj but we keep whole by land . xxmaj this speed of xxmaj caesar 's 
▁ xxmaj carries beyond belief . 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj while he was yet in xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj his power went out in such distractions as 
▁ xxmaj beguil'd all spies . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj who 's his lieutenant , hear you ? 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj they say one xxmaj taurus . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj well i know the man . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj emperor calls xxmaj canidius . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj with news the time 's with labour and throes forth 
▁ xxmaj each minute some . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_8 
▁ xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
▁ a plain near xxmaj actium 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , with his army , marching 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj taurus ! 
▁ xxup taurus . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj strike not by land ; keep whole ; provoke not battle 
▁ xxmaj till we have done at sea . xxmaj do not exceed 
▁ xxmaj the prescript of this scroll . xxmaj our fortune lies 
▁ xxmaj upon this jump . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_9 
▁ xxup scene xxup ix . 
▁ xxmaj another part of the plain 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj set we our squadrons on yon side o ' th ' hill , 
▁ xxmaj in eye of xxmaj caesar 's battle ; from which place 
▁ xxmaj we may the number of the ships behold , 
▁ xxmaj and so proceed accordingly . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_10 
▁ xxup scene xxup x. 
▁ xxmaj another part of the plain 

▁ xxup canidius marcheth with his land army one way 
▁ over the stage , and xxup taurus , the xxmaj lieutenant of 
▁ xxup caesar , the other way . xxmaj after their going in is heard 
▁ the noise of a sea - fight 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj naught , naught , all naught ! i can behold no longer . 
▁ xxmaj th ' xxmaj antoniad , the xxmaj egyptian admiral , 
▁ xxmaj with all their sixty , fly and turn the rudder . 
▁ xxmaj to see't mine eyes are blasted . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup scarus 

▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj gods and goddesses , 
▁ xxmaj all the whole synod of them ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj what 's thy passion ? 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj the greater cantle of the world is lost 
▁ xxmaj with very ignorance ; we have kiss'd away 
▁ xxmaj kingdoms and provinces . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj how appears the fight ? 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj on our side like the token'd pestilence , 
▁ xxmaj where death is sure . xxmaj yon ribaudred nag of xxmaj egypt- 
▁ xxmaj whom leprosy o'ertake!- i ' th ' midst o ' th ' fight , 
▁ xxmaj when vantage like a pair of twins appear'd , 
▁ xxmaj both as the same , or rather ours the elder- 
▁ xxmaj the breese upon her , like a cow in xxmaj june- 
▁ xxmaj hoists sails and flies . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj that i beheld ; 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not 
▁ xxmaj endure a further view . 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj she once being loof'd , 
▁ xxmaj the noble ruin of her magic , xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj claps on his sea - wing , and , like a doting mallard , 
▁ xxmaj leaving the fight in height , flies after her . 
▁ i never saw an action of such shame ; 
▁ xxmaj experience , manhood , honour , ne'er before 
▁ xxmaj did violate so itself . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj alack , alack ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup canidius 

▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj our fortune on the sea is out of breath , 
▁ xxmaj and sinks most lamentably . xxmaj had our general 
▁ xxmaj been what he knew himself , it had gone well . 
▁ xxup o , he has given example for our flight 
▁ xxmaj most grossly by his own ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj ay , are you thereabouts ? 
▁ xxmaj why then , good night indeed . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj toward xxmaj peloponnesus are they fled . 
▁ xxup scarus . ' tis easy to't ; and there i will attend 
▁ xxmaj what further comes . 
▁ xxup canidius . xxmaj to xxmaj caesar will i render 
▁ xxmaj my legions and my horse ; six kings already 
▁ xxmaj show me the way of yielding . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj i 'll yet follow 
▁ xxmaj the wounded chance of xxmaj antony , though my reason 
▁ xxmaj sits in the wind against me . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_11 
▁ xxup scene xxup xi . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony xxmaj with attendants 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj hark ! the land bids me tread no more upon't ; 
▁ xxmaj it is asham'd to bear me . xxmaj friends , come hither . 
▁ i am so lated in the world that i 
▁ xxmaj have lost my way for ever . i have a ship 
▁ xxmaj laden with gold ; take that ; divide it . xxmaj fly , 
▁ xxmaj and make your peace with xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj fly ? xxmaj not we ! 
▁ xxup antony . i have fled myself , and have instructed cowards 
▁ xxmaj to run and show their shoulders . xxmaj friends , be gone ; 
▁ i have myself resolv'd upon a course 
▁ xxmaj which has no need of you ; be gone . 
▁ xxmaj my treasure 's in the harbour , take it . xxup o , 
▁ i follow'd that i blush to look upon . 
▁ xxmaj my very hairs do mutiny ; for the white 
▁ xxmaj reprove the brown for rashness , and they them 
▁ xxmaj for fear and doting . xxmaj friends , be gone ; you shall 
▁ xxmaj have letters from me to some friends that will 
▁ xxmaj sweep your way for you . xxmaj pray you look not sad , 
▁ xxmaj nor make replies of loathness ; take the hint 
▁ xxmaj which my despair proclaims . xxmaj let that be left 
▁ xxmaj which leaves itself . xxmaj to the sea - side straight way . 
▁ i will possess you of that ship and treasure . 
▁ xxmaj leave me , i pray , a little ; pray you now ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , do so , for indeed i have lost command ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore i pray you . xxmaj i 'll see you by and by . [ sits down ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , led by xxup charmian and xxup iras , 
▁ xxup eros following 

▁ xxup eros . xxmaj nay , gentle madam , to him ! xxmaj comfort him . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj do , most dear xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj do ? xxmaj why , what else ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj let me sit down . o xxmaj juno ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj no , no , no , no , no . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj see you here , sir ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxup o , fie , fie , fie ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj madam ! 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj madam , o good xxmaj empress ! 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj sir , sir ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj yes , my lord , yes . xxmaj he at xxmaj philippi kept 
▁ xxmaj his sword e'en like a dancer , while i struck 
▁ xxmaj the lean and wrinkled xxmaj cassius ; and ' twas i 
▁ xxmaj that the mad xxmaj brutus ended ; he alone 
▁ xxmaj dealt on lieutenantry , and no practice had 
▁ xxmaj in the brave squares of war . xxmaj yet now- no matter . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj ah , stand by ! 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj the xxmaj queen , my lord , the xxmaj queen ! 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj go to him , madam , speak to him . 
▁ xxmaj he is unqualitied with very shame . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj well then , sustain me . xxup o ! 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj most noble sir , arise ; the xxmaj queen approaches . 
▁ xxmaj her head 's declin'd , and death will seize her but 
▁ xxmaj your comfort makes the rescue . 
▁ xxup antony . i have offended reputation- 
▁ a most unnoble swerving . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj sir , the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup antony . xxup o , whither hast thou led me , xxmaj egypt ? xxmaj see 
▁ xxmaj how i convey my shame out of thine eyes 
▁ xxmaj by looking back what i have left behind 
▁ ' stroy'd in dishonour . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . o my lord , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj forgive my fearful sails ! i little thought 
▁ xxmaj you would have followed . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj egypt , thou knew'st too well 
▁ xxmaj my heart was to thy rudder tied by th ' strings , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shouldst tow me after . xxmaj o'er my spirit 
▁ xxmaj thy full supremacy thou knew'st , and that 
▁ xxmaj thy beck might from the bidding of the gods 
▁ xxmaj command me . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o , my pardon ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj now i must 
▁ xxmaj to the young man send humble treaties , dodge 
▁ xxmaj and palter in the shifts of lowness , who 
▁ xxmaj with half the bulk o ' th ' world play'd as i pleas'd , 
▁ xxmaj making and marring fortunes . xxmaj you did know 
▁ xxmaj how much you were my conqueror , and that 
▁ xxmaj my sword , made weak by my affection , would 
▁ xxmaj obey it on all cause . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj pardon , pardon ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj fall not a tear , i say ; one of them rates 
▁ xxmaj all that is won and lost . xxmaj give me a kiss ; 
▁ xxmaj even this repays me . 
▁ xxmaj we sent our schoolmaster ; is ' a come back ? 
▁ xxmaj love , i am full of lead . xxmaj some wine , 
▁ xxmaj within there , and our viands ! xxmaj fortune knows 
▁ xxmaj we scorn her most when most she offers blows . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_12 
▁ xxup scene xxup xii . 
▁ xxup caesar 's camp in xxmaj egypt 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup agrippa , xxup dolabella , xxup thyreus , with others 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj let him appear that 's come from xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj know you him ? 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj caesar , ' tis his schoolmaster : 
▁ xxmaj an argument that he is pluck'd , when hither 
▁ xxmaj he sends so poor a pinion of his wing , 
▁ xxmaj which had superfluous kings for messengers 
▁ xxmaj not many moons gone by . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup euphronius , xxmaj ambassador from xxup antony 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj approach , and speak . 
▁ xxup euphronius . xxmaj such as i am , i come from xxmaj antony . 
▁ i was of late as petty to his ends 
▁ xxmaj as is the morn - dew on the myrtle leaf 
▁ xxmaj to his grand sea . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj be't so . xxmaj declare thine office . 
▁ xxup euphronius . xxmaj lord of his fortunes he salutes thee , and 
▁ xxmaj requires to live in xxmaj egypt ; which not granted , 
▁ xxmaj he lessens his requests and to thee sues 
▁ xxmaj to let him breathe between the heavens and earth , 
▁ a private man in xxmaj athens . xxmaj this for him . 
▁ xxmaj next , xxmaj cleopatra does confess thy greatness , 
▁ xxmaj submits her to thy might , and of thee craves 
▁ xxmaj the circle of the xxmaj ptolemies for her heirs , 
▁ xxmaj now hazarded to thy grace . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj for xxmaj antony , 
▁ i have no ears to his request . xxmaj the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj of audience nor desire shall fail , so she 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj egypt drive her all - disgraced friend , 
▁ xxmaj or take his life there . xxmaj this if she perform , 
▁ xxmaj she shall not sue unheard . xxmaj so to them both . 
▁ xxup euphronius . xxmaj fortune pursue thee ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj bring him through the bands . xxmaj exit xxup euphronius 
▁ [ to xxup thyreus ] xxmaj to try thy eloquence , now ' tis time . xxmaj dispatch ; 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj antony win xxmaj cleopatra . xxmaj promise , 
▁ xxmaj and in our name , what she requires ; add more , 
▁ xxmaj from thine invention , offers . xxmaj women are not 
▁ xxmaj in their best fortunes strong ; but want will perjure 
▁ xxmaj the ne'er - touch'd vestal . xxmaj try thy cunning , xxmaj thyreus ; 
▁ xxmaj make thine own edict for thy pains , which we 
▁ xxmaj will answer as a law . 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj caesar , i go . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj observe how xxmaj antony becomes his flaw , 
▁ xxmaj and what thou think'st his very action speaks 
▁ xxmaj in every power that moves . 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj caesar , i shall . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_3|sc_13 
▁ xxup scene x xxrep 3 i . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxup cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup enobarbus , xxup charmian , and xxup iras 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what shall we do , xxmaj enobarbus ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj think , and die . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj is xxmaj antony or we in fault for this ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj antony only , that would make his will 
▁ xxmaj lord of his reason . xxmaj what though you fled 
▁ xxmaj from that great face of war , whose several ranges 
▁ xxmaj frighted each other ? xxmaj why should he follow ? 
▁ xxmaj the itch of his affection should not then 
▁ xxmaj have nick'd his captainship , at such a point , 
▁ xxmaj when half to half the world oppos'd , he being 
▁ xxmaj the mered question . ' twas a shame no less 
▁ xxmaj than was his loss , to course your flying flags 
▁ xxmaj and leave his navy gazing . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj prithee , peace . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup euphronius , the xxmaj ambassador ; with xxup antony 
▁
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj is that his answer ? 
▁ xxup euphronius . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the xxmaj queen shall then have courtesy , so she 
▁ xxmaj will yield us up . 
▁ xxup euphronius . xxmaj he says so . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj let her know't . 
▁ xxmaj to the boy xxmaj caesar send this grizzled head , 
▁ xxmaj and he will fill thy wishes to the brim 
▁ xxmaj with principalities . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj that head , my lord ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj to him again . xxmaj tell him he wears the rose 
▁ xxmaj of youth upon him ; from which the world should note 
▁ xxmaj something particular . xxmaj his coin , ships , legions , 
▁ xxmaj may be a coward 's whose ministers would prevail 
▁ xxmaj under the service of a child as soon 
▁ xxmaj as i ' th ' command of xxmaj caesar . i dare him therefore 
▁ xxmaj to lay his gay comparisons apart , 
▁ xxmaj and answer me declin'd , sword against sword , 
▁ xxmaj ourselves alone . xxmaj i 'll write it . xxmaj follow me . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup antony and xxup euphronius 
▁ xxup euphronius . [ aside ] xxmaj yes , like enough high - battled xxmaj caesar will 
▁ xxmaj unstate his happiness , and be stag'd to th ' show 
▁ xxmaj against a sworder ! i see men 's judgments are 
▁ a parcel of their fortunes , and things outward 
▁ xxmaj do draw the inward quality after them , 
▁ xxmaj to suffer all alike . xxmaj that he should dream , 
▁ xxmaj knowing all measures , the full xxmaj caesar will 
▁ xxmaj answer his emptiness ! xxmaj caesar , thou hast subdu'd 
▁ xxmaj his judgment too . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . a messenger from xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what , no more ceremony ? xxmaj see , my women ! 
▁ xxmaj against the blown rose may they stop their nose 
▁ xxmaj that kneel'd unto the buds . xxmaj admit him , sir . xxmaj exit xxup servant 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside ] xxmaj mine honesty and i begin to square . 
▁ xxmaj the loyalty well held to fools does make 
▁ xxmaj our faith mere folly . xxmaj yet he that can endure 
▁ xxmaj to follow with allegiance a fall'n lord 
▁ xxmaj does conquer him that did his master conquer , 
▁ xxmaj and earns a place i ' th ' story . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup thyreus 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj caesar 's will ? 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj hear it apart . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj none but friends : say boldly . 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj so , haply , are they friends to xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj he needs as many , sir , as xxmaj caesar has , 
▁ xxmaj or needs not us . xxmaj if xxmaj caesar please , our master 
▁ xxmaj will leap to be his friend . xxmaj for us , you know 
▁ xxmaj whose he is we are , and that is xxmaj caesar 's . 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj so . 
▁ xxmaj thus then , thou most renown'd : xxmaj caesar entreats 
▁ xxmaj not to consider in what case thou stand'st 
▁ xxmaj further than he is xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj go on . xxmaj right royal ! 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj he knows that you embrace not xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj as you did love , but as you fear'd him . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o ! 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj the scars upon your honour , therefore , he 
▁ xxmaj does pity , as constrained blemishes , 
▁ xxmaj not as deserv'd . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj he is a god , and knows 
▁ xxmaj what is most right . xxmaj mine honour was not yielded , 
▁ xxmaj but conquer'd merely . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside ] xxmaj to be sure of that , 
▁ i will ask xxmaj antony . xxmaj sir , sir , thou art so leaky 
▁ xxmaj that we must leave thee to thy sinking , for 
▁ xxmaj thy dearest quit thee . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj shall i say to xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj what you require of him ? xxmaj for he partly begs 
▁ xxmaj to be desir'd to give . xxmaj it much would please him 
▁ xxmaj that of his fortunes you should make a staff 
▁ xxmaj to lean upon . xxmaj but it would warm his spirits 
▁ xxmaj to hear from me you had left xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj and put yourself under his shroud , 
▁ xxmaj the universal landlord . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what 's your name ? 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj my name is xxmaj thyreus . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj most kind messenger , 
▁ xxmaj say to great xxmaj caesar this : in deputation 
▁ i kiss his conquring hand . xxmaj tell him i am prompt 
▁ xxmaj to lay my crown at 's feet , and there to kneel . 
▁ xxmaj tell him from his all - obeying breath i hear 
▁ xxmaj the doom of xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxup thyreus . ' tis your noblest course . 
▁ xxmaj wisdom and fortune combating together , 
▁ xxmaj if that the former dare but what it can , 
▁ xxmaj no chance may shake it . xxmaj give me grace to lay 
▁ xxmaj my duty on your hand . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj your xxmaj caesar 's father oft , 
▁ xxmaj when he hath mus'd of taking kingdoms in , 
▁ xxmaj bestow'd his lips on that unworthy place , 
▁ xxmaj as it rain'd kisses . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup antony and xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj favours , by xxmaj jove that thunders ! 
▁ xxmaj what art thou , fellow ? 
▁ xxup thyreus . xxmaj one that but performs 
▁ xxmaj the bidding of the fullest man , and worthiest 
▁ xxmaj to have command obey'd . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside ] xxmaj you will be whipt . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj approach there.- xxmaj ah , you kite!- xxmaj now , gods and devils ! 
▁ xxmaj authority melts from me . xxmaj of late , when i cried ' ho ! ' 
▁ xxmaj like boys unto a muss , kings would start forth 
▁ xxmaj and cry ' your will ? ' xxmaj have you no ears ? i am 
▁ xxmaj antony yet . 

▁ xxmaj enter servants 

▁ xxmaj take hence this xxmaj jack and whip him . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . ' tis better playing with a lion 's whelp 
▁ xxmaj than with an old one dying . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj moon and stars ! 
▁ xxmaj whip him . xxmaj were't twenty of the greatest tributaries 
▁ xxmaj that do acknowledge xxmaj caesar , should i find them 
▁ xxmaj so saucy with the hand of she here- what 's her name 
▁ xxmaj since she was xxmaj cleopatra ? xxmaj whip him , fellows , 
▁ xxmaj till like a boy you see him cringe his face , 
▁ xxmaj and whine aloud for mercy . xxmaj take him hence . 
▁ xxup thymus . xxmaj mark xxmaj antony- 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj tug him away . xxmaj being whipt , 
▁ xxmaj bring him again : the xxmaj jack of xxmaj caesar 's shall 
▁ xxmaj bear us an errand to him . xxmaj exeunt servants with xxup thyreus 
▁ xxmaj you were half blasted ere i knew you . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj have i my pillow left unpress'd in xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj forborne the getting of a lawful race , 
▁ xxmaj and by a gem of women , to be abus'd 
▁ xxmaj by one that looks on feeders ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj good my lord- 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you have been a boggler ever . 
▁ xxmaj but when we in our viciousness grow hard- 
▁ o misery on't!- the wise gods seel our eyes , 
▁ xxmaj in our own filth drop our clear judgments , make us 
▁ xxmaj adore our errors , laugh at 's while we strut 
▁ xxmaj to our confusion . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxup o , is't come to this ? 
▁ xxup antony . i found you as a morsel cold upon 
▁ xxmaj dead xxmaj caesar 's trencher . xxmaj nay , you were a fragment 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj cneius xxmaj pompey 's , besides what hotter hours , 
▁ xxmaj unregist'red in vulgar fame , you have 
▁ xxmaj luxuriously pick'd out ; for i am sure , 
▁ xxmaj though you can guess what temperance should be , 
▁ xxmaj you know not what it is . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj wherefore is this ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj to let a fellow that will take rewards , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' god quit you ! ' be familiar with 
▁ xxmaj my playfellow , your hand , this kingly seal 
▁ xxmaj and plighter of high hearts ! o that i were 
▁ xxmaj upon the hill of xxmaj basan to outroar 
▁ xxmaj the horned herd ! xxmaj for i have savage cause , 
▁ xxmaj and to proclaim it civilly were like 
▁ a halter'd neck which does the hangman thank 
▁ xxmaj for being yare about him . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter a xxup servant with xxup thyreus 
▁
▁ xxmaj is he whipt ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj soundly , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj cried he ? and begg'd ' a pardon ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he did ask favour . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj if that thy father live , let him repent 
▁ xxmaj thou wast not made his daughter ; and be thou sorry 
▁ xxmaj to follow xxmaj caesar in his triumph , since 
▁ xxmaj thou hast been whipt for following him . xxmaj henceforth 
▁ xxmaj the white hand of a lady fever thee ! 
▁ xxmaj shake thou to look on't . xxmaj get thee back to xxmaj caesar ; 
▁ xxmaj tell him thy entertainment ; look thou say 
▁ xxmaj he makes me angry with him ; for he seems 
▁ xxmaj proud and disdainful , harping on what i am , 
▁ xxmaj not what he knew i was . xxmaj he makes me angry ; 
▁ xxmaj and at this time most easy ' tis to do't , 
▁ xxmaj when my good stars , that were my former guides , 
▁ xxmaj have empty left their orbs and shot their fires 
▁ xxmaj into th ' abysm of hell . xxmaj if he mislike 
▁ xxmaj my speech and what is done , tell him he has 
▁ xxmaj hipparchus , my enfranched bondman , whom 
▁ xxmaj he may at pleasure whip or hang or torture , 
▁ xxmaj as he shall like , to quit me . xxmaj urge it thou . 
▁ xxmaj hence with thy stripes , be gone . xxmaj exit xxup thyreus 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj have you done yet ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj alack , our terrene moon 
▁ xxmaj is now eclips'd , and it portends alone 
▁ xxmaj the fall of xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i must stay his time . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj to flatter xxmaj caesar , would you mingle eyes 
▁ xxmaj with one that ties his points ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj not know me yet ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj cold - hearted toward me ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj ah , dear , if i be so , 
▁ xxmaj from my cold heart let heaven engender hail , 
▁ xxmaj and poison it in the source , and the first stone 
▁ xxmaj drop in my neck ; as it determines , so 
▁ xxmaj dissolve my life ! xxmaj the next xxmaj caesarion smite ! 
▁ xxmaj till by degrees the memory of my womb , 
▁ xxmaj together with my brave xxmaj egyptians all , 
▁ xxmaj by the discandying of this pelleted storm , 
▁ xxmaj lie graveless , till the flies and gnats of xxmaj nile 
▁ xxmaj have buried them for prey . 
▁ xxup antony . i am satisfied . 
▁ xxmaj caesar sits down in xxmaj alexandria , where 
▁ i will oppose his fate . xxmaj our force by land 
▁ xxmaj hath nobly held ; our sever'd navy to 
▁ xxmaj have knit again , and fleet , threat'ning most sea - like . 
▁ xxmaj where hast thou been , my heart ? xxmaj dost thou hear , lady ? 
▁ xxmaj if from the field i shall return once more 
▁ xxmaj to kiss these lips , i will appear in blood . 
▁ i and my sword will earn our chronicle . 
▁ xxmaj there 's hope in't yet . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj that 's my brave lord ! 
▁ xxup antony . i will be treble - sinew'd , hearted , breath'd , 
▁ xxmaj and fight maliciously . xxmaj for when mine hours 
▁ xxmaj were nice and lucky , men did ransom lives 
▁ xxmaj of me for jests ; but now xxmaj i 'll set my teeth , 
▁ xxmaj and send to darkness all that stop me . xxmaj come , 
▁ xxmaj let 's have one other gaudy night . xxmaj call to me 
▁ xxmaj all my sad captains ; fill our bowls once more ; 
▁ xxmaj let 's mock the midnight bell . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj it is my birthday . 
▁ i had thought t'have held it poor ; but since my lord 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj antony again , i will be xxmaj cleopatra . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj we will yet do well . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj call all his noble captains to my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj do so , we 'll speak to them ; and to - night xxmaj i 'll force 
▁ xxmaj the wine peep through their scars . xxmaj come on , my queen , 
▁ xxmaj there 's sap in't yet . xxmaj the next time i do fight 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make death love me ; for i will contend 
▁ xxmaj even with his pestilent scythe . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup enobarbus 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj now he 'll outstare the lightning . xxmaj to be furious 
▁ xxmaj is to be frighted out of fear , and in that mood 
▁ xxmaj the dove will peck the estridge ; and i see still 
▁ a diminution in our captain 's brain 
▁ xxmaj restores his heart . xxmaj when valour preys on reason , 
▁ xxmaj it eats the sword it fights with . i will seek 
▁ xxmaj some way to leave him . xxmaj exit 

 xxup act_4|sc_1 
▁ xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
▁ xxup caesar 's camp before xxmaj alexandria 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup agrippa , and xxup maecenas , with his army ; 
▁ xxup caesar reading a letter 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj he calls me boy , and chides as he had power 
▁ xxmaj to beat me out of xxmaj egypt . xxmaj my messenger 
▁ xxmaj he hath whipt with rods ; dares me to personal combat , 
▁ xxmaj caesar to xxmaj antony . xxmaj let the old ruffian know 
▁ i have many other ways to die , meantime 
▁ xxmaj laugh at his challenge . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj caesar must think 
▁ xxmaj when one so great begins to rage , he 's hunted 
▁ xxmaj even to falling . xxmaj give him no breath , but now 
▁ xxmaj make boot of his distraction . xxmaj never anger 
▁ xxmaj made good guard for itself . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj let our best heads 
▁ xxmaj know that to - morrow the last of many battles 
▁ xxmaj we mean to fight . xxmaj within our files there are 
▁ xxmaj of those that serv'd xxmaj mark xxmaj antony but late 
▁ xxmaj enough to fetch him in . xxmaj see it done ; 
▁ xxmaj and feast the army ; we have store to do't , 
▁ xxmaj and they have earn'd the waste . xxmaj poor xxmaj antony ! xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_2 
▁ xxup scene xxup ii . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony , xxup cleopatra , xxup enobarbus , xxup charmian , xxup iras , 
▁ xxup alexas , with others 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj he will not fight with me , xxmaj domitius ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj why should he not ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj he thinks , being twenty times of better fortune , 
▁ xxmaj he is twenty men to one . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj to - morrow , soldier , 
▁ xxmaj by sea and land xxmaj i 'll fight . xxmaj or i will live , 
▁ xxmaj or bathe my dying honour in the blood 
▁ xxmaj shall make it live again . xxmaj woo't thou fight well ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj i 'll strike , and cry ' take all . ' 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj well said ; come on . 
▁ xxmaj call forth my household servants ; let 's to - night 
▁ xxmaj be bounteous at our meal . 

▁ xxmaj enter three or four servitors 
▁
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj thou has been rightly honest . xxmaj so hast thou ; 
▁ xxmaj thou , and thou , and thou . xxmaj you have serv'd me well , 
▁ xxmaj and kings have been your fellows . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . [ aside to xxup enobarbus ] xxmaj what means this ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside to xxup cleopatra ] ' tis one of those odd tricks which 
▁ sorrow shoots 
▁ xxmaj out of the mind . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj and thou art honest too . 
▁ i wish i could be made so many men , 
▁ xxmaj and all of you clapp'd up together in 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj antony , that i might do you service 
▁ xxmaj so good as you have done . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj the gods forbid ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj well , my good fellows , wait on me to - night . 
▁ xxmaj scant not my cups , and make as much of me 
▁ xxmaj as when mine empire was your fellow too , 
▁ xxmaj and suffer'd my command . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . [ aside to xxup enobarbus ] xxmaj what does he mean ? 
▁ xxup enobarbus . [ aside to xxup cleopatra ] xxmaj to make his followers weep . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj tend me to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj may be it is the period of your duty . 
▁ xxmaj haply you shall not see me more ; or if , 
▁ a mangled shadow . xxmaj perchance to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj you 'll serve another master . i look on you 
▁ xxmaj as one that takes his leave . xxmaj mine honest friends , 
▁ i turn you not away ; but , like a master 
▁ xxmaj married to your good service , stay till death . 
▁ xxmaj tend me to - night two hours , i ask no more , 
▁ xxmaj and the gods yield you for't ! 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj what mean you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj to give them this discomfort ? xxmaj look , they weep ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , an ass , am onion - ey'd . xxmaj for shame ! 
▁ xxmaj transform us not to women . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj ho , ho , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj now the witch take me if i meant it thus ! 
▁ xxmaj grace grow where those drops fall ! xxmaj my hearty friends , 
▁ xxmaj you take me in too dolorous a sense ; 
▁ xxmaj for i spake to you for your comfort , did desire you 
▁ xxmaj to burn this night with torches . xxmaj know , my hearts , 
▁ i hope well of to - morrow , and will lead you 
▁ xxmaj where rather xxmaj i 'll expect victorious life 
▁ xxmaj than death and honour . xxmaj let 's to supper , come , 
▁ xxmaj and drown consideration . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_3 
▁ xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxmaj before cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter a company of soldiers 

▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj brother , good night . xxmaj to - morrow is the day . 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj it will determine one way . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj heard you of nothing strange about the streets ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj nothing . xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj belike ' tis but a rumour . xxmaj good night to you . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj well , sir , good night . 
▁ [ they meet other soldiers ] 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj soldiers , have careful watch . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj and you . xxmaj good night , good night . 
▁ [ the two companies separate and place themselves 
▁ in every corner of the stage ] 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj here we . xxmaj and if to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj our navy thrive , i have an absolute hope 
▁ xxmaj our landmen will stand up . 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . ' tis a brave army , 
▁ xxmaj and full of purpose . 
▁ [ music of the hautboys is under the stage ] 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj peace , what noise ? 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj list , list ! 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj hark ! 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj music i ' th ' air . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup soldier . xxmaj under the earth . 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj it signs well , does it not ? 
▁ xxup fourth xxup soldier . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj peace , i say ! 
▁ xxmaj what should this mean ? 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . ' tis the god xxmaj hercules , whom xxmaj antony lov'd , 
▁ xxmaj now leaves him . 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj walk ; let 's see if other watchmen 
▁ xxmaj do hear what we do . 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj how now , masters ! 
▁ xxup soldiers . [ speaking together ] xxmaj how now ! 
▁ xxmaj how now ! xxmaj do you hear this ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj ay ; is't not strange ? 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj do you hear , masters ? xxmaj do you hear ? 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj follow the noise so far as we have quarter ; 
▁ xxmaj let 's see how it will give off . 
▁ xxup soldiers . xxmaj content . ' tis strange . xxmaj exeunt