xxbos xxup act_4|sc_4 
▁ xxup scene xxup iv . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , 
▁ with others 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj eros ! mine armour , xxmaj eros ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj sleep a little . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj no , my chuck . xxmaj eros ! xxmaj come , mine armour , xxmaj eros ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup eros with armour 

▁ xxmaj come , good fellow , put mine iron on . 
▁ xxmaj if fortune be not ours to - day , it is 
▁ xxmaj because we brave her . xxmaj come . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll help too . 
▁ xxmaj what 's this for ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj ah , let be , let be ! xxmaj thou art 
▁ xxmaj the armourer of my heart . xxmaj false , false ; this , this . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj sooth , la , xxmaj i 'll help . xxmaj thus it must be . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj well , well ; 
▁ xxmaj we shall thrive now . xxmaj seest thou , my good fellow ? 
▁ xxmaj go put on thy defences . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj briefly , sir . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj is not this buckled well ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj rarely , rarely ! 
▁ xxmaj he that unbuckles this , till we do please 
▁ xxmaj to daff't for our repose , shall hear a storm . 
▁ xxmaj thou fumblest , xxmaj eros , and my queen 's a squire 
▁ xxmaj more tight at this than thou . xxmaj dispatch . o love , 
▁ xxmaj that thou couldst see my wars to - day , and knew'st 
▁ xxmaj the royal occupation ! xxmaj thou shouldst see 
▁ a workman in't . 

▁ xxmaj enter an armed xxup soldier 

▁ xxmaj good - morrow to thee . xxmaj welcome . 
▁ xxmaj thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge . 
▁ xxmaj to business that we love we rise betime , 
▁ xxmaj and go to't with delight . 
▁ xxup soldier . a thousand , sir , 
▁ xxmaj early though't be , have on their riveted trim , 
▁ xxmaj and at the port expect you . 
▁ [ shout . xxmaj flourish of trumpets within ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup captains and soldiers 

▁ xxup captain . xxmaj the morn is fair . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj general . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj general . 
▁ xxup antony . ' tis well blown , lads . 
▁ xxmaj this morning , like the spirit of a youth 
▁ xxmaj that means to be of note , begins betimes . 
▁ xxmaj so , so . xxmaj come , give me that . xxmaj this way . xxmaj well said . 
▁ xxmaj fare thee well , dame , whate'er becomes of me . 
▁ xxmaj this is a soldier 's kiss . xxmaj rebukeable , 
▁ xxmaj and worthy shameful check it were , to stand 
▁ xxmaj on more mechanic compliment ; xxmaj i 'll leave thee 
▁ xxmaj now like a man of steel . xxmaj you that will fight , 
▁ xxmaj follow me close ; xxmaj i 'll bring you to't . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup antony , xxup eros , xxup captains and soldiers 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj please you retire to your chamber ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj lead me . 
▁ xxmaj he goes forth gallantly . xxmaj that he and xxmaj caesar might 
▁ xxmaj determine this great war in single fight ! 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj antony- but now . xxmaj well , on . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_5 
▁ xxup scene xxup v. 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxup antony 's camp 

▁ xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup eros , a xxup soldier 
▁ meeting them 

▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj the gods make this a happy day to xxmaj antony ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj would thou and those thy scars had once prevail'd 
▁ xxmaj to make me fight at land ! 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj hadst thou done so , 
▁ xxmaj the kings that have revolted , and the soldier 
▁ xxmaj that has this morning left thee , would have still 
▁ xxmaj followed thy heels . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj who 's gone this morning ? 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj who ? 
▁ xxmaj one ever near thee . xxmaj call for xxmaj enobarbus , 
▁ xxmaj he shall not hear thee ; or from xxmaj caesar 's camp 
▁ xxmaj say ' i am none of thine . ' 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj what say'st thou ? 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj he is with xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj sir , his chests and treasure 
▁ xxmaj he has not with him . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj is he gone ? 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj most certain . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj go , xxmaj eros , send his treasure after ; do it ; 
▁ xxmaj detain no jot , i charge thee . xxmaj write to him- 
▁ i will subscribe- gentle adieus and greetings ; 
▁ xxmaj say that i wish he never find more cause 
▁ xxmaj to change a master . xxup o , my fortunes have 
▁ xxmaj corrupted honest men ! xxmaj dispatch . xxmaj enobarbus ! xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_6 
▁ xxup scene xxup vi . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxup caesar 's camp 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup agrippa , xxup caesar , xxmaj with xxup dolabella 
▁ and xxup enobarbus 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj go forth , xxmaj agrippa , and begin the fight . 
▁ xxmaj our will is xxmaj antony be took alive ; 
▁ xxmaj make it so known . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj caesar , i shall . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the time of universal peace is near . 
▁ xxmaj prove this a prosp'rous day , the three - nook'd world 
▁ xxmaj shall bear the olive freely . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj is come into the field . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj go charge xxmaj agrippa 
▁ xxmaj plant those that have revolted in the vant , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj antony may seem to spend his fury 
▁ xxmaj upon himself . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup enobarbus 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj alexas did revolt and went to xxmaj jewry on 
▁ xxmaj affairs of xxmaj antony ; there did dissuade 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj herod to incline himself to xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj and leave his master xxmaj antony . xxmaj for this pains 
▁ xxmaj casaer hath hang'd him . xxmaj canidius and the rest 
▁ xxmaj that fell away have entertainment , but 
▁ xxmaj no honourable trust . i have done ill , 
▁ xxmaj of which i do accuse myself so sorely 
▁ xxmaj that i will joy no more . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup soldier of xxup caesar 's 

▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj enobarbus , xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj hath after thee sent all thy treasure , with 
▁ xxmaj his bounty overplus . xxmaj the messenger 
▁ xxmaj came on my guard , and at thy tent is now 
▁ xxmaj unloading of his mules . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i give it you . 
▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj mock not , xxmaj enobarbus . 
▁ i tell you true . xxmaj best you saf'd the bringer 
▁ xxmaj out of the host . i must attend mine office , 
▁ xxmaj or would have done't myself . xxmaj your emperor 
▁ xxmaj continues still a xxmaj jove . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup enobarbus . i am alone the villain of the earth , 
▁ xxmaj and feel i am so most . o xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj thou mine of bounty , how wouldst thou have paid 
▁ xxmaj my better service , when my turpitude 
▁ xxmaj thou dost so crown with gold ! xxmaj this blows my heart . 
▁ xxmaj if swift thought break it not , a swifter mean 
▁ xxmaj shall outstrike thought ; but thought will do't , i feel . 
▁ i fight against thee ? xxmaj no ! i will go seek 
▁ xxmaj some ditch wherein to die ; the foul'st best fits 
▁ xxmaj my latter part of life . xxmaj exit 

 xxup act_4|sc_7 
▁ xxup scene xxup vii . 
▁ xxmaj field of battle between the camps 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj drums and trumpets . xxmaj enter xxup agrippa 
▁ and others 

▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj retire . xxmaj we have engag'd ourselves too far . 
▁ xxmaj caesar himself has work , and our oppression 
▁ xxmaj exceeds what we expected . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj alarums . xxmaj enter xxup antony , and xxup scarus wounded 

▁ xxup scarus . o my brave xxmaj emperor , this is fought indeed ! 
▁ xxmaj had we done so at first , we had droven them home 
▁ xxmaj with clouts about their heads . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj thou bleed'st apace . 
▁ xxup scarus . i had a wound here that was like a xxup t , 
▁ xxmaj but now ' tis made an xxup h. 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj they do retire . 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj we 'll beat'em into bench - holes . i have yet 
▁ xxmaj room for six scotches more . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup eros 

▁ xxup eros . xxmaj they are beaten , sir , and our advantage serves 
▁ xxmaj for a fair victory . 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj let us score their backs 
▁ xxmaj and snatch 'em up , as we take hares , behind . 
▁ ' tis sport to maul a runner . 
▁ xxup antony . i will reward thee 
▁ xxmaj once for thy sprightly comfort , and tenfold 
▁ xxmaj for thy good valour . xxmaj come thee on . 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj i 'll halt after . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_8 
▁ xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
▁ xxmaj under the walls of xxmaj alexandria 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup antony , again in a march ; xxup scarus 
▁ with others 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj we have beat him to his camp . xxmaj run one before 
▁ xxmaj and let the xxmaj queen know of our gests . xxmaj to - morrow , 
▁ xxmaj before the sun shall see 's , we 'll spill the blood 
▁ xxmaj that has to - day escap'd . i thank you all ; 
▁ xxmaj for doughty - handed are you , and have fought 
▁ xxmaj not as you serv'd the cause , but as't had been 
▁ xxmaj each man 's like mine ; you have shown all xxmaj hectors . 
▁ xxmaj enter the city , clip your wives , your friends , 
▁ xxmaj tell them your feats ; whilst they with joyful tears 
▁ xxmaj wash the congealment from your wounds and kiss 
▁ xxmaj the honour'd gashes whole . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , attended 

▁ [ to xxup scarus ] xxmaj give me thy hand- 
▁ xxmaj to this great fairy xxmaj i 'll commend thy acts , 
▁ xxmaj make her thanks bless thee . o thou day o ' th ' world , 
▁ xxmaj chain mine arm'd neck . xxmaj leap thou , attire and all , 
▁ xxmaj through proof of harness to my heart , and there 
▁ xxmaj ride on the pants triumphing . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj lord of lords ! 
▁ o infinite virtue , com'st thou smiling from 
▁ xxmaj the world 's great snare uncaught ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj mine nightingale , 
▁ xxmaj we have beat them to their beds . xxmaj what , girl ! though grey 
▁ xxmaj do something mingle with our younger brown , yet ha ' we 
▁ a brain that nourishes our nerves , and can 
▁ xxmaj get goal for goal of youth . xxmaj behold this man ; 
▁ xxmaj commend unto his lips thy favouring hand- 
▁ xxmaj kiss it , my warrior- he hath fought to - day 
▁ xxmaj as if a god in hate of mankind had 
▁ xxmaj destroyed in such a shape . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj i 'll give thee , friend , 
▁ xxmaj an armour all of gold ; it was a king 's . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj he has deserv'd it , were it carbuncled 
▁ xxmaj like holy xxmaj phoebus ' car . xxmaj give me thy hand . 
▁ xxmaj through xxmaj alexandria make a jolly march ; 
▁ xxmaj bear our hack'd targets like the men that owe them . 
▁ xxmaj had our great palace the capacity 
▁ xxmaj to camp this host , we all would sup together , 
▁ xxmaj and drink carouses to the next day 's fate , 
▁ xxmaj which promises royal peril . xxmaj trumpeters , 
▁ xxmaj with brazen din blast you the city 's ear ; 
▁ xxmaj make mingle with our rattling tabourines , 
▁ xxmaj that heaven and earth may strike their sounds together 
▁ xxmaj applauding our approach . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_9 
▁ xxup scene xxup ix . 
▁ xxup caesar 's camp 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup centurion and his company ; xxup enobarbus follows 

▁ xxup centurion . xxmaj if we be not reliev'd within this hour , 
▁ xxmaj we must return to th ' court of guard . xxmaj the night 
▁ xxmaj is shiny , and they say we shall embattle 
▁ xxmaj by th ' second hour i ' th ' morn . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj this last day was 
▁ a shrewd one to 's . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxup o , bear me witness , night- 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj what man is this ? 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj stand close and list him . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . xxmaj be witness to me , o thou blessed moon , 
▁ xxmaj when men revolted shall upon record 
▁ xxmaj bear hateful memory , poor xxmaj enobarbus did 
▁ xxmaj before thy face repent ! 
▁ xxup centurion . xxmaj enobarbus ? 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxmaj hark further . 
▁ xxup enobarbus . o sovereign mistress of true melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj the poisonous damp of night disponge upon me , 
▁ xxmaj that life , a very rebel to my will , 
▁ xxmaj may hang no longer on me . xxmaj throw my heart 
▁ xxmaj against the flint and hardness of my fault , 
▁ xxmaj which , being dried with grief , will break to powder , 
▁ xxmaj and finish all foul thoughts . o xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj nobler than my revolt is infamous , 
▁ xxmaj forgive me in thine own particular , 
▁ xxmaj but let the world rank me in register 
▁ a master - leaver and a fugitive ! 
▁ o xxmaj antony ! o xxmaj antony ! [ dies ] 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj let 's speak to him . 
▁ xxup centurion . xxmaj let 's hear him , for the things he speaks 
▁ xxmaj may concern xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj let 's do so . xxmaj but he sleeps . 
▁ xxup centurion . xxmaj swoons rather ; for so bad a prayer as his 
▁ xxmaj was never yet for sleep . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj go we to him . 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj awake , sir , awake ; speak to us . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj hear you , sir ? 
▁ xxup centurion . xxmaj the hand of death hath raught him . 
▁ [ drums afar off ] xxmaj hark ! the drums 
▁ xxmaj demurely wake the sleepers . xxmaj let us bear him 
▁ xxmaj to th ' court of guard ; he is of note . xxmaj our hour 
▁ xxmaj is fully out . 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj come on , then ; 
▁ xxmaj he may recover yet . xxmaj exeunt with the body 

 xxup act_4|sc_10 
▁ xxup scene xxup x. 
▁ xxmaj between the two camps 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup scarus , with their army 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj their preparation is to - day by sea ; 
▁ xxmaj we please them not by land . 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj for both , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . i would they 'd fight i ' th ' fire or i ' th ' air ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'd fight there too . xxmaj but this it is , our foot 
▁ xxmaj upon the hills adjoining to the city 
▁ xxmaj shall stay with us- xxmaj order for sea is given ; 
▁ xxmaj they have put forth the haven- 
▁ xxmaj where their appointment we may best discover 
▁ xxmaj and look on their endeavour . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_11 
▁ xxup scene xxup xi . 
▁ xxmaj between the camps 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar and his army 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj but being charg'd , we will be still by land , 
▁ xxmaj which , as i take't , we shall ; for his best force 
▁ xxmaj is forth to man his galleys . xxmaj to the vales , 
▁ xxmaj and hold our best advantage . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_12 
▁ xxup scene xxup xii . 
▁ a hill near xxmaj alexandria 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup scarus 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj yet they are not join'd . xxmaj where yond pine does stand 
▁ i shall discover all . xxmaj i 'll bring thee word 
▁ xxmaj straight how ' tis like to go . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup scarus . xxmaj swallows have built 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj cleopatra 's sails their nests . xxmaj the augurers 
▁ xxmaj say they know not , they can not tell ; look grimly , 
▁ xxmaj and dare not speak their knowledge . xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj is valiant and dejected ; and by starts 
▁ xxmaj his fretted fortunes give him hope and fear 
▁ xxmaj of what he has and has not . 
▁ [ alarum afar off , as at a sea - fight ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup antony 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj all is lost ! 
▁ xxmaj this foul xxmaj egyptian hath betrayed me . 
▁ xxmaj my fleet hath yielded to the foe , and yonder 
▁ xxmaj they cast their caps up and carouse together 
▁ xxmaj like friends long lost . xxmaj triple - turn'd whore ! ' tis thou 
▁ xxmaj hast sold me to this novice ; and my heart 
▁ xxmaj makes only wars on thee . xxmaj bid them all fly ; 
▁ xxmaj for when i am reveng'd upon my charm , 
▁ i have done all . xxmaj bid them all fly ; begone . xxmaj exit xxup scarus 
▁ o sun , thy uprise shall i see no more ! 
▁ xxmaj fortune and xxmaj antony part here ; even here 
▁ xxmaj do we shake hands . xxmaj all come to this ? xxmaj the hearts 
▁ xxmaj that spaniel'd me at heels , to whom i gave 
▁ xxmaj their wishes , do discandy , melt their sweets 
▁ xxmaj on blossoming xxmaj caesar ; and this pine is bark'd 
▁ xxmaj that overtopp'd them all . xxmaj betray'd i am . 
▁ o this false soul of xxmaj egypt ! this grave charm- 
▁ xxmaj whose eye beck'd forth my wars and call'd them home , 
▁ xxmaj whose bosom was my crownet , my chief end- 
▁ xxmaj like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose 
▁ xxmaj beguil'd me to the very heart of loss . 
▁ xxmaj what , xxmaj eros , xxmaj eros ! 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra 

▁ xxmaj ah , thou spell ! xxmaj avaunt ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj why is my lord enrag'd against his love ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj vanish , or i shall give thee thy deserving 
▁ xxmaj and blemish xxmaj caesar 's triumph . xxmaj let him take thee 
▁ xxmaj and hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians ; 
▁ xxmaj follow his chariot , like the greatest spot 
▁ xxmaj of all thy sex ; most monster - like , be shown 
▁ xxmaj for poor'st diminutives , for doits , and let 
▁ xxmaj patient xxmaj octavia plough thy visage up 
▁ xxmaj with her prepared nails . xxmaj exit xxup cleopatra 
▁ ' tis well th'art gone , 
▁ xxmaj if it be well to live ; but better ' twere 
▁ xxmaj thou fell'st into my fury , for one death 
▁ xxmaj might have prevented many . xxmaj eros , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj the shirt of xxmaj nessus is upon me ; teach me , 
▁ xxmaj alcides , thou mine ancestor , thy rage ; 
▁ xxmaj let me lodge xxmaj lichas on the horns o ' th ' moon , 
▁ xxmaj and with those hands that grasp'd the heaviest club 
▁ xxmaj subdue my worthiest self . xxmaj the witch shall die . 
▁ xxmaj to the young xxmaj roman boy she hath sold me , and i fall 
▁ xxmaj under this plot . xxmaj she dies for't . xxmaj eros , ho ! xxmaj exit 

 xxup act_4|sc_13 
▁ xxup scene x xxrep 3 i . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , and xxup mardian 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj help me , my women . xxup o , he is more mad 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj telamon for his shield ; the boar of xxmaj thessaly 
▁ xxmaj was never so emboss'd . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj to th'monument ! 
▁ xxmaj there lock yourself , and send him word you are dead . 
▁ xxmaj the soul and body rive not more in parting 
▁ xxmaj than greatness going off . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj to th ' monument ! 
▁ xxmaj mardian , go tell him i have slain myself ; 
▁ xxmaj say that the last i spoke was ' antony ' 
▁ xxmaj and word it , prithee , piteously . xxmaj hence , xxmaj mardian , 
▁ xxmaj and bring me how he takes my death . xxmaj to th ' monument ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_4|sc_14 
▁ xxup scene xxup xiv . 
▁ xxup cleopatra 's palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antony and xxup eros 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj eros , thou yet behold'st me ? 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj ay , noble lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj sometime we see a cloud that 's dragonish ; 
▁ a vapour sometime like a bear or lion , 
▁ a tower'd citadel , a pendent rock , 
▁ a forked mountain , or blue promontory 
▁ xxmaj with trees upon't that nod unto the world 
▁ xxmaj and mock our eyes with air . xxmaj thou hast seen these signs ; 
▁ xxmaj they are black vesper 's pageants . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj that which is now a horse , even with a thought 
▁ xxmaj the rack dislimns , and makes it indistinct , 
▁ xxmaj as water is in water . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj it does , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj my good knave xxmaj eros , now thy captain is 
▁ xxmaj even such a body . xxmaj here i am xxmaj antony ; 
▁ xxmaj yet can not hold this visible shape , my knave . 
▁ i made these wars for xxmaj egypt ; and the xxmaj queen- 
▁ xxmaj whose heart i thought i had , for she had mine , 
▁ xxmaj which , whilst it was mine , had annex'd unto't 
▁ a million moe , now lost- she , xxmaj eros , has 
▁ xxmaj pack'd cards with xxmaj caesar , and false - play'd my glory 
▁ xxmaj unto an enemy 's triumph . 
▁ xxmaj nay , weep not , gentle xxmaj eros ; there is left us 
▁ xxmaj ourselves to end ourselves . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mardian 

▁ xxup o , thy vile lady ! 
▁ xxmaj she has robb'd me of my sword . 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj no , xxmaj antony ; 
▁ xxmaj my mistress lov'd thee , and her fortunes mingled 
▁ xxmaj with thine entirely . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj hence , saucy eunuch ; peace ! 
▁ xxmaj she hath betray'd me , and shall die the death . 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj death of one person can be paid but once , 
▁ xxmaj and that she has discharg'd . xxmaj what thou wouldst do 
▁ xxmaj is done unto thy hand . xxmaj the last she spake 
▁ xxmaj was ' antony ! most noble xxmaj antony ! ' 
▁ xxmaj then in the midst a tearing groan did break 
▁ xxmaj the name of xxmaj antony ; it was divided 
▁ xxmaj between her heart and lips . xxmaj she rend'red life , 
▁ xxmaj thy name so buried in her . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj dead then ? 
▁ xxup mardian . xxmaj dead . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj unarm , xxmaj eros ; the long day 's task is done , 
▁ xxmaj and we must sleep . xxmaj that thou depart'st hence safe 
▁ xxmaj does pay thy labour richly . xxmaj go . xxmaj exit xxup mardian 
▁ xxmaj off , pluck off ! 
▁ xxmaj the sevenfold shield of xxmaj ajax can not keep 
▁ xxmaj the battery from my heart . xxup o , cleave , my sides ! 
▁ xxmaj heart , once be stronger than thy continent , 
▁ xxmaj crack thy frail case . xxmaj apace , xxmaj eros , apace.- 
▁ xxmaj no more a soldier . xxmaj bruised pieces , go ; 
▁ xxmaj you have been nobly borne.- xxmaj from me awhile . xxmaj exit xxup eros 
▁ i will o'ertake thee , xxmaj cleopatra , and 
▁ xxmaj weep for my pardon . xxmaj so it must be , for now 
▁ xxmaj all length is torture . xxmaj since the torch is out , 
▁ xxmaj lie down , and stray no farther . xxmaj now all labour 
▁ xxmaj mars what it does ; yea , very force entangles 
▁ xxmaj itself with strength . xxmaj seal then , and all is done . 
▁ xxmaj eros!- i come , my queen.- xxmaj eros!- xxmaj stay for me ; 
▁ xxmaj where souls do couch on flowers , we 'll hand in hand , 
▁ xxmaj and with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze . 
▁ xxmaj dido and her xxmaj aeneas shall want troops , 
▁ xxmaj and all the haunt be ours.- xxmaj come , xxmaj eros , xxmaj eros ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup eros 

▁ xxup eros . xxmaj what would my lord ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj since xxmaj cleopatra died , 
▁ i have liv'd in such dishonour that the gods 
▁ xxmaj detest my baseness . xxup i , that with my sword 
▁ xxmaj quarter'd the world , and o'er green xxmaj neptune 's back 
▁ xxmaj with ships made cities , condemn myself to lack 
▁ xxmaj the courage of a woman ; less noble mind 
▁ xxmaj than she which by her death our xxmaj caesar tells 
▁ ' i am conqueror of myself . ' xxmaj thou art sworn , xxmaj eros , 
▁ xxmaj that , when the exigent should come- which now 
▁ xxmaj is come indeed- when i should see behind me 
▁ xxmaj th ' inevitable prosecution of 
▁ xxmaj disgrace and horror , that , on my command , 
▁ xxmaj thou then wouldst kill me . xxmaj do't ; the time is come . 
▁ xxmaj thou strik'st not me ; ' tis xxmaj caesar thou defeat'st . 
▁ xxmaj put colour in thy cheek . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj the gods withhold me ! 
▁ xxmaj shall i do that which all the xxmaj parthian darts , 
▁ xxmaj though enemy , lost aim and could not ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj eros , 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou be window'd in great xxmaj rome and see 
▁ xxmaj thy master thus with pleach'd arms , bending down 
▁ xxmaj his corrigible neck , his face subdu'd 
▁ xxmaj to penetrative shame , whilst the wheel'd seat 
▁ xxmaj of fortunate xxmaj caesar , drawn before him , branded 
▁ xxmaj his baseness that ensued ? 
▁ xxup eros . i would not see't . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj come , then ; for with a wound i must be cur'd . 
▁ xxmaj draw that thy honest sword , which thou hast worn 
▁ xxmaj most useful for thy country . 
▁ xxup eros . xxup o , sir , pardon me ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj when i did make thee free , swor'st thou not then 
▁ xxmaj to do this when i bade thee ? xxmaj do it at once , 
▁ xxmaj or thy precedent services are all 
▁ xxmaj but accidents unpurpos'd . xxmaj draw , and come . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj turn from me then that noble countenance , 
▁ xxmaj wherein the worship of the whole world lies . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj lo thee ! [ turning from him ] 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj my sword is drawn . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj then let it do at once 
▁ xxmaj the thing why thou hast drawn it . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj my dear master , 
▁ xxmaj my captain and my emperor , let me say , 
▁ xxmaj before i strike this bloody stroke , farewell . 
▁ xxup antony . ' tis said , man ; and farewell . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj farewell , great chief . xxmaj shall i strike now ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj now , xxmaj eros . 
▁ xxup eros . xxmaj why , there then ! xxmaj thus do i escape the sorrow 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj antony 's death . [ kills himself 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj thrice nobler than myself ! 
▁ xxmaj thou teachest me , o valiant xxmaj eros , what 
▁ i should , and thou couldst not . xxmaj my queen and xxmaj eros 
▁ xxmaj have , by their brave instruction , got upon me 
▁ a nobleness in record . xxmaj but i will be 
▁ a bridegroom in my death , and run into't 
▁ xxmaj as to a lover 's bed . xxmaj come , then ; and , xxmaj eros , 
▁ xxmaj thy master dies thy scholar . xxmaj to do thus 
▁ [ falling on his sword ] 
▁ i learn'd of thee . xxmaj how ? not dead ? not dead?- 
▁ xxmaj the guard , ho ! xxup o , dispatch me ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dercetas and a guard 

▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj what 's the noise ? 
▁ xxup antony . i have done my work ill , friends . xxup o , make an end 
▁ xxmaj of what i have begun . 
▁ xxup second xxup guard . xxmaj the star is fall'n . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj and time is at his period . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj alas , and woe ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj let him that loves me , strike me dead . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxup second xxup guard . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup third xxup guard . xxmaj nor any one . xxmaj exeunt guard 
▁ xxup dercetas . xxmaj thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly . 
▁ xxmaj this sword but shown to xxmaj caesar , with this tidings , 
▁ xxmaj shall enter me with him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup diomedes 

▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj where 's xxmaj antony ? 
▁ xxup dercetas . xxmaj there , xxmaj diomed , there . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj lives he ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou not answer , man ? xxmaj exit xxup dercetas 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj art thou there , xxmaj diomed ? xxmaj draw thy sword and give me 
▁ xxmaj sufficing strokes for death . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj most absolute lord , 
▁ xxmaj my mistress xxmaj cleopatra sent me to thee . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj when did she send thee ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj now , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj where is she ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj lock'd in her monument . xxmaj she had a prophesying fear 
▁ xxmaj of what hath come to pass ; for when she saw- 
▁ xxmaj which never shall be found- you did suspect 
▁ xxmaj she had dispos'd with xxmaj caesar , and that your rage 
▁ xxmaj would not be purg'd , she sent you word she was dead ; 
▁ xxmaj but fearing since how it might work , hath sent 
▁ xxmaj me to proclaim the truth ; and i am come , 
▁ i dread , too late . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj too late , good xxmaj diomed . xxmaj call my guard , i prithee . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj what , ho ! the xxmaj emperor 's guard ! xxmaj the guard , what ho ! 
▁ xxmaj come , your lord calls ! 

▁ xxmaj enter four or five of the guard of xxup antony 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj bear me , good friends , where xxmaj cleopatra bides ; 
▁ ' tis the last service that i shall command you . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj woe , woe are we , sir , you may not live to wear 
▁ xxmaj all your true followers out . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj most heavy day ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj nay , good my fellows , do not please sharp fate 
▁ xxmaj to grace it with your sorrows . xxmaj bid that welcome 
▁ xxmaj which comes to punish us , and we punish it , 
▁ xxmaj seeming to bear it lightly . xxmaj take me up . 
▁ i have led you oft ; carry me now , good friends , 
▁ xxmaj and have my thanks for all . xxmaj exeunt , hearing xxup antony 
 xxup act_4|sc_15 
▁ xxup scene xxup xv . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . a monument 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra and her maids aloft , with xxup charmian 
▁ and xxup iras 

▁ xxup cleopatra . o xxmaj charmian , i will never go from hence ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj be comforted , dear madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj no , i will not . 
▁ xxmaj all strange and terrible events are welcome , 
▁ xxmaj but comforts we despise ; our size of sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj proportion'd to our cause , must be as great 
▁ xxmaj as that which makes it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup diomedes , below 

▁ xxmaj how now ! xxmaj is he dead ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj his death 's upon him , but not dead . 
▁ xxmaj look out o ' th ' other side your monument ; 
▁ xxmaj his guard have brought him thither . 

▁ xxmaj enter , below , xxup antony , borne by the guard 

▁ xxup cleopatra . o sun , 
▁ xxmaj burn the great sphere thou mov'st in ! xxmaj darkling stand 
▁ xxmaj the varying shore o ' th ' world . o xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj antony , xxmaj antony ! xxmaj help , xxmaj charmian ; help , xxmaj iras , help ; 
▁ xxmaj help , friends below ! xxmaj let 's draw him hither . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj caesar 's valour hath o'erthrown xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj antony 's hath triumph'd on itself . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj so it should be , that none but xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj should conquer xxmaj antony ; but woe ' tis so ! 
▁ xxup antony . i am dying , xxmaj egypt , dying ; only 
▁ i here importune death awhile , until 
▁ xxmaj of many thousand kisses the poor last 
▁ i lay upon thy lips . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i dare not , dear . 
▁ xxmaj dear my lord , pardon ! i dare not , 
▁ xxmaj lest i be taken . xxmaj not th ' imperious show 
▁ xxmaj of the full - fortun'd xxmaj caesar ever shall 
▁ xxmaj be brooch'd with me . xxmaj if knife , drugs , serpents , have 
▁ xxmaj edge , sting , or operation , i am safe . 
▁ xxmaj your wife xxmaj octavia , with her modest eyes 
▁ xxmaj and still conclusion , shall acquire no honour 
▁ xxmaj demuring upon me . xxmaj but come , come , xxmaj antony- 
▁ xxmaj help me , my women- we must draw thee up ; 
▁ xxmaj assist , good friends . 
▁ xxup antony . xxup o , quick , or i am gone . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj here 's sport indeed ! xxmaj how heavy weighs my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj our strength is all gone into heaviness ; 
▁ xxmaj that makes the weight . xxmaj had i great xxmaj juno 's power , 
▁ xxmaj the strong - wing'd xxmaj mercury should fetch thee up , 
▁ xxmaj and set thee by xxmaj jove 's side . xxmaj yet come a little . 
▁ xxmaj wishers were ever fools . o come , come , 
▁ [ they heave xxup antony aloft to xxup cleopatra ] 
▁ xxmaj and welcome , welcome ! xxmaj die where thou hast liv'd . 
▁ xxmaj quicken with kissing . xxmaj had my lips that power , 
▁ xxmaj thus would i wear them out . 
▁ xxup all . a heavy sight ! 
▁ xxup antony . i am dying , xxmaj egypt , dying . 
▁ xxmaj give me some wine , and let me speak a little . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj no , let me speak ; and let me rail so high 
▁ xxmaj that the false huswife xxmaj fortune break her wheel , 
▁ xxmaj provok'd by my offence . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj one word , sweet queen : 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj caesar seek your honour , with your safety . xxup o ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj they do not go together . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj gentle , hear me : 
▁ xxmaj none about xxmaj caesar trust but xxmaj proculeius . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj my resolution and my hands xxmaj i 'll trust ; 
▁ xxmaj none about xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj the miserable change now at my end 
▁ xxmaj lament nor sorrow at ; but please your thoughts 
▁ xxmaj in feeding them with those my former fortunes 
▁ xxmaj wherein i liv'd the greatest prince o ' th ' world , 
▁ xxmaj the noblest ; and do now not basely die , 
▁ xxmaj not cowardly put off my helmet to 
▁ xxmaj my countryman- a xxmaj roman by a xxmaj roman 
▁ xxmaj valiantly vanquish'd . xxmaj now my spirit is going 
▁ i can no more . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj noblest of men , woo't die ? 
▁ xxmaj hast thou no care of me ? xxmaj shall i abide 
▁ xxmaj in this dull world , which in thy absence is 
▁ xxmaj no better than a sty ? xxup o , see , my women , [ antony dies ] 
▁ xxmaj the crown o ' th ' earth doth melt . xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxup o , wither'd is the garland of the war , 
▁ xxmaj the soldier 's pole is fall'n ! xxmaj young boys and girls 
▁ xxmaj are level now with men . xxmaj the odds is gone , 
▁ xxmaj and there is nothing left remarkable 
▁ xxmaj beneath the visiting moon . [ swoons ] 
▁ xxup charmian . xxup o , quietness , lady ! 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj she 's dead too , our sovereign . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj lady ! 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj madam ! 
▁ xxup charmian . o madam , madam , madam ! 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj royal xxmaj egypt , xxmaj empress ! 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj peace , peace , xxmaj iras ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj no more but e'en a woman , and commanded 
▁ xxmaj by such poor passion as the maid that milks 
▁ xxmaj and does the meanest chares . xxmaj it were for me 
▁ xxmaj to throw my sceptre at the injurious gods ; 
▁ xxmaj to tell them that this world did equal theirs 
▁ xxmaj till they had stol'n our jewel . xxmaj all 's but nought ; 
▁ xxmaj patience is sottish , and impatience does 
▁ xxmaj become a dog that 's mad . xxmaj then is it sin 
▁ xxmaj to rush into the secret house of death 
▁ xxmaj ere death dare come to us ? xxmaj how do you , women ? 
▁ xxmaj what , what ! good cheer ! xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj charmian ! 
▁ xxmaj my noble girls ! xxmaj ah , women , women , look , 
▁ xxmaj our lamp is spent , it 's out ! xxmaj good sirs , take heart . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll bury him ; and then , what 's brave , what 's noble , 
▁ xxmaj let 's do it after the high xxmaj roman fashion , 
▁ xxmaj and make death proud to take us . xxmaj come , away ; 
▁ xxmaj this case of that huge spirit now is cold . 
▁ xxmaj ah , women , women ! xxmaj come ; we have no friend 
▁ xxmaj but resolution and the briefest end . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt ; those above hearing off xxup antony 's body 

 xxup act_5|sc_1 
▁ xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxup caesar 's camp 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar , xxup agrippa , xxup dolabella , xxup maecenas , xxup gallus , 
▁ xxup proculeius , and others , his xxmaj council of xxmaj war 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj go to him , xxmaj dolabella , bid him yield ; 
▁ xxmaj being so frustrate , tell him he mocks 
▁ xxmaj the pauses that he makes . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj caesar , i shall . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dercetas xxmaj with the sword of xxup antony 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj wherefore is that ? xxmaj and what art thou that dar'st 
▁ xxmaj appear thus to us ? 
▁ xxup dercetas . i am call'd xxmaj dercetas ; 
▁ xxmaj mark xxmaj antony i serv'd , who best was worthy 
▁ xxmaj best to be serv'd . xxmaj whilst he stood up and spoke , 
▁ xxmaj he was my master , and i wore my life 
▁ xxmaj to spend upon his haters . xxmaj if thou please 
▁ xxmaj to take me to thee , as i was to him 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be to xxmaj caesar ; if thou pleasest not , 
▁ i yield thee up my life . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what is't thou say'st ? 
▁ xxup dercetas . i say , o xxmaj caesar , xxmaj antony is dead . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the breaking of so great a thing should make 
▁ a greater crack . xxmaj the round world 
▁ xxmaj should have shook lions into civil streets , 
▁ xxmaj and citizens to their dens . xxmaj the death of xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj is not a single doom ; in the name lay 
▁ a moiety of the world . 
▁ xxup dercetas . xxmaj he is dead , xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj not by a public minister of justice , 
▁ xxmaj nor by a hired knife ; but that self hand 
▁ xxmaj which writ his honour in the acts it did 
▁ xxmaj hath , with the courage which the heart did lend it , 
▁ xxmaj splitted the heart . xxmaj this is his sword ; 
▁ i robb'd his wound of it ; behold it stain'd 
▁ xxmaj with his most noble blood . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj look you sad , friends ? 
▁ xxmaj the gods rebuke me , but it is tidings 
▁ xxmaj to wash the eyes of kings . 
▁ xxup agrippa . xxmaj and strange it is 
▁ xxmaj that nature must compel us to lament 
▁ xxmaj our most persisted deeds . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj his taints and honours 
▁ xxmaj wag'd equal with him . 
▁ xxup agrippa . a rarer spirit never 
▁ xxmaj did steer humanity . xxmaj but you gods will give us 
▁ xxmaj some faults to make us men . xxmaj caesar is touch'd . 
▁ xxup maecenas . xxmaj when such a spacious mirror 's set before him , 
▁ xxmaj he needs must see himself . 
▁ xxup caesar . o xxmaj antony , 
▁ i have follow'd thee to this ! xxmaj but we do lance 
▁ xxmaj diseases in our bodies . i must perforce 
▁ xxmaj have shown to thee such a declining day 
▁ xxmaj or look on thine ; we could not stall together 
▁ xxmaj in the whole world . xxmaj but yet let me lament , 
▁ xxmaj with tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts , 
▁ xxmaj that thou , my brother , my competitor 
▁ xxmaj in top of all design , my mate in empire , 
▁ xxmaj friend and companion in the front of war , 
▁ xxmaj the arm of mine own body , and the heart 
▁ xxmaj where mine his thoughts did kindle- that our stars , 
▁ xxmaj unreconciliable , should divide 
▁ xxmaj our equalness to this . xxmaj hear me , good friends- 

▁ xxmaj enter an xxup egyptian 

▁ xxmaj but i will tell you at some meeter season . 
▁ xxmaj the business of this man looks out of him ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll hear him what he says . xxmaj whence are you ? 
▁ xxup egyptian . a poor xxmaj egyptian , yet the xxmaj queen , my mistress , 
▁ xxmaj confin'd in all she has , her monument , 
▁ xxmaj of thy intents desires instruction , 
▁ xxmaj that she preparedly may frame herself 
▁ xxmaj to th ' way she 's forc'd to . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj bid her have good heart . 
▁ xxmaj she soon shall know of us , by some of ours , 
▁ xxmaj how honourable and how kindly we 
▁ xxmaj determine for her ; for xxmaj caesar can not learn 
▁ xxmaj to be ungentle . 
▁ xxup egyptian . xxmaj so the gods preserve thee ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj proculeius . xxmaj go and say 
▁ xxmaj we purpose her no shame . xxmaj give her what comforts 
▁ xxmaj the quality of her passion shall require , 
▁ xxmaj lest , in her greatness , by some mortal stroke 
▁ xxmaj she do defeat us ; for her life in xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj would be eternal in our triumph . xxmaj go , 
▁ xxmaj and with your speediest bring us what she says , 
▁ xxmaj and how you find her . 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj caesar , i shall . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj gallus , go you along . xxmaj exit xxup gallus 
▁ xxmaj where 's xxmaj dolabella , to second xxmaj proculeius ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj dolabella ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj let him alone , for i remember now 
▁ xxmaj how he 's employ'd ; he shall in time be ready . 
▁ xxmaj go with me to my tent , where you shall see 
▁ xxmaj how hardly i was drawn into this war , 
▁ xxmaj how calm and gentle i proceeded still 
▁ xxmaj in all my writings . xxmaj go with me , and see 
▁ xxmaj what i can show in this . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup act_5|sc_2 
▁ xxup scene xxup ii . 
▁ xxmaj alexandria . xxmaj the monument 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cleopatra , xxup charmian , xxup iras , and xxup mardian 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj my desolation does begin to make 
▁ a better life . ' tis paltry to be xxmaj caesar : 
▁ xxmaj not being xxmaj fortune , he 's but xxmaj fortune 's knave , 
▁ a minister of her will ; and it is great 
▁ xxmaj to do that thing that ends all other deeds , 
▁ xxmaj which shackles accidents and bolts up change , 
▁ xxmaj which sleeps , and never palates more the dug , 
▁ xxmaj the beggar 's nurse and xxmaj caesar 's . 

▁ xxmaj enter , to the gates of the monument , xxup proculeius , xxup gallus , 
▁ and soldiers 

▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj caesar sends greetings to the xxmaj queen of xxmaj egypt , 
▁ xxmaj and bids thee study on what fair demands 
▁ xxmaj thou mean'st to have him grant thee . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj my name is xxmaj proculeius . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj did tell me of you , bade me trust you ; but 
▁ i do not greatly care to be deceiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj that have no use for trusting . xxmaj if your master 
▁ xxmaj would have a queen his beggar , you must tell him 
▁ xxmaj that majesty , to keep decorum , must 
▁ xxmaj no less beg than a kingdom . xxmaj if he please 
▁ xxmaj to give me conquer'd xxmaj egypt for my son , 
▁ xxmaj he gives me so much of mine own as i 
▁ xxmaj will kneel to him with thanks . 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj be of good cheer ; 
▁ xxmaj y'are fall'n into a princely hand ; fear nothing . 
▁ xxmaj make your full reference freely to my lord , 
▁ xxmaj who is so full of grace that it flows over 
▁ xxmaj on all that need . xxmaj let me report to him 
▁ xxmaj your sweet dependency , and you shall find 
▁ a conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness 
▁ xxmaj where he for grace is kneel'd to . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj pray you tell him 
▁ i am his fortune 's vassal and i send him 
▁ xxmaj the greatness he has got . i hourly learn 
▁ a doctrine of obedience , and would gladly 
▁ xxmaj look him i ' th ' face . 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj this xxmaj i 'll report , dear lady . 
▁ xxmaj have comfort , for i know your plight is pitied 
▁ xxmaj of him that caus'd it . 
▁ xxup gallus . xxmaj you see how easily she may be surpris'd . 

▁ xxmaj here xxup proculeius and two of the guard ascend the 
▁ monument by a ladder placed against a window , 
▁ and come behind xxup cleopatra . xxmaj some of the guard 
▁ unbar and open the gates 

▁ xxmaj guard her till xxmaj caesar come . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj royal xxmaj queen ! 
▁ xxup charmian . o xxmaj cleopatra ! thou art taken , xxmaj queen ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj quick , quick , good hands . [ drawing a dagger ] 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj hold , worthy lady , hold , [ disarms her ] 
▁ xxmaj do not yourself such wrong , who are in this 
▁ xxmaj reliev'd , but not betray'd . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what , of death too , 
▁ xxmaj that rids our dogs of languish ? 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj cleopatra , 
▁ xxmaj do not abuse my master 's bounty by 
▁ xxmaj th ' undoing of yourself . xxmaj let the world see 
▁ xxmaj his nobleness well acted , which your death 
▁ xxmaj will never let come forth . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj where art thou , death ? 
▁ xxmaj come hither , come ! xxmaj come , come , and take a queen 
▁ xxmaj worth many babes and beggars ! 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxup o , temperance , lady ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj sir , i will eat no meat ; xxmaj i 'll not drink , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj if idle talk will once be necessary , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not sleep neither . xxmaj this mortal house xxmaj i 'll ruin , 
▁ xxmaj do xxmaj caesar what he can . xxmaj know , sir , that i 
▁ xxmaj will not wait pinion'd at your master 's court , 
▁ xxmaj nor once be chastis'd with the sober eye 
▁ xxmaj of dull xxmaj octavia . xxmaj shall they hoist me up , 
▁ xxmaj and show me to the shouting varletry 
▁ xxmaj of censuring xxmaj rome ? xxmaj rather a ditch in xxmaj egypt 
▁ xxmaj be gentle grave unto me ! xxmaj rather on xxmaj nilus ' mud 
▁ xxmaj lay me stark - nak'd , and let the water - flies 
▁ xxmaj blow me into abhorring ! xxmaj rather make 
▁ xxmaj my country 's high pyramides my gibbet , 
▁ xxmaj and hang me up in chains ! 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj you do extend 
▁ xxmaj these thoughts of horror further than you shall 
▁ xxmaj find cause in xxmaj caesar . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dolabella 

▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj proculeius , 
▁ xxmaj what thou hast done thy master xxmaj caesar knows , 
▁ xxmaj and he hath sent for thee . xxmaj for the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll take her to my guard . 
▁ xxup proculeius . xxmaj so , xxmaj dolabella , 
▁ xxmaj it shall content me best . xxmaj be gentle to her . 
▁ [ to xxup cleopatra ] xxmaj to xxmaj caesar i will speak what you shall please , 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll employ me to him . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj say i would die . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup proculeius and soldiers 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj most noble xxmaj empress , you have heard of me ? 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i can not tell . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj assuredly you know me . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj no matter , sir , what i have heard or known . 
▁ xxmaj you laugh when boys or women tell their dreams ; 
▁ xxmaj is't not your trick ? 
▁ xxup dolabella . i understand not , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i dreamt there was an xxmaj emperor xxmaj antony- 
▁ xxup o , such another sleep , that i might see 
▁ xxmaj but such another man ! 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj if it might please ye- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj his face was as the heav'ns , and therein stuck 
▁ a sun and moon , which kept their course and lighted 
▁ xxmaj the little xxup o , the earth . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj most sovereign creature- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj his legs bestrid the ocean ; his rear'd arm 
▁ xxmaj crested the world . xxmaj his voice was propertied 
▁ xxmaj as all the tuned spheres , and that to friends ; 
▁ xxmaj but when he meant to quail and shake the orb , 
▁ xxmaj he was as rattling thunder . xxmaj for his bounty , 
▁ xxmaj there was no winter in't ; an autumn ' twas 
▁ xxmaj that grew the more by reaping . xxmaj his delights 
▁ xxmaj were dolphin - like : they show'd his back above 
▁ xxmaj the element they liv'd in . xxmaj in his livery 
▁ xxmaj walk'd crowns and crownets ; realms and islands were 
▁ xxmaj as plates dropp'd from his pocket . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj cleopatra- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj think you there was or might be such a man 
▁ xxmaj as this i dreamt of ? 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj gentle madam , no . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj you lie , up to the hearing of the gods . 
▁ xxmaj but if there be nor ever were one such , 
▁ xxmaj it 's past the size of drearning . xxmaj nature wants stuff 
▁ xxmaj to vie strange forms with fancy ; yet t ' imagine 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj antony were nature 's piece ' gainst fancy , 
▁ xxmaj condemning shadows quite . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj hear me , good madam . 
▁ xxmaj your loss is , as yourself , great ; and you bear it 
▁ xxmaj as answering to the weight . xxmaj would i might never 
▁ xxmaj o'ertake pursu'd success , but i do feel , 
▁ xxmaj by the rebound of yours , a grief that smites 
▁ xxmaj my very heart at root . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . i thank you , sir . 
▁ xxmaj know you what xxmaj caesar means to do with me ? 
▁ xxup dolabella . i am loath to tell you what i would you knew . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj nay , pray you , sir . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj though he be honourable- 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj he 'll lead me , then , in triumph ? 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj madam , he will . i know't . [ flourish ] 
▁ [ within : ' make way there - caesar ! ' ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caesar ; xxup gallus , xxup proculeius , xxup maecenas , xxup seleucus , 
▁ and others of his train 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj which is the xxmaj queen of xxmaj egypt ? 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj it is the xxmaj emperor , madam . [ cleopatpa kneels ] 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj arise , you shall not kneel . 
▁ i pray you , rise ; rise , xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj sir , the gods 
▁ xxmaj will have it thus ; my master and my lord 
▁ i must obey . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj take to you no hard thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj the record of what injuries you did us , 
▁ xxmaj though written in our flesh , we shall remember 
▁ xxmaj as things but done by chance . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj sole sir o ' th ' world , 
▁ i can not project mine own cause so well 
▁ xxmaj to make it clear , but do confess i have 
▁ xxmaj been laden with like frailties which before