xxbos xxmaj have often sham'd our sex . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj cleopatra , know 
▁ xxmaj we will extenuate rather than enforce . 
▁ xxmaj if you apply yourself to our intents- 
▁ xxmaj which towards you are most gentle- you shall find 
▁ a benefit in this change ; but if you seek 
▁ xxmaj to lay on me a cruelty by taking 
▁ xxmaj antony 's course , you shall bereave yourself 
▁ xxmaj of my good purposes , and put your children 
▁ xxmaj to that destruction which xxmaj i 'll guard them from , 
▁ xxmaj if thereon you rely . xxmaj i 'll take my leave . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj and may , through all the world . ' tis yours , and we , 
▁ xxmaj your scutcheons and your signs of conquest , shall 
▁ xxmaj hang in what place you please . xxmaj here , my good lord . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj you shall advise me in all for xxmaj cleopatra . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj this is the brief of money , plate , and jewels , 
▁ i am possess'd of . ' tis exactly valued , 
▁ xxmaj not petty things admitted . xxmaj where 's xxmaj seleucus ? 
▁ xxup seleucus . xxmaj here , madam . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj this is my treasurer ; let him speak , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj upon his peril , that i have reserv'd 
▁ xxmaj to myself nothing . xxmaj speak the truth , xxmaj seleucus . 
▁ xxup seleucus . xxmaj madam , 
▁ i had rather seal my lips than to my peril 
▁ xxmaj speak that which is not . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj what have i kept back ? 
▁ xxup seleucus . xxmaj enough to purchase what you have made known . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj nay , blush not , xxmaj cleopatra ; i approve 
▁ xxmaj your wisdom in the deed . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj see , xxmaj caesar ! xxup o , behold , 
▁ xxmaj how pomp is followed ! xxmaj mine will now be yours ; 
▁ xxmaj and , should we shift estates , yours would be mine . 
▁ xxmaj the ingratitude of this xxmaj seleucus does 
▁ xxmaj even make me wild . o slave , of no more trust 
▁ xxmaj than love that 's hir'd ! xxmaj what , goest thou back ? xxmaj thou shalt 
▁ xxmaj go back , i warrant thee ; but xxmaj i 'll catch thine eyes 
▁ xxmaj though they had wings . xxmaj slave , soulless villain , dog ! 
▁ o rarely base ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj good xxmaj queen , let us entreat you . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . o xxmaj caesar , what a wounding shame is this , 
▁ xxmaj that thou vouchsafing here to visit me , 
▁ xxmaj doing the honour of thy lordliness 
▁ xxmaj to one so meek , that mine own servant should 
▁ xxmaj parcel the sum of my disgraces by 
▁ xxmaj addition of his envy ! xxmaj say , good xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj that i some lady trifles have reserv'd , 
▁ xxmaj immoment toys , things of such dignity 
▁ xxmaj as we greet modern friends withal ; and say 
▁ xxmaj some nobler token i have kept apart 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj livia and xxmaj octavia , to induce 
▁ xxmaj their mediation- must i be unfolded 
▁ xxmaj with one that i have bred ? xxmaj the gods ! xxmaj it smites me 
▁ xxmaj beneath the fall i have . [ to xxup seleucus ] xxmaj prithee go hence ; 
▁ xxmaj or i shall show the cinders of my spirits 
▁ xxmaj through th ' ashes of my chance . xxmaj wert thou a man , 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst have mercy on me . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj forbear , xxmaj seleucus . xxmaj exit xxup seleucus 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj be it known that we , the greatest , are misthought 
▁ xxmaj for things that others do ; and when we fall 
▁ xxmaj we answer others ' merits in our name , 
▁ xxmaj are therefore to be pitied . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj cleopatra , 
▁ xxmaj not what you have reserv'd , nor what acknowledg'd , 
▁ xxmaj put we i ' th ' roll of conquest . xxmaj still be't yours , 
▁ xxmaj bestow it at your pleasure ; and believe 
▁ xxmaj caesar 's no merchant , to make prize with you 
▁ xxmaj of things that merchants sold . xxmaj therefore be cheer'd ; 
▁ xxmaj make not your thoughts your prisons . xxmaj no , dear xxmaj queen ; 
▁ xxmaj for we intend so to dispose you as 
▁ xxmaj yourself shall give us counsel . xxmaj feed and sleep . 
▁ xxmaj our care and pity is so much upon you 
▁ xxmaj that we remain your friend ; and so , adieu . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj my master and my lord ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj not so . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt xxup caesar and his train 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj he words me , girls , he words me , that i should not 
▁ xxmaj be noble to myself . xxmaj but hark thee , xxmaj charmian ! 
▁ [ whispers xxup charmian ] 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj finish , good lady ; the bright day is done , 
▁ xxmaj and we are for the dark . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj hie thee again . 
▁ i have spoke already , and it is provided ; 
▁ xxmaj go put it to the haste . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj madam , i will . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup dolabella 

▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj where 's the xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj behold , sir . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj dolabella ! 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj madam , as thereto sworn by your command , 
▁ xxmaj which my love makes religion to obey , 
▁ i tell you this : xxmaj caesar through xxmaj syria 
▁ xxmaj intends his journey , and within three days 
▁ xxmaj you with your children will he send before . 
▁ xxmaj make your best use of this ; i have perform'd 
▁ xxmaj your pleasure and my promise . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj dolabella , 
▁ i shall remain your debtor . 
▁ xxup dolabella . i your servant . 
▁ xxmaj adieu , good xxmaj queen ; i must attend on xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj farewell , and thanks . xxmaj exit xxup dolabella 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj iras , what think'st thou ? 
▁ xxmaj thou an xxmaj egyptian puppet shall be shown 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj rome as well as xxup i. xxmaj mechanic slaves , 
▁ xxmaj with greasy aprons , rules , and hammers , shall 
▁ xxmaj uplift us to the view ; in their thick breaths , 
▁ xxmaj rank of gross diet , shall we be enclouded , 
▁ xxmaj and forc'd to drink their vapour . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj the gods forbid ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj nay , ' tis most certain , xxmaj iras . xxmaj saucy lictors 
▁ xxmaj will catch at us like strumpets , and scald rhymers 
▁ xxmaj ballad us out o ' tune ; the quick comedians 
▁ xxmaj extemporally will stage us , and present 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj alexandrian revels ; xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj shall be brought drunken forth , and i shall see 
▁ xxmaj some squeaking xxmaj cleopatra boy my greatness 
▁ xxup i ' th ' posture of a whore . 
▁ xxup iras . o the good gods ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj nay , that 's certain . 
▁ xxup iras . xxmaj i 'll never see't , for i am sure mine nails 
▁ xxmaj are stronger than mine eyes . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj why , that 's the way 
▁ xxmaj to fool their preparation and to conquer 
▁ xxmaj their most absurd intents . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charmian 

▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj charmian ! 
▁ xxmaj show me , my women , like a queen . xxmaj go fetch 
▁ xxmaj my best attires . i am again for xxmaj cydnus , 
▁ xxmaj to meet xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . xxmaj sirrah , xxmaj iras , go . 
▁ xxmaj now , noble xxmaj charmian , we 'll dispatch indeed ; 
▁ xxmaj and when thou hast done this chare , xxmaj i 'll give thee leave 
▁ xxmaj to play till doomsday . xxmaj bring our crown and all . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup iras . a noise within 
▁ xxmaj wherefore 's this noise ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup guardsman 

▁ xxup guardsman . xxmaj here is a rural fellow 
▁ xxmaj that will not be denied your xxmaj highness ' presence . 
▁ xxmaj he brings you figs . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj let him come in . xxmaj exit xxup guardsman 
▁ xxmaj what poor an instrument 
▁ xxmaj may do a noble deed ! xxmaj he brings me liberty . 
▁ xxmaj my resolution 's plac'd , and i have nothing 
▁ xxmaj of woman in me . xxmaj now from head to foot 
▁ i am marble - constant ; now the fleeting moon 
▁ xxmaj no planet is of mine . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup guardsman and xxup clown , with a basket 

▁ xxup guardsman . xxmaj this is the man . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj avoid , and leave him . xxmaj exit xxup guardsman 
▁ xxmaj hast thou the pretty worm of xxmaj nilus there 
▁ xxmaj that kills and pains not ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , i have him . xxmaj but i would not be the party that should 
▁ desire you to touch him , for his biting is immortal ; those that 
▁ do die of it do seldom or never recover . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj remember'st thou any that have died on't ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj very many , men and women too . i heard of one of them no 
▁ longer than yesterday : a very honest woman , but something given 
▁ to lie , as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty ; how 
▁ she died of the biting of it , what pain she felt- truly she makes 
▁ a very good report o ' th ' worm . xxmaj but he that will believe all that 
▁ they say shall never be saved by half that they do . xxmaj but this is 
▁ most falliable , the worm 's an odd worm . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj get thee hence ; farewell . 
▁ xxup clown . i wish you all joy of the worm . 
▁ [ sets down the basket ] 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you must think this , look you , that the worm will do his 
▁ kind . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj ay , ay ; farewell . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj look you , the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping 
▁ of wise people ; for indeed there is no goodness in the worm . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj take thou no care ; it shall be heeded . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj very good . xxmaj give it nothing , i pray you , for it is not worth 
▁ the feeding . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj will it eat me ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you must not think i am so simple but i know the devil 
▁ himself will not eat a woman . i know that a woman is a dish for 
▁ the gods , if the devil dress her not . xxmaj but truly , these same 
▁ whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women , for in 
▁ every ten that they make the devils mar five . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj well , get thee gone ; farewell . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj yes , forsooth . i wish you joy o ' th ' worm . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup iras , with a robe , crown , & c. 

▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj give me my robe , put on my crown ; i have 
▁ xxmaj immortal longings in me . xxmaj now no more 
▁ xxmaj the juice of xxmaj egypt 's grape shall moist this lip . 
▁ xxmaj yare , yare , good xxmaj iras ; quick . xxmaj methinks i hear 
▁ xxmaj antony call . i see him rouse himself 
▁ xxmaj to praise my noble act . i hear him mock 
▁ xxmaj the luck of xxmaj caesar , which the gods give men 
▁ xxmaj to excuse their after wrath . xxmaj husband , i come . 
▁ xxmaj now to that name my courage prove my title ! 
▁ i am fire and air ; my other elements 
▁ i give to baser life . xxmaj so , have you done ? 
▁ xxmaj come then , and take the last warmth of my lips . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , kind xxmaj charmian . xxmaj iras , long farewell . 
▁ [ kisses them . xxup iras falls and dies ] 
▁ xxmaj have i the aspic in my lips ? xxmaj dost fall ? 
▁ xxmaj if thus thou and nature can so gently part , 
▁ xxmaj the stroke of death is as a lover 's pinch , 
▁ xxmaj which hurts and is desir'd . xxmaj dost thou lie still ? 
▁ xxmaj if thou vanishest , thou tell'st the world 
▁ xxmaj it is not worth leave - taking . 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj dissolve , thick cloud , and rain , that i may say 
▁ xxmaj the gods themselves do weep . 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj this proves me base . 
▁ xxmaj if she first meet the curled xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll make demand of her , and spend that kiss 
▁ xxmaj which is my heaven to have . xxmaj come , thou mortal wretch , 
▁ [ to an asp , which she applies to her breast ] 
▁ xxmaj with thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate 
▁ xxmaj of life at once untie . xxmaj poor venomous fool , 
▁ xxmaj be angry and dispatch . o couldst thou speak , 
▁ xxmaj that i might hear thee call great xxmaj caesar ass 
▁ xxmaj unpolicied ! 
▁ xxup charmian . o xxmaj eastern star ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj peace , peace ! 
▁ xxmaj dost thou not see my baby at my breast 
▁ xxmaj that sucks the nurse asleep ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxup o , break ! xxup o , break ! 
▁ xxup cleopatra . xxmaj as sweet as balm , as soft as air , as gentle- 
▁ o xxmaj antony ! xxmaj nay , i will take thee too : 
▁ [ applying another asp to her arm ] 
▁ xxmaj what should i stay- [ dies ] 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj in this vile world ? xxmaj so , fare thee well . 
▁ xxmaj now boast thee , death , in thy possession lies 
▁ a lass unparallel'd . xxmaj downy windows , close ; 
▁ xxmaj and golden xxmaj phoebus never be beheld 
▁ xxmaj of eyes again so royal ! xxmaj your crown 's awry ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll mend it and then play- 

▁ xxmaj enter the guard , rushing in 

▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj where 's the xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj speak softly , wake her not . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj caesar hath sent- 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj too slow a messenger . [ applies an asp ] 
▁ xxup o , come apace , dispatch . i partly feel thee . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj approach , ho ! xxmaj all 's not well : xxmaj caesar 's beguil'd . 
▁ xxup second xxup guard . xxmaj there 's xxmaj dolabella sent from xxmaj caesar ; call him . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj what work is here ! xxmaj charmian , is this well done ? 
▁ xxup charmian . xxmaj it is well done , and fitting for a princes 
▁ xxmaj descended of so many royal kings . 
▁ xxmaj ah , soldier ! [ charmian dies ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup dolabella 

▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj how goes it here ? 
▁ xxup second xxup guard . xxmaj all dead . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj caesar , thy thoughts 
▁ xxmaj touch their effects in this . xxmaj thyself art coming 
▁ xxmaj to see perform'd the dreaded act which thou 
▁ xxmaj so sought'st to hinder . 
▁ [ within : ' a way there , a way for xxmaj caesar ! ' ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup caesar and all his train 

▁ xxup dolabella . o sir , you are too sure an augurer : 
▁ xxmaj that you did fear is done . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj bravest at the last , 
▁ xxmaj she levell'd at our purposes , and being royal , 
▁ xxmaj took her own way . xxmaj the manner of their deaths ? 
▁ i do not see them bleed . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj who was last with them ? 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . a simple countryman that brought her figs . 
▁ xxmaj this was his basket . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj poison'd then . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . o xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj charmian liv'd but now ; she stood and spake . 
▁ i found her trimming up the diadem 
▁ xxmaj on her dead mistress . xxmaj tremblingly she stood , 
▁ xxmaj and on the sudden dropp'd . 
▁ xxup caesar . o noble weakness ! 
▁ xxmaj if they had swallow'd poison ' twould appear 
▁ xxmaj by external swelling ; but she looks like sleep , 
▁ xxmaj as she would catch another xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj in her strong toil of grace . 
▁ xxup dolabella . xxmaj here on her breast 
▁ xxmaj there is a vent of blood , and something blown ; 
▁ xxmaj the like is on her arm . 
▁ xxup first xxup guard . xxmaj this is an aspic 's trail ; and these fig - leaves 
▁ xxmaj have slime upon them , such as th ' aspic leaves 
▁ xxmaj upon the caves of xxmaj nile . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj most probable 
▁ xxmaj that so she died ; for her physician tells me 
▁ xxmaj she hath pursu'd conclusions infinite 
▁ xxmaj of easy ways to die . xxmaj take up her bed , 
▁ xxmaj and bear her women from the monument . 
▁ xxmaj she shall be buried by her xxmaj antony ; 
▁ xxmaj no grave upon the earth shall clip in it 
▁ a pair so famous . xxmaj high events as these 
▁ xxmaj strike those that make them ; and their story is 
▁ xxmaj no less in pity than his glory which 
▁ xxmaj brought them to be lamented . xxmaj our army shall 
▁ xxmaj in solemn show attend this funeral , 
▁ xxmaj and then to xxmaj rome . xxmaj come , xxmaj dolabella , see 
▁ xxmaj high order in this great solemnity . xxmaj exeunt 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1601 

 xxup as xxup you xxup like xxup it 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae . 

▁ xxup duke , living in exile 
▁ xxup frederick , his brother , and usurper of his dominions 
▁ xxup amiens , lord attending on the banished xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup jaques , " " " " " " 
▁ xxup le xxup beau , a courtier attending upon xxmaj frederick 
▁ xxup charles , wrestler to xxmaj frederick 
▁ xxup oliver , son of xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland de xxmaj boys 
▁ xxup jaques , " " " " " " 
▁ xxup orlando , " " " " " " 
▁ xxup adam , servant to xxmaj oliver 
▁ xxup dennis , " " " 
▁ xxup touchstone , the court jester 
▁ xxup sir xxup oliver xxup martext , a vicar 
▁ xxup corin , shepherd 
▁ xxup silvius , " 
▁ xxup william , a country fellow , in love with xxmaj audrey 
▁ a person representing xxup hymen 

▁ xxup rosalind , daughter to the banished xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup celia , daughter to xxmaj frederick 
▁ xxup phebe , a shepherdes 
▁ xxup audrey , a country wench 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj pages , xxmaj foresters , and xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxup oliver 's house ; xxup frederick 's court ; and the xxmaj forest of xxmaj arden 

 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj orchard of xxup oliver 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup orlando and xxup adam 

▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj as i remember , xxmaj adam , it was upon this fashion bequeathed 
▁ me by will but poor a thousand crowns , and , as thou say'st , 
▁ charged my brother , on his blessing , to breed me well ; and there 
▁ begins my sadness . xxmaj my brother xxmaj jaques he keeps at school , and 
▁ report speaks goldenly of his profit . xxmaj for my part , he keeps me 
▁ rustically at home , or , to speak more properly , stays me here at 
▁ home unkept ; for call you that keeping for a gentleman of my 
▁ birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox ? xxmaj his horses are 
▁ bred better ; for , besides that they are fair with their feeding , 
▁ they are taught their manage , and to that end riders dearly 
▁ hir'd ; but xxup i , his brother , gain nothing under him but growth ; for 
▁ the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him 
▁ as xxup i. xxmaj besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me , the 
▁ something that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from 
▁ me . xxmaj he lets me feed with his hinds , bars me the place of a 
▁ brother , and as much as in him lies , mines my gentility with my 
▁ education . xxmaj this is it , xxmaj adam , that grieves me ; and the spirit of 
▁ my father , which i think is within me , begins to mutiny against 
▁ this servitude . i will no longer endure it , though yet i know no 
▁ wise remedy how to avoid it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oliver 

▁ xxup adam . xxmaj yonder comes my master , your brother . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj go apart , xxmaj adam , and thou shalt hear how he will shake me 
▁ up . [ adam retires ] 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj now , sir ! what make you here ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj nothing ; i am not taught to make any thing . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj what mar you then , sir ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj marry , sir , i am helping you to mar that which xxmaj god made , a 
▁ poor unworthy brother of yours , with idleness . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj marry , sir , be better employed , and be nought awhile . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj shall i keep your hogs , and eat husks with them ? xxmaj what 
▁ prodigal portion have i spent that i should come to such penury ? 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj know you where you are , sir ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxup o , sir , very well ; here in your orchard . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj know you before whom , sir ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj ay , better than him i am before knows me . i know you are 
▁ my eldest brother ; and in the gentle condition of blood , you 
▁ should so know me . xxmaj the courtesy of nations allows you my better 
▁ in that you are the first - born ; but the same tradition takes not 
▁ away my blood , were there twenty brothers betwixt us . i have as 
▁ much of my father in me as you , albeit i confess your coming 
▁ before me is nearer to his reverence . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj what , boy ! [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj come , come , elder brother , you are too young in this . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj wilt thou lay hands on me , villain ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i am no villain ; i am the youngest son of xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland de 
▁ xxmaj boys . xxmaj he was my father ; and he is thrice a villain that says such 
▁ a father begot villains . xxmaj wert thou not my brother , i would not 
▁ take this hand from thy throat till this other had pull'd out thy 
▁ tongue for saying so . xxmaj thou has rail'd on thyself . 
▁ xxup adam . [ coming forward ] xxmaj sweet masters , be patient ; for your father 's 
▁ remembrance , be at accord . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj let me go , i say . 
▁ xxup orlando . i will not , till i please ; you shall hear me . xxmaj my father 
▁ charg'd you in his will to give me good education : you have 
▁ train'd me like a peasant , obscuring and hiding from me all 
▁ gentleman - like qualities . xxmaj the spirit of my father grows strong in 
▁ me , and i will no longer endure it ; therefore allow me such 
▁ exercises as may become a gentleman , or give me the poor 
▁ allottery my father left me by testament ; with that i will go buy 
▁ my fortunes . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj and what wilt thou do ? xxmaj beg , when that is spent ? xxmaj well , sir , 
▁ get you in . i will not long be troubled with you ; you shall have 
▁ some part of your will . i pray you leave me . 
▁ xxup orlando . i no further offend you than becomes me for my good . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj get you with him , you old dog . 
▁ xxup adam . xxmaj is ' old dog ' my reward ? xxmaj most true , i have lost my teeth in 
▁ your service . xxmaj god be with my old master ! xxmaj he would not have spoke 
▁ such a word . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup orlando and xxup adam 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj is it even so ? xxmaj begin you to grow upon me ? i will physic 
▁ your rankness , and yet give no thousand crowns neither . xxmaj holla , 
▁ xxmaj dennis ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dennis 

▁ xxup dennis . xxmaj calls your worship ? 
▁ xxup oliver . not xxmaj charles , the xxmaj duke 's wrestler , here to speak with me ? 
▁ xxup dennis . xxmaj so please you , he is here at the door and importunes access 
▁ to you . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj call him in . [ exit xxup dennis ] ' twill be a good way ; and 
▁ to - morrow the wrestling is . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj good morrow to your worship . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj good xxmaj monsieur xxmaj charles ! xxmaj what 's the new news at the new 
▁ court ? 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj there 's no news at the court , sir , but the old news ; that 
▁ is , the old xxmaj duke is banished by his younger brother the new xxmaj duke ; 
▁ and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary 
▁ exile with him , whose lands and revenues enrich the new xxmaj duke ; 
▁ therefore he gives them good leave to wander . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj can you tell if xxmaj rosalind , the xxmaj duke 's daughter , be banished 
▁ with her father ? 
▁ xxup charles . xxup o , no ; for the xxmaj duke 's daughter , her cousin , so loves her , 
▁ being ever from their cradles bred together , that she would have 
▁ followed her exile , or have died to stay behind her . xxmaj she is at 
▁ the court , and no less beloved of her uncle than his own 
▁ daughter ; and never two ladies loved as they do . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj where will the old xxmaj duke live ? 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj they say he is already in the xxmaj forest of xxmaj arden , and a many 
▁ merry men with him ; and there they live like the old xxmaj robin xxmaj hood 
▁ of xxmaj england . xxmaj they say many young gentlemen flock to him every day , 
▁ and fleet the time carelessly , as they did in the golden world . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj what , you wrestle to - morrow before the new xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj marry , do xxup i , sir ; and i came to acquaint you with a 
▁ matter . i am given , sir , secretly to understand that your younger 
▁ brother , xxmaj orlando , hath a disposition to come in disguis'd against 
▁ me to try a fall . xxmaj to - morrow , sir , i wrestle for my credit ; and he 
▁ that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well . 
▁ xxmaj your brother is but young and tender ; and , for your love , i would 
▁ be loath to foil him , as i must , for my own honour , if he come 
▁ in ; therefore , out of my love to you , i came hither to acquaint 
▁ you withal , that either you might stay him from his intendment , 
▁ or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into , in that it is 
▁ thing of his own search and altogether against my will . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj charles , i thank thee for thy love to me , which thou shalt 
▁ find i will most kindly requite . i had myself notice of my 
▁ brother 's purpose herein , and have by underhand means laboured to 
▁ dissuade him from it ; but he is resolute . xxmaj i 'll tell thee , 
▁ xxmaj charles , it is the stubbornest young fellow of xxmaj france ; full of 
▁ ambition , an envious emulator of every man 's good parts , a secret 
▁ and villainous contriver against me his natural brother . 
▁ xxmaj therefore use thy discretion : i had as lief thou didst break his 
▁ neck as his finger . xxmaj and thou wert best look to't ; for if thou 
▁ dost him any slight disgrace , or if he do not mightily grace 
▁ himself on thee , he will practise against thee by poison , entrap 
▁ thee by some treacherous device , and never leave thee till he 
▁ hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other ; for , i 
▁ assure thee , and almost with tears i speak it , there is not one 
▁ so young and so villainous this day living . i speak but brotherly 
▁ of him ; but should i anatomize him to thee as he is , i must blush 
▁ and weep , and thou must look pale and wonder . 
▁ xxup charles . i am heartily glad i came hither to you . xxmaj if he come 
▁ to - morrow xxmaj i 'll give him his payment . xxmaj if ever he go alone again , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll never wrestle for prize more . xxmaj and so , xxmaj god keep your worship ! 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj charles . xxmaj now will i stir this gamester . i 
▁ hope i shall see an end of him ; for my soul , yet i know not why , 
▁ hates nothing more than he . xxmaj yet he 's gentle ; never school'd and 
▁ yet learned ; full of noble device ; of all sorts enchantingly 
▁ beloved ; and , indeed , so much in the heart of the world , and 
▁ especially of my own people , who best know him , that i am 
▁ altogether misprised . xxmaj but it shall not be so long ; this wrestler 
▁ shall clear all . xxmaj nothing remains but that i kindle the boy 
▁ thither , which now xxmaj i 'll go about . xxmaj exit 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a lawn before the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup rosalind and xxup celia 

▁ xxup celia . i pray thee , xxmaj rosalind , sweet my coz , be merry . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj dear xxmaj celia , i show more mirth than i am mistress of ; and 
▁ would you yet i were merrier ? xxmaj unless you could teach me to forget 
▁ a banished father , you must not learn me how to remember any 
▁ extraordinary pleasure . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj herein i see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that i 
▁ love thee . xxmaj if my uncle , thy banished father , had banished thy 
▁ uncle , the xxmaj duke my father , so thou hadst been still with me , i 
▁ could have taught my love to take thy father for mine ; so wouldst 
▁ thou , if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously temper'd 
▁ as mine is to thee . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj well , i will forget the condition of my estate , to 
▁ rejoice in yours . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj you know my father hath no child but xxup i , nor none is like to 
▁ have ; and , truly , when he dies thou shalt be his heir ; for what 
▁ he hath taken away from thy father perforce , i will render thee 
▁ again in affection . xxmaj by mine honour , i will ; and when i break that 
▁ oath , let me turn monster ; therefore , my sweet xxmaj rose , my dear 
▁ xxmaj rose , be merry . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj from henceforth i will , coz , and devise sports . 
▁ xxmaj let me see ; what think you of falling in love ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj marry , i prithee , do , to make sport withal ; but love no man 
▁ in good earnest , nor no further in sport neither than with safety 
▁ of a pure blush thou mayst in honour come off again . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj what shall be our sport , then ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj let us sit and mock the good housewife xxmaj fortune from her 
▁ wheel , that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i would we could do so ; for her benefits are mightily 
▁ misplaced ; and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her 
▁ gifts to women . 
▁ xxup celia . ' tis true ; for those that she makes fair she scarce makes 
▁ honest ; and those that she makes honest she makes very 
▁ ill - favouredly . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay ; now thou goest from xxmaj fortune 's office to xxmaj nature 's : 
▁ xxmaj fortune reigns in gifts of the world , not in the lineaments of 
▁ xxmaj nature . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup touchstone 

▁ xxup celia . xxmaj no ; when xxmaj nature hath made a fair creature , may she not by 
▁ xxmaj fortune fall into the fire ? xxmaj though xxmaj nature hath given us wit to 
▁ flout at xxmaj fortune , hath not xxmaj fortune sent in this fool to cut off 
▁ the argument ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj indeed , there is xxmaj fortune too hard for xxmaj nature , when 
▁ xxmaj fortune makes xxmaj nature 's natural the cutter - off of xxmaj nature 's wit . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj peradventure this is not xxmaj fortune 's work neither , but 
▁ xxmaj nature 's , who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of 
▁ such goddesses , and hath sent this natural for our whetstone ; for 
▁ always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits . xxmaj how 
▁ now , wit ! xxmaj whither wander you ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj mistress , you must come away to your father . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj were you made the messenger ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj no , by mine honour ; but i was bid to come for you . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj where learned you that oath , fool ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj of a certain knight that swore by his honour they were 
▁ good pancakes , and swore by his honour the mustard was naught . 
▁ xxmaj now xxmaj i 'll stand to it , the pancakes were naught and the mustard 
▁ was good , and yet was not the knight forsworn . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj how prove you that , in the great heap of your knowledge ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , marry , now unmuzzle your wisdom . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj stand you both forth now : stroke your chins , and swear 
▁ by your beards that i am a knave . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj by our beards , if we had them , thou art . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj by my knavery , if i had it , then i were . xxmaj but if you 
▁ swear by that that not , you are not forsworn ; no more was this 
▁ knight , swearing by his honour , for he never had any ; or if he 
▁ had , he had sworn it away before ever he saw those pancackes or 
▁ that mustard . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj prithee , who is't that thou mean'st ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj one that old xxmaj frederick , your father , loves . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj my father 's love is enough to honour him . xxmaj enough , speak no 
▁ more of him ; you 'll be whipt for taxation one of these days . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj the more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise 
▁ men do foolishly . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj by my troth , thou sayest true ; for since the little wit that 
▁ fools have was silenced , the little foolery that wise men have 
▁ makes a great show . xxmaj here comes xxmaj monsieur xxmaj le xxmaj beau . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup le xxup beau 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj with his mouth full of news . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj then shall we be news - cramm'd . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj all the better ; we shall be the more marketable . xxmaj bon jour , 
▁ xxmaj monsieur xxmaj le xxmaj beau . xxmaj what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj fair xxmaj princess , you have lost much good sport . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj sport ! of what colour ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj what colour , madam ? xxmaj how shall i answer you ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj as wit and fortune will . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj or as the xxmaj destinies decrees . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj well said ; that was laid on with a trowel . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj nay , if i keep not my rank- 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj thou losest thy old smell . 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj you amaze me , ladies . i would have told you of good 
▁ wrestling , which you have lost the sight of . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj yet tell us the manner of the wrestling . 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . i will tell you the beginning , and , if it please your 
▁ ladyships , you may see the end ; for the best is yet to do ; and 
▁ here , where you are , they are coming to perform it . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj well , the beginning , that is dead and buried . 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj there comes an old man and his three sons- 
▁ xxup celia . i could match this beginning with an old tale . 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj three proper young men , of excellent growth and presence . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj with bills on their necks : ' be it known unto all men by 
▁ these presents'- 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj the eldest of the three wrestled with xxmaj charles , the xxmaj duke 's 
▁ wrestler ; which xxmaj charles in a moment threw him , and broke three of 
▁ his ribs , that there is little hope of life in him . xxmaj so he serv'd 
▁ the second , and so the third . xxmaj yonder they lie ; the poor old man , 
▁ their father , making such pitiful dole over them that all the 
▁ beholders take his part with weeping . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj alas ! 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj but what is the sport , monsieur , that the ladies have 
▁ lost ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj why , this that i speak of . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj thus men may grow wiser every day . xxmaj it is the first time 
▁ that ever i heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj or xxup i , i promise thee . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but is there any else longs to see this broken music in 
▁ his sides ? xxmaj is there yet another dotes upon rib - breaking ? xxmaj shall we 
▁ see this wrestling , cousin ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj you must , if you stay here ; for here is the place 
▁ appointed for the wrestling , and they are ready to perform it . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj yonder , sure , they are coming . xxmaj let us now stay and see it . 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup frederick , xxup lords , xxup orlando , 
▁ xxup charles , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj come on ; since the youth will not be entreated , his own 
▁ peril on his forwardness . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj is yonder the man ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj even he , madam . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj alas , he is too young ; yet he looks successfully . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj how now , daughter and cousin ! xxmaj are you crept hither to 
▁ see the wrestling ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , my liege ; so please you give us leave . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj you will take little delight in it , i can tell you , 
▁ there is such odds in the man . xxmaj in pity of the challenger 's youth 
▁ i would fain dissuade him , but he will not be entreated . xxmaj speak to 
▁ him , ladies ; see if you can move him . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj call him hither , good xxmaj monsieur xxmaj le xxmaj beau . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj do so ; xxmaj i 'll not be by . 
▁ [ duke xxup frederick goes apart ] 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj monsieur the xxmaj challenger , the xxmaj princess calls for you . 
▁ xxup orlando . i attend them with all respect and duty . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj young man , have you challeng'd xxmaj charles the wrestler ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj no , fair xxmaj princess ; he is the general challenger . i come 
▁ but in , as others do , to try with him the strength of my youth . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj young gentleman , your spirits are too bold for your years . 
▁ xxmaj you have seen cruel proof of this man 's strength ; if you saw 
▁ yourself with your eyes , or knew yourself with your judgment , the 
▁ fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal 
▁ enterprise . xxmaj we pray you , for your own sake , to embrace your own 
▁ safety and give over this attempt . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj do , young sir ; your reputation shall not therefore be 
▁ misprised : we will make it our suit to the xxmaj duke that the 
▁ wrestling might not go forward . 
▁ xxup orlando . i beseech you , punish me not with your hard thoughts , 
▁ wherein i confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent 
▁ ladies any thing . xxmaj but let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go 
▁ with me to my trial ; wherein if i be foil'd there is but one 
▁ sham'd that was never gracious ; if kill'd , but one dead that is 
▁ willing to be so . i shall do my friends no wrong , for i have none 
▁ to lament me ; the world no injury , for in it i have nothing ; only 
▁ in the world i fill up a place , which may be better supplied when 
▁ i have made it empty . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj the little strength that i have , i would it were with 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj and mine to eke out hers . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj fare you well . xxmaj pray heaven i be deceiv'd in you ! 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj your heart 's desires be with you ! 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj come , where is this young gallant that is so desirous to 
▁ lie with his mother earth ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj ready , sir ; but his will hath in it a more modest working . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj you shall try but one fall . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj no , i warrant your xxmaj grace , you shall not entreat him to a 
▁ second , that have so mightily persuaded him from a first . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj you mean to mock me after ; you should not have mock'd me 
▁ before ; but come your ways . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj now , xxmaj hercules be thy speed , young man ! 
▁ xxup celia . i would i were invisible , to catch the strong fellow by the 
▁ leg . [ they wrestle ] 
▁ xxup rosalind . o excellent young man ! 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj if i had a thunderbolt in mine eye , i can tell who should 
▁ down . 
▁ [ charles is thrown . xxmaj shout ] 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj no more , no more . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj yes , i beseech your xxmaj grace ; i am not yet well breath'd . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj how dost thou , xxmaj charles ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj he can not speak , my lord . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj bear him away . xxmaj what is thy name , young man ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj orlando , my liege ; the youngest son of xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland de 
▁ xxmaj boys . 
▁ xxup frederick . i would thou hadst been son to some man else . 
▁ xxmaj the world esteem'd thy father honourable , 
▁ xxmaj but i did find him still mine enemy . 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst have better pleas'd me with this deed , 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou descended from another house . 
▁ xxmaj but fare thee well ; thou art a gallant youth ; 
▁ i would thou hadst told me of another father . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup duke , train , and xxup le xxup beau 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj were i my father , coz , would i do this ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i am more proud to be xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland 's son , 
▁ xxmaj his youngest son- and would not change that calling 
▁ xxmaj to be adopted heir to xxmaj frederick . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj my father lov'd xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland as his soul , 
▁ xxmaj and all the world was of my father 's mind ; 
▁ xxmaj had i before known this young man his son , 
▁ i should have given him tears unto entreaties 
▁ xxmaj ere he should thus have ventur'd . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj gentle cousin , 
▁ xxmaj let us go thank him , and encourage him ; 
▁ xxmaj my father 's rough and envious disposition 
▁ xxmaj sticks me at heart . xxmaj sir , you have well deserv'd ; 
▁ xxmaj if you do keep your promises in love 
▁ xxmaj but justly as you have exceeded all promise , 
▁ xxmaj your mistress shall be happy . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj gentleman , [ giving him a chain from her neck ] 
▁ xxmaj wear this for me ; one out of suits with fortune , 
▁ xxmaj that could give more , but that her hand lacks means . 
▁ xxmaj shall we go , coz ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj ay . xxmaj fare you well , fair gentleman . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj can i not say ' i thank you ' ? xxmaj my better parts 
▁ xxmaj are all thrown down ; and that which here stands up 
▁ xxmaj is but a quintain , a mere lifeless block . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj he calls us back . xxmaj my pride fell with my fortunes ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll ask him what he would . xxmaj did you call , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj sir , you have wrestled well , and overthrown 
▁ xxmaj more than your enemies . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj will you go , coz ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj have with you . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup rosalind and xxup celia 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj what passion hangs these weights upon my tongue ? 
▁ i can not speak to her , yet she urg'd conference . 
▁ o poor xxmaj orlando , thou art overthrown ! 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj charles or something weaker masters thee . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup le xxup beau 

▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj good sir , i do in friendship counsel you 
▁ xxmaj to leave this place . xxmaj albeit you have deserv'd 
▁ xxmaj high commendation , true applause , and love , 
▁ xxmaj yet such is now the xxmaj duke 's condition 
▁ xxmaj that he misconstrues all that you have done . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke is humorous ; what he is , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj more suits you to conceive than i to speak of . 
▁ xxup orlando . i thank you , sir ; and pray you tell me this : 
▁ xxmaj which of the two was daughter of the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj that here was at the wrestling ? 
▁ xxup le xxup beau . xxmaj neither his daughter , if we judge by manners ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet , indeed , the smaller is his daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj the other is daughter to the banish'd xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj and here detain'd by her usurping uncle , 
▁ xxmaj to keep his daughter company ; whose loves 
▁ xxmaj are dearer than the natural bond of sisters . 
▁ xxmaj but i can tell you that of late this xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj hath ta'en displeasure ' gainst his gentle niece , 
▁ xxmaj grounded upon no other argument 
▁ xxmaj but that the people praise her for her virtues 
▁ xxmaj and pity her for her good father 's sake ; 
▁ xxmaj and , on my life , his malice ' gainst the lady 
▁ xxmaj will suddenly break forth . xxmaj sir , fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj hereafter , in a better world than this , 
▁ i shall desire more love and knowledge of you . 
▁ xxup orlando . i rest much bounden to you ; fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup le xxup beau 
▁ xxmaj thus must i from the smoke into the smother ; 
▁ xxmaj from tyrant xxmaj duke unto a tyrant brother . 
▁ xxmaj but heavenly xxmaj rosalind ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup celia and xxup rosalind 

▁ xxup celia . xxmaj why , cousin ! why , xxmaj rosalind ! xxmaj cupid have mercy ! 
▁ xxmaj not a word ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj not one to throw at a dog . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj no , thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs ; 
▁ throw some of them at me ; come , lame me with reasons . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj then there were two cousins laid up , when the one should 
▁ be lam'd with reasons and the other mad without any . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj but is all this for your father ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj no , some of it is for my child 's father . xxup o , how full of 
▁ briers is this working - day world ! 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj they are but burs , cousin , thrown upon thee in holiday 
▁ foolery ; if we walk not in the trodden paths , our very petticoats 
▁ will catch them . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i could shake them off my coat : these burs are in my 
▁ heart . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj hem them away . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i would try , if i could cry ' hem ' and have him . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj come , come , wrestle with thy affections . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup o , they take the part of a better wrestler than myself . 
▁ xxup celia . xxup o , a good wish upon you ! xxmaj you will try in time , in despite of 
▁ a fall . xxmaj but , turning these jests out of service , let us talk in 
▁ good earnest . xxmaj is it possible , on such a sudden , you should fall 
▁ into so strong a liking with old xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland 's youngest son ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj the xxmaj duke my father lov'd his father dearly . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly ? 
▁ xxmaj by this kind of chase i should hate him , for my father hated his 
▁ father dearly ; yet i hate not xxmaj orlando . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj no , faith , hate him not , for my sake . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj why should i not ? xxmaj doth he not deserve well ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup frederick , with xxup lords 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj let me love him for that ; and do you love him because i 
▁ do . xxmaj look , here comes the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj with his eyes full of anger . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj mistress , dispatch you with your safest haste , 
▁ xxmaj and get you from our court . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj me , uncle ? 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj you , cousin . 
▁ xxmaj within these ten days if that thou beest found 
▁ xxmaj so near our public court as twenty miles , 
▁ xxmaj thou diest for it . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i do beseech your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me . 
▁ xxmaj if with myself i hold intelligence , 
▁ xxmaj or have acquaintance with mine own desires ; 
▁ xxmaj if that i do not dream , or be not frantic- 
▁ xxmaj as i do trust i am not- then , dear uncle , 
▁ xxmaj never so much as in a thought unborn 
▁ xxmaj did i offend your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj thus do all traitors ; 
▁ xxmaj if their purgation did consist in words , 
▁ xxmaj they are as innocent as grace itself . 
▁ xxmaj let it suffice thee that i trust thee not . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj yet your mistrust can not make me a traitor . 
▁ xxmaj tell me whereon the likelihood depends . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj thou art thy father 's daughter ; there 's enough . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup so was i when your xxmaj highness took his dukedom ; 
▁ xxmaj so was i when your xxmaj highness banish'd him . 
▁ xxmaj treason is not inherited , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if we did derive it from our friends , 
▁ xxmaj what 's that to me ? xxmaj my father was no traitor . 
▁ xxmaj then , good my liege , mistake me not so much 
▁ xxmaj to think my poverty is treacherous . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj dear sovereign , hear me speak . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj ay , xxmaj celia ; we stay'd her for your sake , 
▁ xxmaj else had she with her father rang'd along . 
▁ xxup celia . i did not then entreat to have her stay ; 
▁ xxmaj it was your pleasure , and your own remorse ; 
▁ i was too young that time to value her , 
▁ xxmaj but now i know her . xxmaj if she be a traitor , 
▁ xxmaj why so am xxup i : we still have slept together , 
▁ xxmaj rose at an instant , learn'd , play'd , eat together ; 
▁ xxmaj and wheresoe'er we went , like xxmaj juno 's swans , 
▁ xxmaj still we went coupled and inseparable . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj she is too subtle for thee ; and her smoothness , 
▁ xxmaj her very silence and her patience , 
▁ xxmaj speak to the people , and they pity her . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a fool . xxmaj she robs thee of thy name ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous 
▁ xxmaj when she is gone . xxmaj then open not thy lips . 
▁ xxmaj firm and irrevocable is my doom 
▁ xxmaj which i have pass'd upon her ; she is banish'd . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj pronounce that sentence , then , on me , my liege ; 
▁ i can not live out of her company . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj you are a fool . xxmaj you , niece , provide yourself . 
▁ xxmaj if you outstay the time , upon mine honour , 
▁ xxmaj and in the greatness of my word , you die . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup duke and xxup lords 
▁ xxup celia . o my poor xxmaj rosalind ! xxmaj whither wilt thou go ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou change fathers ? i will give thee mine . 
▁ i charge thee be not thou more griev'd than i am . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i have more cause . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj thou hast not , cousin . 
▁ xxmaj prithee be cheerful . xxmaj know'st thou not the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj hath banish'd me , his daughter ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj that he hath not . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj no , hath not ? xxmaj rosalind lacks , then , the love 
▁ xxmaj which teacheth thee that thou and i am one . 
▁ xxmaj shall we be sund'red ? xxmaj shall we part , sweet girl ? 
▁ xxmaj no ; let my father seek another heir . 
▁ xxmaj therefore devise with me how we may fly , 
▁ xxmaj whither to go , and what to bear with us ; 
▁ xxmaj and do not seek to take your charge upon you , 
▁ xxmaj to bear your griefs yourself , and leave me out ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by this heaven , now at our sorrows pale , 
▁ xxmaj say what thou canst , xxmaj i 'll go along with thee . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why , whither shall we go ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj to seek my uncle in the xxmaj forest of xxmaj arden . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj alas , what danger will it be to us , 
▁ xxmaj maids as we are , to travel forth so far ! 
▁ xxmaj beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj i 'll put myself in poor and mean attire , 
▁ xxmaj and with a kind of umber smirch my face ; 
▁ xxmaj the like do you ; so shall we pass along , 
▁ xxmaj and never stir assailants . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj were it not better , 
▁ xxmaj because that i am more than common tall , 
▁ xxmaj that i did suit me all points like a man ? 
▁ a gallant curtle - axe upon my thigh , 
▁ a boar spear in my hand ; and- in my heart 
▁ xxmaj lie there what hidden woman 's fear there will- 
▁ xxmaj we 'll have a swashing and a martial outside , 
▁ xxmaj as many other mannish cowards have 
▁ xxmaj that do outface it with their semblances . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj what shall i call thee when thou art a man ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj i 'll have no worse a name than xxmaj jove 's own page , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore look you call me xxmaj ganymede . 
▁ xxmaj but what will you be call'd ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj something that hath a reference to my state : 
▁ xxmaj no longer xxmaj celia , but xxmaj aliena . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but , cousin , what if we assay'd to steal 
▁ xxmaj the clownish fool out of your father 's court ? 
▁ xxmaj would he not be a comfort to our travel ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj he 'll go along o'er the wide world with me ; 
▁ xxmaj leave me alone to woo him . xxmaj let 's away , 
▁ xxmaj and get our jewels and our wealth together ; 
▁ xxmaj devise the fittest time and safest way 
▁ xxmaj to hide us from pursuit that will be made 
▁ xxmaj after my flight . xxmaj now go we in content 
▁ xxmaj to liberty , and not to banishment . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the xxmaj forest of xxmaj arden 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup senior , xxup amiens , and two or three xxup lords , like foresters 

▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj now , my co - mates and brothers in exile , 
▁ xxmaj hath not old custom made this life more sweet 
▁ xxmaj than that of painted pomp ? xxmaj are not these woods 
▁ xxmaj more free from peril than the envious court ? 
▁ xxmaj here feel we not the penalty of xxmaj adam , 
▁ xxmaj the seasons ' difference ; as the icy fang 
▁ xxmaj and churlish chiding of the winter 's wind , 
▁ xxmaj which when it bites and blows upon my body , 
▁ xxmaj even till i shrink with cold , i smile and say 
▁ ' this is no flattery ; these are counsellors 
▁ xxmaj that feelingly persuade me what i am . '