xxbos xxmaj sweet are the uses of adversity , 
▁ xxmaj which , like the toad , ugly and venomous , 
▁ xxmaj wears yet a precious jewel in his head ; 
▁ xxmaj and this our life , exempt from public haunt , 
▁ xxmaj finds tongues in trees , books in the running brooks , 
▁ xxmaj sermons in stones , and good in everything . 
▁ i would not change it . 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj happy is your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj that can translate the stubbornness of fortune 
▁ xxmaj into so quiet and so sweet a style . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj come , shall we go and kill us venison ? 
▁ xxmaj and yet it irks me the poor dappled fools , 
▁ xxmaj being native burghers of this desert city , 
▁ xxmaj should , in their own confines , with forked heads 
▁ xxmaj have their round haunches gor'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj indeed , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj the melancholy xxmaj jaques grieves at that ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in that kind , swears you do more usurp 
▁ xxmaj than doth your brother that hath banish'd you . 
▁ xxmaj to - day my xxmaj lord of xxmaj amiens and myself 
▁ xxmaj did steal behind him as he lay along 
▁ xxmaj under an oak whose antique root peeps out 
▁ xxmaj upon the brook that brawls along this wood ! 
▁ xxmaj to the which place a poor sequest'red stag , 
▁ xxmaj that from the hunter 's aim had ta'en a hurt , 
▁ xxmaj did come to languish ; and , indeed , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj the wretched animal heav'd forth such groans 
▁ xxmaj that their discharge did stretch his leathern coat 
▁ xxmaj almost to bursting ; and the big round tears 
▁ xxmaj cours'd one another down his innocent nose 
▁ xxmaj in piteous chase ; and thus the hairy fool , 
▁ xxmaj much marked of the melancholy xxmaj jaques , 
▁ xxmaj stood on th ' extremest verge of the swift brook , 
▁ xxmaj augmenting it with tears . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj but what said xxmaj jaques ? 
▁ xxmaj did he not moralize this spectacle ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxup o , yes , into a thousand similes . 
▁ xxmaj first , for his weeping into the needless stream : 
▁ ' poor deer , ' quoth he ' thou mak'st a testament 
▁ xxmaj as worldlings do , giving thy sum of more 
▁ xxmaj to that which had too much . ' xxmaj then , being there alone , 
▁ xxmaj left and abandoned of his velvet friends : 
▁ '' tis right ' ; quoth he ' thus misery doth part 
▁ xxmaj the flux of company . ' xxmaj anon , a careless herd , 
▁ xxmaj full of the pasture , jumps along by him 
▁ xxmaj and never stays to greet him . ' ay , ' quoth xxmaj jaques 
▁ ' sweep on , you fat and greasy citizens ; 
▁ ' tis just the fashion . xxmaj wherefore do you look 
▁ xxmaj upon that poor and broken bankrupt there ? ' 
▁ xxmaj thus most invectively he pierceth through 
▁ xxmaj the body of the country , city , court , 
▁ xxmaj yea , and of this our life ; swearing that we 
▁ xxmaj are mere usurpers , tyrants , and what 's worse , 
▁ xxmaj to fright the animals , and to kill them up 
▁ xxmaj in their assign'd and native dwelling - place . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj and did you leave him in this contemplation ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj we did , my lord , weeping and commenting 
▁ xxmaj upon the sobbing deer . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj show me the place ; 
▁ i love to cope him in these sullen fits , 
▁ xxmaj for then he 's full of matter . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj i 'll bring you to him straight . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup frederick , with xxup lords 

▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj can it be possible that no man saw them ? 
▁ xxmaj it can not be ; some villains of my court 
▁ xxmaj are of consent and sufferance in this . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i can not hear of any that did see her . 
▁ xxmaj the ladies , her attendants of her chamber , 
▁ xxmaj saw her abed , and in the morning early 
▁ xxmaj they found the bed untreasur'd of their mistress . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj my lord , the roynish clown , at whom so oft 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace was wo nt to laugh , is also missing . 
▁ xxmaj hisperia , the xxmaj princess ' gentlewoman , 
▁ xxmaj confesses that she secretly o'erheard 
▁ xxmaj your daughter and her cousin much commend 
▁ xxmaj the parts and graces of the wrestler 
▁ xxmaj that did but lately foil the sinewy xxmaj charles ; 
▁ xxmaj and she believes , wherever they are gone , 
▁ xxmaj that youth is surely in their company . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj send to his brother ; fetch that gallant hither . 
▁ xxmaj if he be absent , bring his brother to me ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make him find him . xxmaj do this suddenly ; 
▁ xxmaj and let not search and inquisition quail 
▁ xxmaj to bring again these foolish runaways . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj before xxup oliver 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup orlando and xxup adam , meeting 

▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup adam . xxmaj what , my young master ? o my gentle master ! 
▁ o my sweet master ! o you memory 
▁ xxmaj of old xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland ! xxmaj why , what make you here ? 
▁ xxmaj why are you virtuous ? xxmaj why do people love you ? 
▁ xxmaj and wherefore are you gentle , strong , and valiant ? 
▁ xxmaj why would you be so fond to overcome 
▁ xxmaj the bonny prizer of the humorous xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxmaj your praise is come too swiftly home before you . 
▁ xxmaj know you not , master , to some kind of men 
▁ xxmaj their graces serve them but as enemies ? 
▁ xxmaj no more do yours . xxmaj your virtues , gentle master , 
▁ xxmaj are sanctified and holy traitors to you . 
▁ xxup o , what a world is this , when what is comely 
▁ xxmaj envenoms him that bears it ! 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj why , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup adam . o unhappy youth ! 
▁ xxmaj come not within these doors ; within this roof 
▁ xxmaj the enemy of all your graces lives . 
▁ xxmaj your brother- no , no brother ; yet the son- 
▁ xxmaj yet not the son ; i will not call him son 
▁ xxmaj of him i was about to call his father- 
▁ xxmaj hath heard your praises ; and this night he means 
▁ xxmaj to burn the lodging where you use to lie , 
▁ xxmaj and you within it . xxmaj if he fail of that , 
▁ xxmaj he will have other means to cut you off ; 
▁ i overheard him and his practices . 
▁ xxmaj this is no place ; this house is but a butchery ; 
▁ xxmaj abhor it , fear it , do not enter it . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj why , whither , xxmaj adam , wouldst thou have me go ? 
▁ xxup adam . xxmaj no matter whither , so you come not here . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj what , wouldst thou have me go and beg my food , 
▁ xxmaj or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce 
▁ a thievish living on the common road ? 
▁ xxmaj this i must do , or know not what to do ; 
▁ xxmaj yet this i will not do , do how i can . 
▁ i rather will subject me to the malice 
▁ xxmaj of a diverted blood and bloody brother . 
▁ xxup adam . xxmaj but do not so . i have five hundred crowns , 
▁ xxmaj the thrifty hire i sav'd under your father , 
▁ xxmaj which i did store to be my foster - nurse , 
▁ xxmaj when service should in my old limbs lie lame , 
▁ xxmaj and unregarded age in corners thrown . 
▁ xxmaj take that , and xxmaj he that doth the ravens feed , 
▁ xxmaj yea , providently caters for the sparrow , 
▁ xxmaj be comfort to my age ! xxmaj here is the gold ; 
▁ xxmaj all this i give you . xxmaj let me be your servant ; 
▁ xxmaj though i look old , yet i am strong and lusty ; 
▁ xxmaj for in my youth i never did apply 
▁ xxmaj hot and rebellious liquors in my blood , 
▁ xxmaj nor did not with unbashful forehead woo 
▁ xxmaj the means of weakness and debility ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore my age is as a lusty winter , 
▁ xxmaj frosty , but kindly . xxmaj let me go with you ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do the service of a younger man 
▁ xxmaj in all your business and necessities . 
▁ xxup orlando . o good old man , how well in thee appears 
▁ xxmaj the constant service of the antique world , 
▁ xxmaj when service sweat for duty , not for meed ! 
▁ xxmaj thou art not for the fashion of these times , 
▁ xxmaj where none will sweat but for promotion , 
▁ xxmaj and having that do choke their service up 
▁ xxmaj even with the having ; it is not so with thee . 
▁ xxmaj but , poor old man , thou prun'st a rotten tree 
▁ xxmaj that can not so much as a blossom yield 
▁ xxmaj in lieu of all thy pains and husbandry . 
▁ xxmaj but come thy ways , we 'll go along together , 
▁ xxmaj and ere we have thy youthful wages spent 
▁ xxmaj we 'll light upon some settled low content . 
▁ xxup adam . xxmaj master , go on ; and i will follow the 
▁ xxmaj to the last gasp , with truth and loyalty . 
▁ xxmaj from seventeen years till now almost four - score 
▁ xxmaj here lived xxup i , but now live here no more . 
▁ xxmaj at seventeen years many their fortunes seek , 
▁ xxmaj but at fourscore it is too late a week ; 
▁ xxmaj yet fortune can not recompense me better 
▁ xxmaj than to die well and not my master 's debtor . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj forest of xxmaj arden 

 xxmaj enter xxup rosalind for xxup ganymede , xxup celia for xxup aliena , and xxup clown alias xxup touchstone 

▁ xxup rosalind . o xxmaj jupiter , how weary are my spirits ! 
▁ xxup touchstone . i xxmaj care not for my spirits , if my legs were not weary . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i could find in my heart to disgrace my man 's apparel , 
▁ and to cry like a woman ; but i must comfort the weaker vessel , as 
▁ doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat ; 
▁ therefore , courage , good xxmaj aliena . 
▁ xxup celia . i pray you bear with me ; i can not go no further . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj for my part , i had rather bear with you than bear you ; 
▁ yet i should bear no cross if i did bear you ; for i think you 
▁ have no money in your purse . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj well , . this is the xxmaj forest of xxmaj arden . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj ay , now am i in xxmaj arden ; the more fool xxup i ; when i was at 
▁ home i was in a better place ; but travellers must be content . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup corin and xxup silvius 
▁
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , be so , good xxmaj touchstone . xxmaj look you , who comes here , a 
▁ young man and an old in solemn talk . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj that is the way to make her scorn you still . 
▁ xxup silvius . o xxmaj corin , that thou knew'st how i do love her ! 
▁ xxup corin . i partly guess ; for i have lov'd ere now . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj no , xxmaj corin , being old , thou canst not guess , 
▁ xxmaj though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover 
▁ xxmaj as ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow . 
▁ xxmaj but if thy love were ever like to mine , 
▁ xxmaj as sure i think did never man love so , 
▁ xxmaj how many actions most ridiculous 
▁ xxmaj hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy ? 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj into a thousand that i have forgotten . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxup o , thou didst then never love so heartily ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly 
▁ xxmaj that ever love did make thee run into , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast not lov'd ; 
▁ xxmaj or if thou hast not sat as i do now , 
▁ xxmaj wearing thy hearer in thy mistress ' praise , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast not lov'd ; 
▁ xxmaj or if thou hast not broke from company 
▁ xxmaj abruptly , as my passion now makes me , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast not lov'd . 
▁ o xxmaj phebe , xxmaj phebe , xxmaj phebe ! xxmaj exit xxmaj silvius 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj alas , poor shepherd ! searching of thy wound , 
▁ i have by hard adventure found mine own . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj and i mine . i remember , when i was in love , i broke my 
▁ sword upon a stone , and bid him take that for coming a - night to 
▁ xxmaj jane xxmaj smile ; and i remember the kissing of her batler , and the 
▁ cow 's dugs that her pretty chopt hands had milk'd ; and i remember 
▁ the wooing of peascod instead of her ; from whom i took two cods , 
▁ and giving her them again , said with weeping tears ' wear these 
▁ for my sake . ' xxmaj we that are true lovers run into strange capers ; 
▁ but as all is mortal in nature , so is all nature in love mortal 
▁ in folly . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj nay , i shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till i break 
▁ my shins against it . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj jove , xxmaj jove ! this shepherd 's passion 
▁ xxmaj is much upon my fashion . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj and mine ; but it grows something stale with me . 
▁ xxup celia . i pray you , one of you question yond man 
▁ xxmaj if he for gold will give us any food ; 
▁ i faint almost to death . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj holla , you clown ! 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj peace , fool ; he 's not thy xxmaj ensman . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj who calls ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj your betters , sir . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj else are they very wretched . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj peace , i say . xxmaj good even to you , friend . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj and to you , gentle sir , and to you all . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i prithee , shepherd , if that love or gold 
▁ xxmaj can in this desert place buy entertainment , 
▁ xxmaj bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed . 
▁ xxmaj here 's a young maid with travel much oppress'd , 
▁ xxmaj and faints for succour . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj fair sir , i pity her , 
▁ xxmaj and wish , for her sake more than for mine own , 
▁ xxmaj my fortunes were more able to relieve her ; 
▁ xxmaj but i am shepherd to another man , 
▁ xxmaj and do not shear the fleeces that i graze . 
▁ xxmaj my master is of churlish disposition , 
▁ xxmaj and little recks to find the way to heaven 
▁ xxmaj by doing deeds of hospitality . 
▁ xxmaj besides , his cote , his flocks , and bounds of feed , 
▁ xxmaj are now on sale ; and at our sheepcote now , 
▁ xxmaj by reason of his absence , there is nothing 
▁ xxmaj that you will feed on ; but what is , come see , 
▁ xxmaj and in my voice most welcome shall you be . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj what is he that shall buy his flock and pasture ? 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj that young swain that you saw here but erewhile , 
▁ xxmaj that little cares for buying any thing . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i pray thee , if it stand with honesty , 
▁ xxmaj buy thou the cottage , pasture , and the flock , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt have to pay for it of us . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj and we will mend thy wages . i like this place , 
▁ xxmaj and willingly could waste my time in it . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj assuredly the thing is to be sold . 
▁ xxmaj go with me ; if you like upon report 
▁ xxmaj the soil , the profit , and this kind of life , 
▁ i will your very faithful feeder be , 
▁ xxmaj and buy it with your gold right suddenly . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj another part of the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup amiens , xxup jaques , and xxup others 

▁ xxup song 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj under the greenwood tree 
▁ xxmaj who loves to lie with me , 
▁ xxmaj and turn his merry note 
▁ xxmaj unto the sweet bird 's throat , 
▁ xxmaj come hither , come hither , come hither . 
▁ xxmaj here shall he see 
▁ xxmaj no enemy 
▁ xxmaj but winter and rough weather . 

▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj more , more , i prithee , more . 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj it will make you melancholy , xxmaj monsieur xxmaj jaques . 
▁ xxup jaques . i thank it . xxmaj more , i prithee , more . i can suck melancholy 
▁ out of a song , as a weasel sucks eggs . xxmaj more , i prithee , more . 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj my voice is ragged ; i know i can not please you . 
▁ xxup jaques . i do not desire you to please me ; i do desire you to sing . 
▁ xxmaj come , more ; another stanzo . xxmaj call you 'em stanzos ? 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj what you will , xxmaj monsieur xxmaj jaques . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj nay , i care not for their names ; they owe me nothing . xxmaj will 
▁ you sing ? 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj more at your request than to please myself . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj well then , if ever i thank any man , xxmaj i 'll thank you ; but 
▁ that they call compliment is like th ' encounter of two dog - apes ; 
▁ and when a man thanks me heartily , methinks have given him a 
▁ penny , and he renders me the beggarly thanks . xxmaj come , sing ; and you 
▁ that will not , hold your tongues . 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll end the song . xxmaj sirs , cover the while ; the xxmaj duke 
▁ will drink under this tree . xxmaj he hath been all this day to look 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj and i have been all this day to avoid him . xxmaj he is to 
▁ disputable for my company . i think of as many matters as he ; but 
▁ i give heaven thanks , and make no boast of them . xxmaj come , warble , 
▁ come . 

▁ xxup song 
▁ [ all together here ] 
▁
▁ xxmaj who doth ambition shun , 
▁ xxmaj and loves to live i ' th ' sun , 
▁ xxmaj seeking the food he eats , 
▁ xxmaj and pleas'd with what he gets , 
▁ xxmaj come hither , come hither , come hither . 
▁ xxmaj here shall he see 
▁ xxmaj no enemy 
▁ xxmaj but winter and rough weather . 

▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj i 'll give you a verse to this note that i made yesterday in 
▁ despite of my invention . 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll sing it . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj thus it goes : 

▁ xxmaj if it do come to pass 
▁ xxmaj that any man turn ass , 
▁ xxmaj leaving his wealth and ease 
▁ a stubborn will to please , 
▁ xxmaj ducdame , ducdame , ducdame ; 
▁ xxmaj here shall he see 
▁ xxmaj gross fools as he , 
▁ xxmaj an if he will come to me . 

▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj what 's that ' ducdame ' ? 
▁ xxup jaques . ' tis a xxmaj greek invocation , to call fools into a circle . xxmaj i 'll 
▁ go sleep , if i can ; if i can not , xxmaj i 'll rail against all the 
▁ first - born of xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxup amiens . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll go seek the xxmaj duke ; his banquet is prepar'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup orlando and xxup adam 

▁ xxup adam . xxmaj dear master , i can go no further . xxup o , i die for food ! xxmaj here lie 
▁ i down , and measure out my grave . xxmaj farewell , kind master . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj adam ! xxmaj no greater heart in thee ? xxmaj live a 
▁ little ; comfort a little ; cheer thyself a little . xxmaj if this uncouth 
▁ forest yield anything savage , i will either be food for it or 
▁ bring it for food to thee . xxmaj thy conceit is nearer death than thy 
▁ powers . xxmaj for my sake be comfortable ; hold death awhile at the 
▁ arm 's end . i will here be with the presently ; and if i bring thee 
▁ not something to eat , i will give thee leave to die ; but if thou 
▁ diest before i come , thou art a mocker of my labour . xxmaj well said ! 
▁ thou look'st cheerly ; and xxmaj i 'll be with thee quickly . xxmaj yet thou 
▁ liest in the bleak air . xxmaj come , i will bear thee to some shelter ; 
▁ and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner , if there live 
▁ anything in this desert . xxmaj cheerly , good xxmaj adam ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 a table set out . xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup senior , xxup amiens , and xxup lords , like outlaws 

▁ xxup duke xxup senior . i think he be transform'd into a beast ; 
▁ xxmaj for i can nowhere find him like a man . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj my lord , he is but even now gone hence ; 
▁ xxmaj here was he merry , hearing of a song . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj if he , compact of jars , grow musical , 
▁ xxmaj we shall have shortly discord in the spheres . 
▁ xxmaj go seek him ; tell him i would speak with him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jaques 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj he saves my labour by his own approach . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj why , how now , monsieur ! what a life is this , 
▁ xxmaj that your poor friends must woo your company ? 
▁ xxmaj what , you look merrily ! 
▁ xxup jaques . a fool , a fool ! i met a fool i ' th ' forest , 
▁ a motley fool . a miserable world ! 
▁ xxmaj as i do live by food , i met a fool , 
▁ xxmaj who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun , 
▁ xxmaj and rail'd on xxmaj lady xxmaj fortune in good terms , 
▁ xxmaj in good set terms- and yet a motley fool . 
▁ ' good morrow , fool , ' quoth xxup i ; ' no , sir , ' quoth he , 
▁ ' call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune . ' 
▁ xxmaj and then he drew a dial from his poke , 
▁ xxmaj and , looking on it with lack - lustre eye , 
▁ xxmaj says very wisely , ' it is ten o'clock ; 
▁ xxmaj thus we may see , ' quoth he , ' how the world wags ; 
▁ ' tis but an hour ago since it was nine ; 
▁ xxmaj and after one hour more ' twill be eleven ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , from hour to hour , we ripe and ripe , 
▁ xxmaj and then , from hour to hour , we rot and rot ; 
▁ xxmaj and thereby hangs a tale . ' xxmaj when i did hear 
▁ xxmaj the motley fool thus moral on the time , 
▁ xxmaj my lungs began to crow like chanticleer 
▁ xxmaj that fools should be so deep contemplative ; 
▁ xxmaj and i did laugh sans intermission 
▁ xxmaj an hour by his dial . o noble fool ! 
▁ a worthy fool ! xxmaj motley 's the only wear . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj what fool is this ? 
▁ xxup jaques . o worthy fool ! xxmaj one that hath been a courtier , 
▁ xxmaj and says , if ladies be but young and fair , 
▁ xxmaj they have the gift to know it ; and in his brain , 
▁ xxmaj which is as dry as the remainder biscuit 
▁ xxmaj after a voyage , he hath strange places cramm'd 
▁ xxmaj with observation , the which he vents 
▁ xxmaj in mangled forms . o that i were a fool ! 
▁ i am ambitious for a motley coat . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj thou shalt have one . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj it is my only suit , 
▁ xxmaj provided that you weed your better judgments 
▁ xxmaj of all opinion that grows rank in them 
▁ xxmaj that i am wise . i must have liberty 
▁ xxmaj withal , as large a charter as the wind , 
▁ xxmaj to blow on whom i please , for so fools have ; 
▁ xxmaj and they that are most galled with my folly , 
▁ xxmaj they most must laugh . xxmaj and why , sir , must they so ? 
▁ xxmaj the why is plain as way to parish church : 
▁ xxmaj he that a fool doth very wisely hit 
▁ xxmaj doth very foolishly , although he smart , 
▁ xxmaj not to seem senseless of the bob ; if not , 
▁ xxmaj the wise man 's folly is anatomiz'd 
▁ xxmaj even by the squand'ring glances of the fool . 
▁ xxmaj invest me in my motley ; give me leave 
▁ xxmaj to speak my mind , and i will through and through 
▁ xxmaj cleanse the foul body of th ' infected world , 
▁ xxmaj if they will patiently receive my medicine . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj fie on thee ! i can tell what thou wouldst do . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj what , for a counter , would i do but good ? 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj most xxmaj mischievous foul sin , in chiding sin ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou thyself hast been a libertine , 
▁ xxmaj as sensual as the brutish sting itself ; 
▁ xxmaj and all th ' embossed sores and headed evils 
▁ xxmaj that thou with license of free foot hast caught 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou disgorge into the general world . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj why , who cries out on pride 
▁ xxmaj that can therein tax any private party ? 
▁ xxmaj doth it not flow as hugely as the sea , 
▁ xxmaj till that the wearer 's very means do ebb ? 
▁ xxmaj what woman in the city do i name 
▁ xxmaj when that i say the city - woman bears 
▁ xxmaj the cost of princes on unworthy shoulders ? 
▁ xxmaj who can come in and say that i mean her , 
▁ xxmaj when such a one as she such is her neighbour ? 
▁ xxmaj or what is he of basest function 
▁ xxmaj that says his bravery is not on my cost , 
▁ xxmaj thinking that i mean him , but therein suits 
▁ xxmaj his folly to the mettle of my speech ? 
▁ xxmaj there then ! how then ? what then ? xxmaj let me see wherein 
▁ xxmaj my tongue hath wrong'd him : if it do him right , 
▁ xxmaj then he hath wrong'd himself ; if he be free , 
▁ xxmaj why then my taxing like a wild - goose flies , 
▁ xxmaj unclaim'd of any man . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup orlando with his sword drawn 

▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj forbear , and eat no more . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj why , i have eat none yet . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj nor shalt not , till necessity be serv'd . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj of what kind should this cock come of ? 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj art thou thus bolden'd , man , by thy distress ? 
▁ xxmaj or else a rude despiser of good manners , 
▁ xxmaj that in civility thou seem'st so empty ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj you touch'd my vein at first : the thorny point 
▁ xxmaj of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show 
▁ xxmaj of smooth civility ; yet arn i inland bred , 
▁ xxmaj and know some nurture . xxmaj but forbear , i say ; 
▁ xxmaj he dies that touches any of this fruit 
▁ xxmaj till i and my affairs are answered . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj an you will not be answer'd with reason , i must die . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj what would you have ? xxmaj your gentleness shall force 
▁ xxmaj more than your force move us to gentleness . 
▁ xxup orlando . i almost die for food , and let me have it . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj sit down and feed , and welcome to our table . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj speak you so gently ? xxmaj pardon me , i pray you ; 
▁ i thought that all things had been savage here , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore put i on the countenance 
▁ xxmaj of stern commandment . xxmaj but whate'er you are 
▁ xxmaj that in this desert inaccessible , 
▁ xxmaj under the shade of melancholy boughs , 
▁ xxmaj lose and neglect the creeping hours of time ; 
▁ xxmaj if ever you have look'd on better days , 
▁ xxmaj if ever been where bells have knoll'd to church , 
▁ xxmaj if ever sat at any good man 's feast , 
▁ xxmaj if ever from your eyelids wip'd a tear , 
▁ xxmaj and know what ' tis to pity and be pitied , 
▁ xxmaj let gentleness my strong enforcement be ; 
▁ xxmaj in the which hope i blush , and hide my sword . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj true is it that we have seen better days , 
▁ xxmaj and have with holy bell been knoll'd to church , 
▁ xxmaj and sat at good men 's feasts , and wip'd our eyes 
▁ xxmaj of drops that sacred pity hath engend'red ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore sit you down in gentleness , 
▁ xxmaj and take upon command what help we have 
▁ xxmaj that to your wanting may be minist'red . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj then but forbear your food a little while , 
▁ xxmaj whiles , like a doe , i go to find my fawn , 
▁ xxmaj and give it food . xxmaj there is an old poor man 
▁ xxmaj who after me hath many a weary step 
▁ xxmaj limp'd in pure love ; till he be first suffic'd , 
▁ xxmaj oppress'd with two weak evils , age and hunger , 
▁ i will not touch a bit . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj go find him out . 
▁ xxmaj and we will nothing waste till you return . 
▁ xxup orlando . i thank ye ; and be blest for your good comfort ! 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj thou seest we are not all alone unhappy : 
▁ xxmaj this wide and universal theatre 
▁ xxmaj presents more woeful pageants than the scene 
▁ xxmaj wherein we play in . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj all the world 's a stage , 
▁ xxmaj and all the men and women merely players ; 
▁ xxmaj they have their exits and their entrances ; 
▁ xxmaj and one man in his time plays many parts , 
▁ xxmaj his acts being seven ages . xxmaj at first the infant , 
▁ xxmaj mewling and puking in the nurse 's arms ; 
▁ xxmaj then the whining school - boy , with his satchel 
▁ xxmaj and shining morning face , creeping like snail 
▁ xxmaj unwillingly to school . xxmaj and then the lover , 
▁ xxmaj sighing like furnace , with a woeful ballad 
▁ xxmaj made to his mistress ' eyebrow . xxmaj then a soldier , 
▁ xxmaj full of strange oaths , and bearded like the pard , 
▁ xxmaj jealous in honour , sudden and quick in quarrel , 
▁ xxmaj seeking the bubble reputation 
▁ xxmaj even in the cannon 's mouth . xxmaj and then the justice , 
▁ xxmaj in fair round belly with good capon lin'd , 
▁ xxmaj with eyes severe and beard of formal cut , 
▁ xxmaj full of wise saws and modern instances ; 
▁ xxmaj and so he plays his part . xxmaj the sixth age shifts 
▁ xxmaj into the lean and slipper'd pantaloon , 
▁ xxmaj with spectacles on nose and pouch on side , 
▁ xxmaj his youthful hose , well sav'd , a world too wide 
▁ xxmaj for his shrunk shank ; and his big manly voice , 
▁ xxmaj turning again toward childish treble , pipes 
▁ xxmaj and whistles in his sound . xxmaj last scene of all , 
▁ xxmaj that ends this strange eventful history , 
▁ xxmaj is second childishness and mere oblivion ; 
▁ xxmaj sans teeth , sans eyes , sans taste , sans every thing . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup orlando with xxup adam 

▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj welcome . xxmaj set down your venerable burden . 
▁ xxmaj and let him feed . 
▁ xxup orlando . i thank you most for him . 
▁ xxup adam . xxmaj so had you need ; 
▁ i scarce can speak to thank you for myself . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj welcome ; fall to . i will not trouble you 
▁ xxmaj as yet to question you about your fortunes . 
▁ xxmaj give us some music ; and , good cousin , sing . 

▁ xxup song 
▁ xxmaj blow , blow , thou winter wind , 
▁ xxmaj thou art not so unkind 
▁ xxmaj as man 's ingratitude ; 
▁ xxmaj thy tooth is not so keen , 
▁ xxmaj because thou art not seen , 
▁ xxmaj although thy breath be rude . 
▁ xxmaj heigh - ho ! sing heigh - ho ! unto the green holly . 
▁ xxmaj most friendship is feigning , most loving mere folly . 
▁ xxmaj then , heigh - ho , the holly ! 
▁ xxmaj this life is most jolly . 

▁ xxmaj freeze , freeze , thou bitter sky , 
▁ xxmaj that dost not bite so nigh 
▁ xxmaj as benefits forgot ; 
▁ xxmaj though thou the waters warp , 
▁ xxmaj thy sting is not so sharp 
▁ xxmaj as friend rememb'red not . 
▁ xxmaj heigh - ho ! sing , & c. 

▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj if that you were the good xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland 's son , 
▁ xxmaj as you have whisper'd faithfully you were , 
▁ xxmaj and as mine eye doth his effigies witness 
▁ xxmaj most truly limn'd and living in your face , 
▁ xxmaj be truly welcome hither . i am the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj that lov'd your father . xxmaj the residue of your fortune , 
▁ xxmaj go to my cave and tell me . xxmaj good old man , 
▁ xxmaj thou art right welcome as thy master is . 
▁ xxmaj support him by the arm . xxmaj give me your hand , 
▁ xxmaj and let me all your fortunes understand . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup frederick , xxup oliver , and xxup lords 

▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj not see him since ! xxmaj sir , sir , that can not be . 
▁ xxmaj but were i not the better part made mercy , 
▁ i should not seek an absent argument 
▁ xxmaj of my revenge , thou present . xxmaj but look to it : 
▁ xxmaj find out thy brother wheresoe'er he is ; 
▁ xxmaj seek him with candle ; bring him dead or living 
▁ xxmaj within this twelvemonth , or turn thou no more 
▁ xxmaj to seek a living in our territory . 
▁ xxmaj thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine 
▁ xxmaj worth seizure do we seize into our hands , 
▁ xxmaj till thou canst quit thee by thy brother 's mouth 
▁ xxmaj of what we think against thee . 
▁ xxup oliver . o that your xxmaj highness knew my heart in this ! 
▁ i never lov'd my brother in my life . 
▁ xxup frederick . xxmaj more villain thou . xxmaj well , push him out of doors ; 
▁ xxmaj and let my officers of such a nature 
▁ xxmaj make an extent upon his house and lands . 
▁ xxmaj do this expediently , and turn him going . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup orlando , with a paper 

▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj hang there , my verse , in witness of my love ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou , thrice - crowned xxmaj queen of xxmaj night , survey 
▁ xxmaj with thy chaste eye , from thy pale sphere above , 
▁ xxmaj thy huntress ' name that my full life doth sway . 
▁ o xxmaj rosalind ! these trees shall be my books , 
▁ xxmaj and in their barks my thoughts xxmaj i 'll character , 
▁ xxmaj that every eye which in this forest looks 
▁ xxmaj shall see thy virtue witness'd every where . 
▁ xxmaj run , run , xxmaj orlando ; carve on every tree , 
▁ xxmaj the fair , the chaste , and unexpressive she . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup corin and xxup touchstone 

▁ xxup corin . xxmaj and how like you this shepherd 's life , xxmaj master xxmaj touchstone ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj truly , shepherd , in respect of itself , it is a good 
▁ life ; but in respect that it is a shepherd 's life , it is nought . 
▁ xxmaj in respect that it is solitary , i like it very well ; but in 
▁ respect that it is private , it is a very vile life . xxmaj now in 
▁ respect it is in the fields , it pleaseth me well ; but in respect 
▁ it is not in the court , it is tedious . xxmaj as it is a spare life , 
▁ look you , it fits my humour well ; but as there is no more plenty 
▁ in it , it goes much against my stomach . xxmaj hast any philosophy in 
▁ thee , shepherd ? 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj no more but that i know the more one sickens the worse at 
▁ ease he is ; and that he that wants money , means , and content , is 
▁ without three good friends ; that the property of rain is to wet , 
▁ and fire to burn ; that good pasture makes fat sheep ; and that a 
▁ great cause of the night is lack of the sun ; that he that hath 
▁ learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding , 
▁ or comes of a very dull kindred . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj such a one is a natural philosopher . xxmaj wast ever in 
▁ court , shepherd ? 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj no , truly . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj then thou art damn'd . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj nay , i hope . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj truly , thou art damn'd , like an ill - roasted egg , all on 
▁ one side . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj for not being at court ? xxmaj your reason . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj why , if thou never wast at court thou never saw'st good 
▁ manners ; if thou never saw'st good manners , then thy manners must 
▁ be wicked ; and wickedness is sin , and sin is damnation . xxmaj thou art 
▁ in a parlous state , shepherd . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj not a whit , xxmaj touchstone . xxmaj those that are good manners at the 
▁ court are as ridiculous in the country as the behaviour of the 
▁ country is most mockable at the court . xxmaj you told me you salute not 
▁ at the court , but you kiss your hands ; that courtesy would be 
▁ uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj instance , briefly ; come , instance . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj why , we are still handling our ewes ; and their fells , you 
▁ know , are greasy . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj why , do not your courtier 's hands sweat ? xxmaj and is not the 
▁ grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man ? xxmaj shallow , 
▁ shallow . a better instance , i say ; come . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj besides , our hands are hard . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj your lips will feel them the sooner . xxmaj shallow again . a 
▁ more sounder instance ; come . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj and they are often tarr'd over with the surgery of our 
▁ sheep ; and would you have us kiss tar ? xxmaj the courtier 's hands are 
▁ perfum'd with civet . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj most shallow man ! thou worm 's meat in respect of a good 
▁ piece of flesh indeed ! xxmaj learn of the wise , and perpend : civet is 
▁ of a baser birth than tar- the very uncleanly flux of a cat . xxmaj mend 
▁ the instance , shepherd . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj you have too courtly a wit for me ; xxmaj i 'll rest . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj wilt thou rest damn'd ? xxmaj god help thee , shallow man ! xxmaj god 
▁ make incision in thee ! thou art raw . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj sir , i am a true labourer : i earn that i eat , get that i 
▁ wear ; owe no man hate , envy no man 's happiness ; glad of other 
▁ men 's good , content with my harm ; and the greatest of my pride is 
▁ to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj that is another simple sin in you : to bring the ewes 
▁ and the rams together , and to offer to get your living by the 
▁ copulation of cattle ; to be bawd to a bell - wether , and to betray 
▁ a she - lamb of a twelvemonth to crooked - pated , old , cuckoldly ram , 
▁ out of all reasonable match . xxmaj if thou beest not damn'd for this , 
▁ the devil himself will have no shepherds ; i can not see else how 
▁ thou shouldst scape . 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj here comes young xxmaj master xxmaj ganymede , my new mistress 's brother . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup rosalind , reading a paper 

▁ xxup rosalind . ' from the east to western xxmaj inde , 
▁ xxmaj no jewel is like xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj her worth , being mounted on the wind , 
▁ xxmaj through all the world bears xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj all the pictures fairest lin'd 
▁ xxmaj are but black to xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj let no face be kept in mind 
▁ xxmaj but the fair of xxmaj rosalinde . ' 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj i 'll rhyme you so eight years together , dinners , and 
▁ suppers , and sleeping hours , excepted . xxmaj it is the right 
▁ butter - women 's rank to market . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj out , fool ! 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj for a taste : 
▁ xxmaj if a hart do lack a hind , 
▁ xxmaj let him seek out xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj if the cat will after kind , 
▁ xxmaj so be sure will xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj winter garments must be lin'd , 
▁ xxmaj so must slender xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj they that reap must sheaf and bind , 
▁ xxmaj then to cart with xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj sweetest nut hath sourest rind , 
▁ xxmaj such a nut is xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj he that sweetest rose will find 
▁ xxmaj must find love 's prick and xxmaj rosalinde . 
▁ xxmaj this is the very false gallop of verses ; why do you infect 
▁ yourself with them ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj peace , you dull fool ! i found them on a tree . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj truly , the tree yields bad fruit . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj i 'll graff it with you , and then i shall graff it with a 
▁ medlar . xxmaj then it will be the earliest fruit i ' th ' country ; for 
▁ you 'll be rotten ere you be half ripe , and that 's the right 
▁ virtue of the medlar . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj you have said ; but whether wisely or no , let the forest 
▁ judge . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup celia , with a writing 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxmaj here comes my sister , reading ; stand aside . 
▁ xxup celia . ' why should this a desert be ? 
▁ xxmaj for it is unpeopled ? xxmaj no ; 
▁ xxmaj tongues xxmaj i 'll hang on every tree 
▁ xxmaj that shall civil sayings show . 
▁ xxmaj some , how brief the life of man 
▁ xxmaj runs his erring pilgrimage , 
▁ xxmaj that the streching of a span 
▁ xxmaj buckles in his sum of age ; 
▁ xxmaj some , of violated vows 
▁ ' twixt the souls of friend and friend ; 
▁ xxmaj but upon the fairest boughs , 
▁ xxmaj or at every sentence end , 
▁ xxmaj will i xxmaj rosalinda write , 
▁ xxmaj teaching all that read to know 
▁ xxmaj the quintessence of every sprite 
▁ xxmaj heaven would in little show . 
▁ xxmaj therefore heaven xxmaj nature charg'd 
▁ xxmaj that one body should be fill'd 
▁ xxmaj with all graces wide - enlarg'd . 
▁ xxmaj nature presently distill'd 
▁ xxmaj helen 's cheek , but not her heart , 
▁ xxmaj cleopatra 's majesty , 
▁ xxmaj atalanta 's better part , 
▁ xxmaj sad xxmaj lucretia 's modesty . 
▁ xxmaj thus xxmaj rosalinde of many parts 
▁ xxmaj by heavenly synod was devis'd , 
▁ xxmaj of many faces , eyes , and hearts , 
▁ xxmaj to have the touches dearest priz'd . 
▁ xxmaj heaven would that she these gifts should have , 
▁ xxmaj and i to live and die her slave . ' 
▁ xxup rosalind . o most gentle pulpiter ! xxmaj what tedious homily of love have 
▁ you wearied your parishioners withal , and never cried ' have 
▁ patience , good people . ' 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj back , friends ; shepherd , go off a little ; go with 
▁ him , sirrah . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj come , shepherd , let us make an honourable retreat ; 
▁ though not with bag and baggage , yet with scrip and scrippage . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup corin and xxup touchstone 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj didst thou hear these verses ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup o , yes , i heard them all , and more too ; for some of them 
▁ had in them more feet than the verses would bear . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj that 's no matter ; the feet might bear the verses . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , but the feet were lame , and could not bear themselves 
▁ without the verse , and therefore stood lamely in the verse . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj but didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be 
▁ hang'd and carved upon these trees ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . i was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you 
▁ came ; for look here what i found on a palm - tree . i was never so 
▁ berhym'd since xxmaj pythagoras ' time that i was an xxmaj irish rat , which i 
▁ can hardly remember . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj trow you who hath done this ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj is it a man ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj and a chain , that you once wore , about his neck . 
▁ xxmaj change you colour ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . i prithee , who ? 
▁ xxup celia . o xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord ! it is a hard matter for friends to meet ; but 
▁ mountains may be remov'd with earthquakes , and so encounter . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , but who is it ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj is it possible ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , i prithee now , with most petitionary vehemence , tell 
▁ me who it is . 
▁ xxup celia . o wonderful , wonderful , most wonderful wonderful , and yet 
▁ again wonderful , and after that , out of all whooping ! 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj good my complexion ! dost thou think , though i am 
▁ caparison'd like a man , i have a doublet and hose in my 
▁ disposition ? xxmaj one inch of delay more is a xxmaj south xxmaj sea of discovery . 
▁ i prithee tell me who is it quickly , and speak apace . i would 
▁ thou could'st stammer , that thou mightst pour this conceal'd man 
▁ out of thy mouth , as wine comes out of narrow - mouth'd bottle- 
▁ either too much at once or none at all . i prithee take the cork 
▁ out of thy mouth that i may drink thy tidings . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj so you may put a man in your belly . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj is he of xxmaj god 's making ? xxmaj what manner of man ? 
▁ xxmaj is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj nay , he hath but a little beard . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why , xxmaj god will send more if the man will be thankful . xxmaj let 
▁ me stay the growth of his beard , if thou delay me not the 
▁ knowledge of his chin . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj it is young xxmaj orlando , that tripp'd up the wrestler 's heels 
▁ and your heart both in an instant . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , but the devil take mocking ! xxmaj speak sad brow and true 
▁ maid . 
▁ xxup celia . xxup i ' faith , coz , ' tis he . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj orlando ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj orlando . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj alas the day ! what shall i do with my doublet and hose ? 
▁ xxmaj what did he when thou saw'st him ? xxmaj what said he ? xxmaj how look'd he ? 
▁ xxmaj wherein went he ? xxmaj what makes he here ? xxmaj did he ask for me ? xxmaj where 
▁ remains he ? xxmaj how parted he with thee ? xxmaj and when shalt thou see him 
▁ again ? xxmaj answer me in one word . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj you must borrow me xxmaj gargantua 's mouth first ; ' tis a word too 
▁ great for any mouth of this age 's size . xxmaj to say ay and no to these 
▁ particulars is more than to answer in a catechism . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but doth he know that i am in this forest , and in man 's 
▁ apparel ? xxmaj looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj it is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the 
▁ propositions of a lover ; but take a taste of my finding him , and 
▁ relish it with good observance . i found him under a tree , like a 
▁ dropp'd acorn . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj it may well be call'd xxmaj jove 's tree , when it drops forth 
▁ such fruit . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj give me audience , good madam . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj there lay he , stretch'd along like a wounded knight . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj though it be pity to see such a sight , it well becomes 
▁ the ground . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj cry ' holla ' to thy tongue , i prithee ; it curvets 
▁ unseasonably . xxmaj he was furnish'd like a hunter . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup o , ominous ! he comes to kill my heart . 
▁ xxup celia . i would sing my song without a burden ; thou bring'st me out 
▁ of tune . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj do you not know i am a woman ? xxmaj when i think , i must speak . 
▁ xxmaj sweet , say on . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj you bring me out . xxmaj soft ! comes he not here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup orlando and xxup jaques 

▁ xxup rosalind . ' tis he ; slink by , and note him . 
▁ xxup jaques . i thank you for your company ; but , good faith , i had as 
▁ lief have been myself alone . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and so had xxup i ; but yet , for fashion sake , i thank you too 
▁ for your society . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj god buy you ; let 's meet as little as we can . 
▁ xxup orlando . i do desire we may be better strangers . 
▁ xxup jaques . i pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs in 
▁ their barks . 
▁ xxup orlando . i pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them 
▁ ill - favouredly . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj rosalind is your love 's name ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj yes , just . 
▁ xxup jaques . i do not like her name . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj there was no thought of pleasing you when she was 
▁ christen'd . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj what stature is she of ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj just as high as my heart . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj you are full of pretty answers . xxmaj have you not been 
▁ acquainted with goldsmiths ' wives , and conn'd them out of rings ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj not so ; but i answer you right painted cloth , from whence 
▁ you have studied your questions . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj you have a nimble wit ; i think ' twas made of xxmaj atalanta 's 
▁ heels . xxmaj will you sit down with me ? and we two will rail against 
▁ our mistress the world , and all our misery . 
▁ xxup orlando . i will chide no breather in the world but myself , against 
▁ whom i know most faults . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj the worst fault you have is to be in love . 
▁ xxup orlando . ' tis a fault i will not change for your best virtue . i am 
▁ weary of you . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj by my troth , i was seeking for a fool when i found you . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj he is drown'd in the brook ; look but in , and you shall see 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj there i shall see mine own figure . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj which i take to be either a fool or a cipher . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj i 'll tarry no longer with you ; farewell , good xxmaj signior xxmaj love . 
▁ xxup orlando . i am glad of your departure ; adieu , good xxmaj monsieur 
▁ xxmaj melancholy . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup jaques 
▁ xxup rosalind . [ aside to xxup celia ] i will speak to him like a saucy lackey , 
▁ and under that habit play the knave with him.- xxmaj do you hear , 
▁ forester ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj very well ; what would you ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . i pray you , what is't o'clock ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj you should ask me what time o ' day ; there 's no clock in 
▁ the forest . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj then there is no true lover in the forest , else sighing 
▁ every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot 
▁ of xxmaj time as well as a clock . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and why not the swift foot of xxmaj time ? xxmaj had not that been as 
▁ proper ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj by no means , sir . xxmaj time travels in divers paces with 
▁ divers persons . xxmaj i 'll tell you who xxmaj time ambles withal , who xxmaj time 
▁ trots withal , who xxmaj time gallops withal , and who he stands still 
▁ withal . 
▁ xxup orlando . i prithee , who doth he trot withal ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj marry , he trots hard with a young maid between the 
▁ contract of her marriage and the day it is solemniz'd ; if the 
▁ interim be but a se'nnight , xxmaj time 's pace is so hard that it seems 
▁ the length of seven year . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj who ambles xxmaj time withal ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj with a priest that lacks xxmaj latin and a rich man that hath 
▁ not the gout ; for the one sleeps easily because he can not study , 
▁ and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain ; the one 
▁ lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning , the other 
▁ knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury . xxmaj these xxmaj time ambles 
▁ withal . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj who doth he gallop withal ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj with a thief to the gallows ; for though he go as softly 
▁ as foot can fall , he thinks himself too soon there . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj who stays it still withal ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj with lawyers in the vacation ; for they sleep between term 
▁ and term , and then they perceive not how xxmaj time moves . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj where dwell you , pretty youth ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj with this shepherdess , my sister ; here in the skirts of 
▁ the forest , like fringe upon a petticoat . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj are you native of this place ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj as the coney that you see dwell where she is kindled . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj your accent is something finer than you could purchase in 
▁ so removed a dwelling . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i have been told so of many ; but indeed an old religious 
▁ uncle of mine taught me to speak , who was in his youth an inland 
▁ man ; one that knew courtship too well , for there he fell in love . 
▁ i have heard him read many lectures against it ; and i thank xxmaj god i 
▁ am not a woman , to be touch'd with so many giddy offences as he 
▁ hath generally tax'd their whole sex withal . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid 
▁ to the charge of women ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj there were none principal ; they were all like one another 
▁ as halfpence are ; every one fault seeming monstrous till his 
▁ fellow - fault came to match it . 
▁ xxup orlando . i prithee recount some of them . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj no ; i will not cast away my physic but on those that are 
▁ sick . xxmaj there is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young 
▁ plants with carving ' rosalind ' on their barks ; hangs odes upon 
▁ hawthorns and elegies on brambles ; all , forsooth , deifying the 
▁ name of xxmaj rosalind . xxmaj if i could meet that fancy - monger , i would give 
▁ him some good counsel , for he seems to have the quotidian of love 
▁ upon him . 
▁ xxup orlando . i am he that is so love - shak'd ; i pray you tell me your 
▁ remedy . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj there is none of my uncle 's marks upon you ; he taught me 
▁ how to know a man in love ; in which cage of rushes i am sure you 
▁ are not prisoner . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj what were his marks ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . a lean cheek , which you have not ; a blue eye and sunken , 
▁ which you have not ; an unquestionable spirit , which you have not ; 
▁ a beard neglected , which you have not ; but i pardon you for that , 
▁ for simply your having in beard is a younger brother 's revenue . 
▁ xxmaj then your hose should be ungarter'd , your bonnet unbanded , your 
▁ sleeve unbutton'd , your shoe untied , and every thing about you 
▁ demonstrating a careless desolation . xxmaj but you are no such man ; you 
▁ are rather point - device in your accoutrements , as loving yourself 
▁ than seeming the lover of any other . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj fair youth , i would i could make thee believe i love . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj me believe it ! xxmaj you may as soon make her that you love