xxbos believe it ; which , i warrant , she is apter to do than to confess 
▁ she does . xxmaj that is one of the points in the which women still give 
▁ the lie to their consciences . xxmaj but , in good sooth , are you he that 
▁ hangs the verses on the trees wherein xxmaj rosalind is so admired ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i swear to thee , youth , by the white hand of xxmaj rosalind , i 
▁ am that he , that unfortunate he . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but are you so much in love as your rhymes speak ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj neither rhyme nor reason can express how much . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj love is merely a madness ; and , i tell you , deserves as 
▁ well a dark house and a whip as madmen do ; and the reason why 
▁ they are not so punish'd and cured is that the lunacy is so 
▁ ordinary that the whippers are in love too . xxmaj yet i profess curing 
▁ it by counsel . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj did you ever cure any so ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj yes , one ; and in this manner . xxmaj he was to imagine me his 
▁ love , his mistress ; and i set him every day to woo me ; at which 
▁ time would xxup i , being but a moonish youth , grieve , be effeminate , 
▁ changeable , longing and liking , proud , fantastical , apish , 
▁ shallow , inconstant , full of tears , full of smiles ; for every 
▁ passion something and for no passion truly anything , as boys and 
▁ women are for the most part cattle of this colour ; would now like 
▁ him , now loathe him ; then entertain him , then forswear him ; now 
▁ weep for him , then spit at him ; that i drave my suitor from his 
▁ mad humour of love to a living humour of madness ; which was , to 
▁ forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook 
▁ merely monastic . xxmaj and thus i cur'd him ; and this way will i take 
▁ upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep 's heart , 
▁ that there shall not be one spot of love in ' t. 
▁ xxup orlando . i would not be cured , youth . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i would cure you , if you would but call me xxmaj rosalind , and 
▁ come every day to my cote and woo me . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj now , by the faith of my love , i will . xxmaj tell me where it is . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj go with me to it , and xxmaj i 'll show it you ; and , by the way , 
▁ you shall tell me where in the forest you live . xxmaj will you go ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj with all my heart , good youth . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , you must call me xxmaj rosalind . xxmaj come , sister , will you 
▁ go ? xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup touchstone and xxup audrey ; xxup jaques behind 

▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj come apace , good xxmaj audrey ; i will fetch up your goats , 
▁ xxmaj audrey . xxmaj and how , xxmaj audrey , am i the man yet ? xxmaj doth my simple feature 
▁ content you ? 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj your features ! xxmaj lord warrant us ! xxmaj what features ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . i am here with thee and thy goats , as the most 
▁ capricious poet , honest xxmaj ovid , was among the xxmaj goths . 
▁ xxup jaques . [ aside ] o knowledge ill - inhabited , worse than xxmaj jove in a 
▁ thatch'd house ! 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj when a man 's verses can not be understood , nor a man 's 
▁ good wit seconded with the forward child understanding , it 
▁ strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room . 
▁ xxmaj truly , i would the gods had made thee poetical . 
▁ xxup audrey . i do not know what ' poetical ' is . xxmaj is it honest in deed and 
▁ word ? xxmaj is it a true thing ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj no , truly ; for the truest poetry is the most feigning , 
▁ and lovers are given to poetry ; and what they swear in poetry may 
▁ be said as lovers they do feign . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj do you wish , then , that the gods had made me poetical ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . i do , truly , for thou swear'st to me thou art honest ; 
▁ now , if thou wert a poet , i might have some hope thou didst 
▁ feign . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj would you not have me honest ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj no , truly , unless thou wert hard - favour'd ; for honesty 
▁ coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar . 
▁ xxup jaques . [ aside ] a material fool ! 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj well , i am not fair ; and therefore i pray the gods make me 
▁ honest . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj truly , and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were 
▁ to put good meat into an unclean dish . 
▁ xxup audrey . i am not a slut , though i thank the gods i am foul . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj well , praised be the gods for thy foulness ; 
▁ sluttishness may come hereafter . xxmaj but be it as it may be , i will 
▁ marry thee ; and to that end i have been with xxmaj sir xxmaj oliver xxmaj martext , 
▁ the vicar of the next village , who hath promis'd to meet me in 
▁ this place of the forest , and to couple us . 
▁ xxup jaques . [ aside ] i would fain see this meeting . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj well , the gods give us joy ! 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj amen . a man may , if he were of a fearful heart , stagger 
▁ in this attempt ; for here we have no temple but the wood , no 
▁ assembly but horn - beasts . xxmaj but what though ? xxmaj courage ! xxmaj as horns are 
▁ odious , they are necessary . xxmaj it is said : ' many a man knows no end 
▁ of his goods . ' xxmaj right ! xxmaj many a man has good horns and knows no end 
▁ of them . xxmaj well , that is the dowry of his wife ; ' tis none of his 
▁ own getting . xxmaj horns ? xxmaj even so . xxmaj poor men alone ? xxmaj no , no ; the noblest 
▁ deer hath them as huge as the rascal . xxmaj is the single man therefore 
▁ blessed ? xxmaj no ; as a wall'd town is more worthier than a village , so 
▁ is the forehead of a married man more honourable than the bare 
▁ brow of a bachelor ; and by how much defence is better than no 
▁ skill , by so much is horn more precious than to want . xxmaj here comes 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj oliver . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup oliver xxup martext 

▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj oliver xxmaj martext , you are well met . xxmaj will you dispatch us here 
▁ under this tree , or shall we go with you to your chapel ? 
▁ xxup martext . xxmaj is there none here to give the woman ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . i will not take her on gift of any man . 
▁ xxup martext . xxmaj truly , she must be given , or the marriage is not lawful . 
▁ xxup jaques . [ discovering himself ] xxmaj proceed , proceed ; xxmaj i 'll give her . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj good even , good xxmaj master xxmaj what - ye - call't ; how do you , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj you are very well met . xxmaj goddild you for your last company . i am 
▁ very glad to see you . xxmaj even a toy in hand here , sir . xxmaj nay ; pray be 
▁ cover'd . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj will you be married , motley ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj as the ox hath his bow , sir , the horse his curb , and 
▁ the falcon her bells , so man hath his desires ; and as pigeons 
▁ bill , so wedlock would be nibbling . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj and will you , being a man of your breeding , be married 
▁ under a bush , like a beggar ? xxmaj get you to church and have a good 
▁ priest that can tell you what marriage is ; this fellow will but 
▁ join you together as they join wainscot ; then one of you will 
▁ prove a shrunk panel , and like green timber warp , warp . 
▁ xxup touchstone . [ aside ] i am not in the mind but i were better to be 
▁ married of him than of another ; for he is not like to marry me 
▁ well ; and not being well married , it will be a good excuse for me 
▁ hereafter to leave my wife . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj go thou with me , and let me counsel thee . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj come , sweet xxmaj audrey ; 
▁ xxmaj we must be married or we must live in bawdry . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj master xxmaj oliver . xxmaj not- 
▁ o sweet xxmaj oliver , 
▁ o brave xxmaj oliver , 
▁ xxmaj leave me not behind thee . 
▁ xxmaj but- 
▁ xxmaj wind away , 
▁ xxmaj begone , i say , 
▁ i will not to wedding with thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup jaques , xxup touchstone , and xxup audrey 
▁ xxup martext . ' tis no matter ; ne'er a fantastical knave of them all 
▁ shall flout me out of my calling . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup rosalind and xxup celia 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj never talk to me ; i will weep . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj do , i prithee ; but yet have the grace to consider that tears 
▁ do not become a man . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but have i not cause to weep ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj as good cause as one would desire ; therefore weep . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj his very hair is of the dissembling colour . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj something browner than xxmaj judas 's . 
▁ xxmaj marry , his kisses are xxmaj judas 's own children . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup i ' faith , his hair is of a good colour . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj an excellent colour : your chestnut was ever the only colour . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of 
▁ holy bread . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj he hath bought a pair of cast lips of xxmaj diana . a nun of 
▁ winter 's sisterhood kisses not more religiously ; the very ice of 
▁ chastity is in them . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but why did he swear he would come this morning , and 
▁ comes not ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj nay , certainly , there is no truth in him . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj do you think so ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj yes ; i think he is not a pick - purse nor a horse - stealer ; but 
▁ for his verity in love , i do think him as concave as covered 
▁ goblet or a worm - eaten nut . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj not true in love ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj yes , when he is in ; but i think he is not in . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj you have heard him swear downright he was . 
▁ xxup celia . ' was ' is not ' is ' ; besides , the oath of a lover is no 
▁ stronger than the word of a tapster ; they are both the confirmer 
▁ of false reckonings . xxmaj he attends here in the forest on the xxmaj duke , 
▁ your father . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i met the xxmaj duke yesterday , and had much question with him . 
▁ xxmaj he asked me of what parentage i was ; i told him , of as good as 
▁ he ; so he laugh'd and let me go . xxmaj but what talk we of fathers when 
▁ there is such a man as xxmaj orlando ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxup o , that 's a brave man ! xxmaj he writes brave verses , speaks brave 
▁ words , swears brave oaths , and breaks them bravely , quite 
▁ traverse , athwart the heart of his lover ; as a puny tilter , that 
▁ spurs his horse but on one side , breaks his staff like a noble 
▁ goose . xxmaj but all 's brave that youth mounts and folly guides . xxmaj who 
▁ comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup corin 

▁ xxup corin . xxmaj mistress and master , you have oft enquired 
▁ xxmaj after the shepherd that complain'd of love , 
▁ xxmaj who you saw sitting by me on the turf , 
▁ xxmaj praising the proud disdainful shepherdess 
▁ xxmaj that was his mistress . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj well , and what of him ? 
▁ xxup corin . xxmaj if you will see a pageant truly play'd 
▁ xxmaj between the pale complexion of true love 
▁ xxmaj and the red glow of scorn and proud disdain , 
▁ xxmaj go hence a little , and i shall conduct you , 
▁ xxmaj if you will mark it . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup o , come , let us remove ! 
▁ xxmaj the sight of lovers feedeth those in love . 
▁ xxmaj bring us to this sight , and you shall say 
▁ xxmaj i 'll prove a busy actor in their play . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj another part of the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup silvius and xxup phebe 

▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj sweet xxmaj phebe , do not scorn me ; do not , xxmaj phebe . 
▁ xxmaj say that you love me not ; but say not so 
▁ xxmaj in bitterness . xxmaj the common executioner , 
▁ xxmaj whose heart th ' accustom'd sight of death makes hard , 
▁ xxmaj falls not the axe upon the humbled neck 
▁ xxmaj but first begs pardon . xxmaj will you sterner be 
▁ xxmaj than he that dies and lives by bloody drops ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup rosalind , xxup celia , and xxup corin , at a distance 

▁ xxup phebe . i would not be thy executioner ; 
▁ i fly thee , for i would not injure thee . 
▁ xxmaj thou tell'st me there is murder in mine eye . 
▁ ' tis pretty , sure , and very probable , 
▁ xxmaj that eyes , that are the frail'st and softest things , 
▁ xxmaj who shut their coward gates on atomies , 
▁ xxmaj should be call'd tyrants , butchers , murderers ! 
▁ xxmaj now i do frown on thee with all my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and if mine eyes can wound , now let them kill thee . 
▁ xxmaj now counterfeit to swoon ; why , now fall down ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if thou canst not , xxup o , for shame , for shame , 
▁ xxmaj lie not , to say mine eyes are murderers . 
▁ xxmaj now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee . 
▁ xxmaj scratch thee but with a pin , and there remains 
▁ xxmaj some scar of it ; lean upon a rush , 
▁ xxmaj the cicatrice and capable impressure 
▁ xxmaj thy palm some moment keeps ; but now mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj which i have darted at thee , hurt thee not ; 
▁ xxmaj nor , i am sure , there is not force in eyes 
▁ xxmaj that can do hurt . 
▁ xxup silvius . o dear xxmaj phebe , 
▁ xxmaj if ever- as that ever may be near- 
▁ xxmaj you meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy , 
▁ xxmaj then shall you know the wounds invisible 
▁ xxmaj that love 's keen arrows make . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj but till that time 
▁ xxmaj come not thou near me ; and when that time comes , 
▁ xxmaj afflict me with thy mocks , pity me not ; 
▁ xxmaj as till that time i shall not pity thee . 
▁ xxup rosalind . [ advancing ] xxmaj and why , i pray you ? xxmaj who might be your 
▁ mother , 
▁ xxmaj that you insult , exult , and all at once , 
▁ xxmaj over the wretched ? xxmaj what though you have no beauty- 
▁ xxmaj as , by my faith , i see no more in you 
▁ xxmaj than without candle may go dark to bed- 
▁ xxmaj must you be therefore proud and pitiless ? 
▁ xxmaj why , what means this ? xxmaj why do you look on me ? 
▁ i see no more in you than in the ordinary 
▁ xxmaj of nature 's sale - work . ' od 's my little life , 
▁ i think she means to tangle my eyes too ! 
▁ xxmaj no faith , proud mistress , hope not after it ; 
▁ ' tis not your inky brows , your black silk hair , 
▁ xxmaj your bugle eyeballs , nor your cheek of cream , 
▁ xxmaj that can entame my spirits to your worship . 
▁ xxmaj you foolish shepherd , wherefore do you follow her , 
▁ xxmaj like foggy south , puffing with wind and rain ? 
▁ xxmaj you are a thousand times a properer man 
▁ xxmaj than she a woman . ' tis such fools as you 
▁ xxmaj that makes the world full of ill - favour'd children . 
▁ ' tis not her glass , but you , that flatters her ; 
▁ xxmaj and out of you she sees herself more proper 
▁ xxmaj than any of her lineaments can show her . 
▁ xxmaj but , mistress , know yourself . xxmaj down on your knees , 
▁ xxmaj and thank heaven , fasting , for a good man 's love ; 
▁ xxmaj for i must tell you friendly in your ear : 
▁ xxmaj sell when you can ; you are not for all markets . 
▁ xxmaj cry the man mercy , love him , take his offer ; 
▁ xxmaj foul is most foul , being foul to be a scoffer . 
▁ xxmaj so take her to thee , shepherd . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj sweet youth , i pray you chide a year together ; 
▁ i had rather hear you chide than this man woo . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj he 's fall'n in love with your foulness , and she 'll fall 
▁ in love with my anger . xxmaj if it be so , as fast as she answers thee 
▁ with frowning looks , xxmaj i 'll sauce her with bitter words . xxmaj why look 
▁ you so upon me ? 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj for no ill will i bear you . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i pray you do not fall in love with me , 
▁ xxmaj for i am falser than vows made in wine ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , i like you not . xxmaj if you will know my house , 
▁ ' tis at the tuft of olives here hard by . 
▁ xxmaj will you go , sister ? xxmaj shepherd , ply her hard . 
▁ xxmaj come , sister . xxmaj shepherdess , look on him better , 
▁ xxmaj and be not proud ; though all the world could see , 
▁ xxmaj none could be so abus'd in sight as he . 
▁ xxmaj come , to our flock . xxmaj exeunt xxup rosalind , xxup celia , and xxup corin 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj dead shepherd , now i find thy saw of might : 
▁ ' who ever lov'd that lov'd not at first sight ? ' 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj sweet xxmaj phebe . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj ha ! what say'st thou , xxmaj silvius ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj sweet xxmaj phebe , pity me . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj why , i arn sorry for thee , gentle xxmaj silvius . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj wherever sorrow is , relief would be . 
▁ xxmaj if you do sorrow at my grief in love , 
▁ xxmaj by giving love , your sorrow and my grief 
▁ xxmaj were both extermin'd . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj thou hast my love ; is not that neighbourly ? 
▁ xxup silvius . i would have you . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj why , that were covetousness . 
▁ xxmaj silvius , the time was that i hated thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet it is not that i bear thee love ; 
▁ xxmaj but since that thou canst talk of love so well , 
▁ xxmaj thy company , which erst was irksome to me , 
▁ i will endure ; and xxmaj i 'll employ thee too . 
▁ xxmaj but do not look for further recompense 
▁ xxmaj than thine own gladness that thou art employ'd . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj so holy and so perfect is my love , 
▁ xxmaj and i in such a poverty of grace , 
▁ xxmaj that i shall think it a most plenteous crop 
▁ xxmaj to glean the broken ears after the man 
▁ xxmaj that the main harvest reaps ; loose now and then 
▁ a scatt'red smile , and that xxmaj i 'll live upon . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj not very well ; but i have met him oft ; 
▁ xxmaj and he hath bought the cottage and the bounds 
▁ xxmaj that the old carlot once was master of . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj think not i love him , though i ask for him ; 
▁ ' tis but a peevish boy ; yet he talks well . 
▁ xxmaj but what care i for words ? xxmaj yet words do well 
▁ xxmaj when he that speaks them pleases those that hear . 
▁ xxmaj it is a pretty youth- not very pretty ; 
▁ xxmaj but , sure , he 's proud ; and yet his pride becomes him . 
▁ xxmaj he 'll make a proper man . xxmaj the best thing in him 
▁ xxmaj is his complexion ; and faster than his tongue 
▁ xxmaj did make offence , his eye did heal it up . 
▁ xxmaj he is not very tall ; yet for his years he 's tall ; 
▁ xxmaj his leg is but so - so ; and yet ' tis well . 
▁ xxmaj there was a pretty redness in his lip , 
▁ a little riper and more lusty red 
▁ xxmaj than that mix'd in his cheek ; ' twas just the difference 
▁ xxmaj betwixt the constant red and mingled damask . 
▁ xxmaj there be some women , xxmaj silvius , had they mark'd him 
▁ xxmaj in parcels as i did , would have gone near 
▁ xxmaj to fall in love with him ; but , for my part , 
▁ i love him not , nor hate him not ; and yet 
▁ i have more cause to hate him than to love him ; 
▁ xxmaj for what had he to do to chide at me ? 
▁ xxmaj he said mine eyes were black , and my hair black , 
▁ xxmaj and , now i am rememb'red , scorn'd at me . 
▁ i marvel why i answer'd not again ; 
▁ xxmaj but that 's all one : omittance is no quittance . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll write to him a very taunting letter , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt bear it ; wilt thou , xxmaj silvius ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj phebe , with all my heart . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj i 'll write it straight ; 
▁ xxmaj the matter 's in my head and in my heart ; 
▁ i will be bitter with him and passing short . 
▁ xxmaj go with me , xxmaj silvius . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup rosalind , xxup celia , and xxup jaques 

▁ xxup jaques . i prithee , pretty youth , let me be better acquainted with 
▁ thee . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj they say you are a melancholy fellow . 
▁ xxup jaques . i am so ; i do love it better than laughing . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj those that are in extremity of either are abominable 
▁ fellows , and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than 
▁ drunkards . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj why , ' tis good to be sad and say nothing . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why then , ' tis good to be a post . 
▁ xxup jaques . i have neither the scholar 's melancholy , which is 
▁ emulation ; nor the musician 's , which is fantastical ; nor the 
▁ courtier 's , which is proud ; nor the soldier 's , which is 
▁ ambitious ; nor the lawyer 's , which is politic ; nor the lady 's , 
▁ which is nice ; nor the lover 's , which is all these ; but it is a 
▁ melancholy of mine own , compounded of many simples , extracted 
▁ from many objects , and , indeed , the sundry contemplation of my 
▁ travels ; in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous 
▁ sadness . 
▁ xxup rosalind . a traveller ! xxmaj by my faith , you have great reason to be 
▁ sad . i fear you have sold your own lands to see other men 's ; then 
▁ to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and 
▁ poor hands . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj yes , i have gain'd my experience . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup orlando 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and your experience makes you sad . i had rather have a 
▁ fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad- and to 
▁ travel for it too . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj good day , and happiness , dear xxmaj rosalind ! 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj nay , then , xxmaj god buy you , an you talk in blank verse . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj monsieur xxmaj traveller ; look you lisp and wear 
▁ strange suits , disable all the benefits of your own country , be 
▁ out of love with your nativity , and almost chide xxmaj god for making 
▁ you that countenance you are ; or i will scarce think you have 
▁ swam in a gondola . [ exit xxup jaques ] xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj orlando ! where 
▁ have you been all this while ? xxmaj you a lover ! xxmaj an you serve me such 
▁ another trick , never come in my sight more . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj my fair xxmaj rosalind , i come within an hour of my promise . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj break an hour 's promise in love ! xxmaj he that will divide a 
▁ minute into a thousand parts , and break but a part of the 
▁ thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love , it may be said 
▁ of him that xxmaj cupid hath clapp'd him o ' th ' shoulder , but xxmaj i 'll 
▁ warrant him heart - whole . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj pardon me , dear xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , an you be so tardy , come no more in my sight . i had 
▁ as lief be woo'd of a snail . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj of a snail ! 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , of a snail ; for though he comes slowly , he carries 
▁ his house on his head- a better jointure , i think , than you make 
▁ a woman ; besides , he brings his destiny with him . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why , horns ; which such as you are fain to be beholding to 
▁ your wives for ; but he comes armed in his fortune , and prevents 
▁ the slander of his wife . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj virtue is no horn - maker ; and my xxmaj rosalind is virtuous . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and i am your xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj it pleases him to call you so ; but he hath a xxmaj rosalind of a 
▁ better leer than you . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj come , woo me , woo me ; for now i am in a holiday humour , 
▁ and like enough to consent . xxmaj what would you say to me now , an i 
▁ were your very very xxmaj rosalind ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i would kiss before i spoke . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , you were better speak first ; and when you were 
▁ gravell'd for lack of matter , you might take occasion to kiss . 
▁ xxmaj very good orators , when they are out , they will spit ; and for 
▁ lovers lacking- xxmaj god warn us!- matter , the cleanliest shift is to 
▁ kiss . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj how if the kiss be denied ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj then she puts you to entreaty , and there begins new 
▁ matter . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj who could be out , being before his beloved mistress ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj marry , that should you , if i were your mistress ; or i 
▁ should think my honesty ranker than my wit . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj what , of my suit ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj not out of your apparel , and yet out of your suit . 
▁ xxmaj am not i your xxmaj rosalind ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i take some joy to say you are , because i would be talking 
▁ of her . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj well , in her person , i say i will not have you . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj then , in mine own person , i die . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj no , faith , die by attorney . xxmaj the poor world is almost six 
▁ thousand years old , and in all this time there was not any man 
▁ died in his own person , videlicet , in a love - cause . xxmaj troilus had 
▁ his brains dash'd out with a xxmaj grecian club ; yet he did what he 
▁ could to die before , and he is one of the patterns of love . 
▁ xxmaj leander , he would have liv'd many a fair year , though xxmaj hero had 
▁ turn'd nun , if it had not been for a hot midsummer night ; for , 
▁ good youth , he went but forth to wash him in the xxmaj hellespont , and , 
▁ being taken with the cramp , was drown'd ; and the foolish 
▁ chroniclers of that age found it was- xxmaj hero of xxmaj sestos . xxmaj but these 
▁ are all lies : men have died from time to time , and worms have 
▁ eaten them , but not for love . 
▁ xxup orlando . i would not have my right xxmaj rosalind of this mind ; for , i 
▁ protest , her frown might kill me . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj by this hand , it will not kill a fly . xxmaj but come , now i 
▁ will be your xxmaj rosalind in a more coming - on disposition ; and ask me 
▁ what you will , i will grant it . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj then love me , xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj yes , faith , will xxup i , xxmaj fridays and xxmaj saturdays , and all . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and wilt thou have me ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , and twenty such . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj what sayest thou ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj are you not good ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i hope so . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why then , can one desire too much of a good thing ? xxmaj come , 
▁ sister , you shall be the priest , and marry us . xxmaj give me your hand , 
▁ xxmaj orlando . xxmaj what do you say , sister ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj pray thee , marry us . 
▁ xxup celia . i can not say the words . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj you must begin ' will you , xxmaj orlando'- 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj go to . xxmaj will you , xxmaj orlando , have to wife this xxmaj rosalind ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i will . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , but when ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj why , now ; as fast as she can marry us . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj then you must say ' i take thee , xxmaj rosalind , for wife . ' 
▁ xxup orlando . i take thee , xxmaj rosalind , for wife . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i might ask you for your commission ; but- i do take thee , 
▁ xxmaj orlando , for my husband . xxmaj there 's a girl goes before the priest ; 
▁ and , certainly , a woman 's thought runs before her actions . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj so do all thoughts ; they are wing'd . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj now tell me how long you would have her , after you have 
▁ possess'd her . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj for ever and a day . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj say ' a day ' without the ' ever . ' xxmaj no , no , xxmaj orlando ; men are 
▁ xxmaj april when they woo , xxmaj december when they we d : maids are xxmaj may when 
▁ they are maids , but the sky changes when they are wives . i will 
▁ be more jealous of thee than a xxmaj barbary cock - pigeon over his hen , 
▁ more clamorous than a parrot against rain , more new - fangled than 
▁ an ape , more giddy in my desires than a monkey . i will weep for 
▁ nothing , like xxmaj diana in the fountain , and i will do that when you 
▁ are dispos'd to be merry ; i will laugh like a hyen , and that when 
▁ thou are inclin'd to sleep . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj but will my xxmaj rosalind do so ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj by my life , she will do as i do . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxup o , but she is wise . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj or else she could not have the wit to do this . xxmaj the wiser , 
▁ the waywarder . xxmaj make the doors upon a woman 's wit , and it will out 
▁ at the casement ; shut that , and ' twill out at the key - hole ; stop 
▁ that , ' twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney . 
▁ xxup orlando . a man that had a wife with such a wit , he might say ' wit , 
▁ whither wilt ? ' xxup rosalind . xxmaj nay , you might keep that check for it , till you met your 
▁ wife 's wit going to your neighbour 's bed . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and what wit could wit have to excuse that ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj marry , to say she came to seek you there . xxmaj you shall never 
▁ take her without her answer , unless you take her without her 
▁ tongue . xxup o , that woman that can not make her fault her husband 's 
▁ occasion , let her never nurse her child herself , for she will 
▁ breed it like a fool ! 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj for these two hours , xxmaj rosalind , i will leave thee . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj alas , dear love , i can not lack thee two hours ! 
▁ xxup orlando . i must attend the xxmaj duke at dinner ; by two o'clock i will be 
▁ with thee again . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj ay , go your ways , go your ways . i knew what you would 
▁ prove ; my friends told me as much , and i thought no less . xxmaj that 
▁ flattering tongue of yours won me . ' tis but one cast away , and 
▁ so , come death ! xxmaj two o'clock is your hour ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj ay , sweet xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj by my troth , and in good earnest , and so xxmaj god mend me , and 
▁ by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous , if you break one jot 
▁ of your promise , or come one minute behind your hour , i will 
▁ think you the most pathetical break - promise , and the most hollow 
▁ lover , and the most unworthy of her you call xxmaj rosalind , that may 
▁ be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful . xxmaj therefore 
▁ beware my censure , and keep your promise . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj with no less religion than if thou wert indeed my 
▁ xxmaj rosalind ; so , adieu . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj well , xxmaj time is the old justice that examines all such 
▁ offenders , and let xxmaj time try . xxmaj adieu . xxmaj exit xxup orlando 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj you have simply misus'd our sex in your love - prate . xxmaj we must 
▁ have your doublet and hose pluck'd over your head , and show the 
▁ world what the bird hath done to her own nest . 
▁ xxup rosalind . o coz , coz , coz , my pretty little coz , that thou didst 
▁ know how many fathom deep i am in love ! xxmaj but it can not be sounded ; 
▁ my affection hath an unknown bottom , like the xxmaj bay of xxmaj portugal . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj or rather , bottomless ; that as fast as you pour affection 
▁ in , it runs out . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj no ; that same wicked bastard of xxmaj venus , that was begot of 
▁ thought , conceiv'd of spleen , and born of madness ; that blind 
▁ rascally boy , that abuses every one 's eyes , because his own are 
▁ out- let him be judge how deep i am in love . xxmaj i 'll tell thee , 
▁ xxmaj aliena , i can not be out of the sight of xxmaj orlando . xxmaj i 'll go find a 
▁ shadow , and sigh till he come . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll sleep . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the forest 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jaques and xxup lords , in the habit of foresters 

▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj which is he that killed the deer ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj sir , it was xxup i. 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj let 's present him to the xxmaj duke , like a xxmaj roman conqueror ; and 
▁ it would do well to set the deer 's horns upon his head for a 
▁ branch of victory . xxmaj have you no song , forester , for this purpose ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj yes , sir . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj sing it ; ' tis no matter how it be in tune , so it make noise 
▁ enough . 

▁ xxup song . 

▁ xxmaj what shall he have that kill'd the deer ? 
▁ xxmaj his leather skin and horns to wear . 
▁ [ the rest shall hear this burden :] 
▁ xxmaj then sing him home . 

▁ xxmaj take thou no scorn to wear the horn ; 
▁ xxmaj it was a crest ere thou wast born . 
▁ xxmaj thy father 's father wore it ; 
▁ xxmaj and thy father bore it . 
▁ xxmaj the horn , the horn , the lusty horn , 
▁ xxmaj is not a thing to laugh to scorn . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup rosalind and xxup celia 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj how say you now ? xxmaj is it not past two o'clock ? 
▁ xxmaj and here much xxmaj orlando ! 
▁ xxup celia . i warrant you , with pure love and troubled brain , he hath 
▁ ta'en his bow and arrows , and is gone forth- to sleep . xxmaj look , who 
▁ comes here . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup silvius 

▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj my errand is to you , fair youth ; 
▁ xxmaj my gentle xxmaj phebe did bid me give you this . 
▁ i know not the contents ; but , as i guess 
▁ xxmaj by the stern brow and waspish action 
▁ xxmaj which she did use as she was writing of it , 
▁ xxmaj it bears an angry tenour . xxmaj pardon me , 
▁ i am but as a guiltless messenger . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj patience herself would startle at this letter , 
▁ xxmaj and play the swaggerer . xxmaj bear this , bear all . 
▁ xxmaj she says i am not fair , that i lack manners ; 
▁ xxmaj she calls me proud , and that she could not love me , 
▁ xxmaj were man as rare as xxmaj phoenix . ' od 's my will ! 
▁ xxmaj her love is not the hare that i do hunt ; 
▁ xxmaj why writes she so to me ? xxmaj well , shepherd , well , 
▁ xxmaj this is a letter of your own device . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj no , i protest , i know not the contents ; 
▁ xxmaj phebe did write it . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj come , come , you are a fool , 
▁ xxmaj and turn'd into the extremity of love . 
▁ i saw her hand ; she has a leathern hand , 
▁ a freestone - colour'd hand ; i verily did think 
▁ xxmaj that her old gloves were on , but ' twas her hands ; 
▁ xxmaj she has a huswife 's hand- but that 's no matter . 
▁ i say she never did invent this letter : 
▁ xxmaj this is a man 's invention , and his hand . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj sure , it is hers . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why , ' tis a boisterous and a cruel style ; 
▁ a style for challengers . xxmaj why , she defies me , 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj turk to xxmaj christian . xxmaj women 's gentle brain 
▁ xxmaj could not drop forth such giant - rude invention , 
▁ xxmaj such xxmaj ethiope words , blacker in their effect 
▁ xxmaj than in their countenance . xxmaj will you hear the letter ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj so please you , for i never heard it yet ; 
▁ xxmaj yet heard too much of xxmaj phebe 's cruelty . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj she xxmaj phebes me : mark how the tyrant writes . 
▁ [ reads ] 

▁ ' art thou god to shepherd turn'd , 
▁ xxmaj that a maiden 's heart hath burn'd ? ' 

▁ xxmaj can a woman rail thus ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj call you this railing ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . ' why , thy godhead laid apart , 
▁ xxmaj warr'st thou with a woman 's heart ? ' 

▁ xxmaj did you ever hear such railing ? 

▁ ' whiles the eye of man did woo me , 
▁ xxmaj that could do no vengeance to me . ' 
▁
▁ xxmaj meaning me a beast . 

▁ ' if the scorn of your bright eyne 
▁ xxmaj have power to raise such love in mine , 
▁ xxmaj alack , in me what strange effect 
▁ xxmaj would they work in mild aspect ! 
▁ xxmaj whiles you chid me , i did love ; 
▁ xxmaj how then might your prayers move ! 
▁ xxmaj he that brings this love to the 
▁ xxmaj little knows this love in me ; 
▁ xxmaj and by him seal up thy mind , 
▁ xxmaj whether that thy youth and kind 
▁ xxmaj will the faithful offer take 
▁ xxmaj of me and all that i can make ; 
▁ xxmaj or else by him my love deny , 
▁ xxmaj and then xxmaj i 'll study how to die . ' 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj call you this chiding ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj alas , poor shepherd ! 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj do you pity him ? xxmaj no , he deserves no pity . xxmaj wilt thou love 
▁ such a woman ? xxmaj what , to make thee an instrument , and play false 
▁ strains upon thee ! xxmaj not to be endur'd ! xxmaj well , go your way to her , 
▁ for i see love hath made thee tame snake , and say this to her- 
▁ that if she love me , i charge her to love thee ; if she will not , 
▁ i will never have her unless thou entreat for her . xxmaj if you be a 
▁ true lover , hence , and not a word ; for here comes more company . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup silvius 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oliver 

▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj good morrow , fair ones ; pray you , if you know , 
▁ xxmaj where in the purlieus of this forest stands 
▁ a sheep - cote fenc'd about with olive trees ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj west of this place , down in the neighbour bottom . 
▁ xxmaj the rank of osiers by the murmuring stream 
▁ xxmaj left on your right hand brings you to the place . 
▁ xxmaj but at this hour the house doth keep itself ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's none within . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj if that an eye may profit by a tongue , 
▁ xxmaj then should i know you by description- 
▁ xxmaj such garments , and such years : ' the boy is fair , 
▁ xxmaj of female favour , and bestows himself 
▁ xxmaj like a ripe sister ; the woman low , 
▁ xxmaj and browner than her brother . ' xxmaj are not you 
▁ xxmaj the owner of the house i did inquire for ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj it is no boast , being ask'd , to say we are . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj orlando doth commend him to you both ; 
▁ xxmaj and to that youth he calls his xxmaj rosalind 
▁ xxmaj he sends this bloody napkin . xxmaj are you he ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . i am . xxmaj what must we understand by this ? 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj some of my shame ; if you will know of me 
▁ xxmaj what man i am , and how , and why , and where , 
▁ xxmaj this handkercher was stain'd . 
▁ xxup celia . i pray you , tell it . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj when last the young xxmaj orlando parted from you , 
▁ xxmaj he left a promise to return again 
▁ xxmaj within an hour ; and , pacing through the forest , 
▁ xxmaj chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy , 
▁ xxmaj lo , what befell ! xxmaj he threw his eye aside , 
▁ xxmaj and mark what object did present itself . 
▁ xxmaj under an oak , whose boughs were moss'd with age , 
▁ xxmaj and high top bald with dry antiquity , 
▁ a wretched ragged man , o'ergrown with hair , 
▁ xxmaj lay sleeping on his back . xxmaj about his neck 
▁ a green and gilded snake had wreath'd itself , 
▁ xxmaj who with her head nimble in threats approach'd 
▁ xxmaj the opening of his mouth ; but suddenly , 
▁ xxmaj seeing xxmaj orlando , it unlink'd itself , 
▁ xxmaj and with indented glides did slip away 
▁ xxmaj into a bush ; under which bush 's shade 
▁ a lioness , with udders all drawn dry , 
▁ xxmaj lay couching , head on ground , with catlike watch , 
▁ xxmaj when that the sleeping man should stir ; for ' tis 
▁ xxmaj the royal disposition of that beast 
▁ xxmaj to prey on nothing that doth seem as dead . 
▁ xxmaj this seen , xxmaj orlando did approach the man , 
▁ xxmaj and found it was his brother , his elder brother . 
▁ xxup celia . xxup o , i have heard him speak of that same brother ; 
▁ xxmaj and he did render him the most unnatural 
▁ xxmaj that liv'd amongst men . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj and well he might so do , 
▁ xxmaj for well i know he was unnatural . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but , to xxmaj orlando : did he leave him there , 
▁ xxmaj food to the suck'd and hungry lioness ? 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj twice did he turn his back , and purpos'd so ; 
▁ xxmaj but kindness , nobler ever than revenge , 
▁ xxmaj and nature , stronger than his just occasion , 
▁ xxmaj made him give battle to the lioness , 
▁ xxmaj who quickly fell before him ; in which hurtling 
▁ xxmaj from miserable slumber i awak'd . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj are you his brother ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj was't you he rescu'd ? 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj was't you that did so oft contrive to kill him ? 
▁ xxup oliver . ' twas xxup i ; but ' tis not xxup i. i do not shame 
▁ xxmaj to tell you what i was , since my conversion 
▁ xxmaj so sweetly tastes , being the thing i am . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but for the bloody napkin ? 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj by and by . 
▁ xxmaj when from the first to last , betwixt us two , 
▁ xxmaj tears our recountments had most kindly bath'd , 
▁ xxmaj as how i came into that desert place- 
▁ xxmaj in brief , he led me to the gentle xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj who gave me fresh array and entertainment , 
▁ xxmaj committing me unto my brother 's love ; 
▁ xxmaj who led me instantly unto his cave , 
▁ xxmaj there stripp'd himself , and here upon his arm 
▁ xxmaj the lioness had torn some flesh away , 
▁ xxmaj which all this while had bled ; and now he fainted , 
▁ xxmaj and cried , in fainting , upon xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxmaj brief , i recover'd him , bound up his wound , 
▁ xxmaj and , after some small space , being strong at heart , 
▁ xxmaj he sent me hither , stranger as i am , 
▁ xxmaj to tell this story , that you might excuse 
▁ xxmaj his broken promise , and to give this napkin , 
▁ xxmaj dy'd in his blood , unto the shepherd youth 
▁ xxmaj that he in sport doth call his xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ [ rosalind swoons ] 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj ganymede ! sweet xxmaj ganymede ! 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj many will swoon when they do look on blood . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj there is more in it . xxmaj cousin xxmaj ganymede ! 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj look , he recovers . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i would i were at home . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj we 'll lead you thither . 
▁ i pray you , will you take him by the arm ? 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj be of good cheer , youth . xxmaj you a man ! 
▁ xxmaj you lack a man 's heart . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i do so , i confess it . xxmaj ah , sirrah , a body would think 
▁ this was well counterfeited . i pray you tell your brother how 
▁ well i counterfeited . xxmaj heigh - ho ! 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj this was not counterfeit ; there is too great testimony in 
▁ your complexion that it was a passion of earnest . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj counterfeit , i assure you . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj well then , take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj so i do ; but , i ' faith , i should have been a woman by 
▁ right . 
▁ xxup celia . xxmaj come , you look paler and paler ; pray you draw homewards . 
▁ xxmaj good sir , go with us . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj that will xxup i , for i must bear answer back 
▁ xxmaj how you excuse my brother , xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i shall devise something ; but , i pray you , commend my 
▁ counterfeiting to him . xxmaj will you go ? xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup touchstone and xxup audrey 

▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj we shall find a time , xxmaj audrey ; patience , gentle xxmaj audrey . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj faith , the priest was good enough , for all the old 
▁ gentleman 's saying . 
▁ xxup touchstone . a most wicked xxmaj sir xxmaj oliver , xxmaj audrey , a most vile xxmaj martext . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj audrey , there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj ay , i know who ' tis ; he hath no interest in me in the 
▁ world ; here comes the man you mean . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup william 

▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj it is meat and drink to me to see a clown . xxmaj by my troth , 
▁ we that have good wits have much to answer for : we shall be 
▁ flouting ; we can not hold . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj good ev'n , xxmaj audrey . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj god ye good ev'n , xxmaj william . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj and good ev'n to you , sir . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj good ev'n , gentle friend . xxmaj cover thy head , cover thy 
▁ head ; nay , prithee be cover'd . xxmaj how old are you , friend ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj five and twenty , sir . 
▁ xxup touchstone . a ripe age . xxmaj is thy name xxmaj william ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj william , sir . 
▁ xxup touchstone . a fair name . xxmaj wast born i ' th ' forest here ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj ay , sir , i thank xxmaj god . 
▁ xxup touchstone . ' thank xxmaj god . ' a good answer . 
▁ xxmaj art rich ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj faith , sir , so so . 
▁ xxup touchstone . ' so so ' is good , very good , very excellent good ; and 
▁ yet it is not ; it is but so so . xxmaj art thou wise ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj ay , sir , i have a pretty wit . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj why , thou say'st well . i do now remember a saying : ' the 
▁ fool doth think he is wise , but the wise man knows himself to be 
▁ a fool . ' xxmaj the heathen philosopher , when he had a desire to eat a 
▁ grape , would open his lips when he put it into his mouth ; meaning 
▁ thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open . xxmaj you do 
▁ love this maid ? 
▁ xxup william . i do , sir . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj give me your hand . xxmaj art thou learned ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj no , sir . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj then learn this of me : to have is to have ; for it is a 
▁ figure in rhetoric that drink , being pour'd out of cup into a 
▁ glass , by filling the one doth empty the other ; for all your 
▁ writers do consent that ipse is he ; now , you are not ipse , for i 
▁ am he . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj which he , sir ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj he , sir , that must marry this woman . xxmaj therefore , you 
▁ clown , abandon- which is in the vulgar leave- the society- which 
▁ in the boorish is company- of this female- which in the common is 
▁ woman- which together is : abandon the society of this female ; or , 
▁ clown , thou perishest ; or , to thy better understanding , diest ; 
▁ or , to wit , i kill thee , make thee away , translate thy life into 
▁ death , thy liberty into bondage . i will deal in poison with thee , 
▁ or in bastinado , or in steel ; i will bandy with thee in faction ; 
▁ will o'er - run thee with policy ; i will kill thee a hundred and 
▁ fifty ways ; therefore tremble and depart . 
▁ xxup audrey . xxmaj do , good xxmaj william . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj god rest you merry , sir . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup corin 

▁ xxup corin . xxmaj our master and mistress seeks you ; come away , away . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj trip , xxmaj audrey , trip , xxmaj audrey . i attend , i attend . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup orlando and xxup oliver 

▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj is't possible that on so little acquaintance you should 
▁ like her ? that but seeing you should love her ? and loving woo ? 
▁ and , wooing , she should grant ? and will you persever to enjoy 
▁ her ? 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj neither call the giddiness of it in question , the poverty 
▁ of her , the small acquaintance , my sudden wooing , nor her sudden 
▁ consenting ; but say with me , i love xxmaj aliena ; say with her that she 
▁ loves me ; consent with both that we may enjoy each other . xxmaj it 
▁ shall be to your good ; for my father 's house and all the revenue 
▁ that was old xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland 's will i estate upon you , and here live 
▁ and die a shepherd . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj you have my consent . xxmaj let your wedding be to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj thither will i invite the xxmaj duke and all 's contented followers . xxmaj go 
▁ you and prepare xxmaj aliena ; for , look you , here comes my xxmaj rosalind . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup rosalind 
▁
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj god save you , brother . 
▁ xxup oliver . xxmaj and you , fair sister . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup o , my dear xxmaj orlando , how it grieves me to see thee wear 
▁ thy heart in a scarf ! 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj it is my arm . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a 
▁ lion . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj wounded it is , but with the eyes of a lady . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj did your brother tell you how i counterfeited to swoon 
▁ when he show'd me your handkercher ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj ay , and greater wonders than that . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxup o , i know where you are . xxmaj nay , ' tis true . xxmaj there was never 
▁ any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams and xxmaj caesar 's 
▁ thrasonical brag of ' i came , saw , and overcame . ' xxmaj for your brother 
▁ and my sister no sooner met but they look'd ; no sooner look'd but 
▁ they lov'd ; no sooner lov'd but they sigh'd ; no sooner sigh'd but 
▁ they ask'd one another the reason ; no sooner knew the reason but 
▁ they sought the remedy- and in these degrees have they made pair 
▁ of stairs to marriage , which they will climb incontinent , or else 
▁ be incontinent before marriage . xxmaj they are in the very wrath of 
▁ love , and they will together . xxmaj clubs can not part them . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj they shall be married to - morrow ; and i will bid the xxmaj duke 
▁ to the nuptial . xxmaj but , xxup o , how bitter a thing it is to look into 
▁ happiness through another man 's eyes ! xxmaj by so much the more shall i 
▁ to - morrow be at the height of heart - heaviness , by how much i 
▁ shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why , then , to - morrow i can not serve your turn for 
▁ xxmaj rosalind ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i can live no longer by thinking . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i will weary you , then , no longer with idle talking . xxmaj know 
▁ of me then- for now i speak to some purpose- that i know you are 
▁ a gentleman of good conceit . i speak not this that you should 
▁ bear a good opinion of my knowledge , insomuch i say i know you 
▁ are ; neither do i labour for a greater esteem than may in some 
▁ little measure draw a belief from you , to do yourself good , and 
▁ not to grace me . xxmaj believe then , if you please , that i can do 
▁ strange things . i have , since i was three year old , convers'd 
▁ with a magician , most profound in his art and yet not damnable . 
▁ xxmaj if you do love xxmaj rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries 
▁ it out , when your brother marries xxmaj aliena shall you marry her . i 
▁ know into what straits of fortune she is driven ; and it is not 
▁ impossible to me , if it appear not inconvenient to you , to set 
▁ her before your eyes to - morrow , human as she is , and without any 
▁ danger . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj speak'st thou in sober meanings ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj by my life , i do ; which i tender dearly , though i say i 
▁ am a magician . xxmaj therefore put you in your best array , bid your 
▁ friends ; for if you will be married to - morrow , you shall ; and to 
▁ xxmaj rosalind , if you will . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup silvius and xxup phebe 

▁ xxmaj look , here comes a lover of mine , and a lover of hers . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj youth , you have done me much ungentleness 
▁ xxmaj to show the letter that i writ to you . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i care not if i have . xxmaj it is my study 
▁ xxmaj to seem despiteful and ungentle to you . 
▁ xxmaj you are there follow'd by a faithful shepherd ; 
▁ xxmaj look upon him , love him ; he worships you . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj good shepherd , tell this youth what ' tis to love . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj it is to be all made of sighs and tears ; 
▁ xxmaj and so am i for xxmaj phebe . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj and i for xxmaj ganymede . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and i for xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and i for no woman . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj it is to be all made of faith and service ; 
▁ xxmaj and so am i for xxmaj phebe . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj and i for xxmaj ganymede . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and i for xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and i for no woman . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj it is to be all made of fantasy , 
▁ xxmaj all made of passion , and all made of wishes ; 
▁ xxmaj all adoration , duty , and observance , 
▁ xxmaj all humbleness , all patience , and impatience , 
▁ xxmaj all purity , all trial , all obedience ; 
▁ xxmaj and so am i for xxmaj phebe . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj and so am i for xxmaj ganymede . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj and so am i for xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and so am i for no woman . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj if this be so , why blame you me to love you ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj if this be so , why blame you me to love you ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj if this be so , why blame you me to love you ? 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj why do you speak too , ' why blame you me to love you ? ' 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj to her that is not here , nor doth not hear . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj pray you , no more of this ; ' tis like the howling of xxmaj irish 
▁ wolves against the moon . [ to xxup silvius ] i will help you if i can . 
▁ [ to xxup phebe ] i would love you if i could.- xxmaj to - morrow meet me all 
▁ together . [ xxmaj to xxup phebe ] i will marry you if ever i marry woman , 
▁ and xxmaj i 'll be married to - morrow . [ to xxup orlando ] i will satisfy you if 
▁ ever i satisfied man , and you shall be married to - morrow . [ to 
▁ xxmaj silvius ] i will content you if what pleases you contents you , and