xxbos you shall be married to - morrow . [ to xxup orlando ] xxmaj as you love 
▁ xxmaj rosalind , meet . [ to xxup silvius ] xxmaj as you love xxmaj phebe , meet;- and as i 
▁ love no woman , xxmaj i 'll meet . xxmaj so , fare you well ; i have left you 
▁ commands . 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj i 'll not fail , if i live . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj nor xxup i. xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup touchstone and xxup audrey 

▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj to - morrow is the joyful day , xxmaj audre'y ; to - morrow will we 
▁ be married . 
▁ xxup audrey . i do desire it with all my heart ; and i hope it is no 
▁ dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world . xxmaj here come 
▁ two of the banish'd xxmaj duke 's pages . 

▁ xxmaj enter two xxup pages 

▁ xxup first xxup page . xxmaj well met , honest gentleman . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj by my troth , well met . xxmaj come sit , sit , and a song . 
▁ xxup second xxup page . xxmaj we are for you ; sit i ' th ' middle . 
▁ xxup first xxup page . xxmaj shall we clap into't roundly , without hawking , or 
▁ spitting , or saying we are hoarse , which are the only prologues 
▁ to a bad voice ? 
▁ xxup second xxup page . xxmaj i'faith , i'faith ; and both in a tune , like two gipsies 
▁ on a horse . 
▁
▁ xxup song . 
▁ xxmaj it was a lover and his lass , 
▁ xxmaj with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
▁ xxmaj that o'er the green corn - field did pass 
▁ xxmaj in the spring time , the only pretty ring time , 
▁ xxmaj when birds do sing , hey ding a ding , ding . 
▁ xxmaj sweet lovers love the spring . 

▁ xxmaj between the acres of the rye , 
▁ xxmaj with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
▁ xxmaj these pretty country folks would lie , 
▁ xxmaj in the spring time , & c. 

▁ xxmaj this carol they began that hour , 
▁ xxmaj with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
▁ xxmaj how that a life was but a flower , 
▁ xxmaj in the spring time , & c. 

▁ xxmaj and therefore take the present time , 
▁ xxmaj with a hey , and a ho , and a hey nonino , 
▁ xxmaj for love is crowned with the prime , 
▁ xxmaj in the spring time , & c. 

▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj truly , young gentlemen , though there was no great 
▁ matter in the ditty , yet the note was very untuneable . 
▁ xxup first xxup page . xxup you are deceiv'd , sir ; we kept time , we lost not our 
▁ time . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj by my troth , yes ; i count it but time lost to hear such 
▁ a foolish song . xxmaj god buy you ; and xxmaj god mend your voices . xxmaj come , 
▁ xxmaj audrey . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup senior , xxup amiens , xxup jaques , xxup orlando , xxup oliver , and xxup celia 

▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj dost thou believe , xxmaj orlando , that the boy 
▁ xxmaj can do all this that he hath promised ? 
▁ xxup orlando . i sometimes do believe and sometimes do not : 
▁ xxmaj as those that fear they hope , and know they fear . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup rosalind , xxup silvius , and xxup phebe 

▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj patience once more , whiles our compact is urg'd : 
▁ xxmaj you say , if i bring in your xxmaj rosalind , 
▁ xxmaj you will bestow her on xxmaj orlando here ? 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj that would xxup i , had i kingdoms to give with her . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj and you say you will have her when i bring her ? 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj that would xxup i , were i of all kingdoms king . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj you say you 'll marry me , if i be willing ? 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj that will xxup i , should i die the hour after . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj but if you do refuse to marry me , 
▁ xxmaj you 'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd ? 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj so is the bargain . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj you say that you 'll have xxmaj phebe , if she will ? 
▁ xxup silvius . xxmaj though to have her and death were both one thing . 
▁ xxup rosalind . i have promis'd to make all this matter even . 
▁ xxmaj keep you your word , o xxmaj duke , to give your daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj you yours , xxmaj orlando , to receive his daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj keep your word , xxmaj phebe , that you 'll marry me , 
▁ xxmaj or else , refusing me , to we d this shepherd ; 
▁ xxmaj keep your word , xxmaj silvius , that you 'll marry her 
▁ xxmaj if she refuse me ; and from hence i go , 
▁ xxmaj to make these doubts all even . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup rosalind and xxup celia 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . i do remember in this shepherd boy 
▁ xxmaj some lively touches of my daughter 's favour . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj my lord , the first time that i ever saw him 
▁ xxmaj methought he was a brother to your daughter . 
▁ xxmaj but , my good lord , this boy is forest - born , 
▁ xxmaj and hath been tutor'd in the rudiments 
▁ xxmaj of many desperate studies by his uncle , 
▁ xxmaj whom he reports to be a great magician , 
▁ xxmaj obscured in the circle of this forest . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup touchstone and xxup audrey 

▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj there is , sure , another flood toward , and these couples are 
▁ coming to the ark . xxmaj here comes a pair of very strange beasts which 
▁ in all tongues are call'd fools . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj salutation and greeting to you all ! 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj good my lord , bid him welcome . xxmaj this is the motley - minded 
▁ gentleman that i have so often met in the forest . xxmaj he hath been a 
▁ courtier , he swears . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj if any man doubt that , let him put me to my purgation . 
▁ i have trod a measure ; i have flatt'red a lady ; i have been 
▁ politic with my friend , smooth with mine enemy ; i have undone 
▁ three tailors ; i have had four quarrels , and like to have fought 
▁ one . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj and how was that ta'en up ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj faith , we met , and found the quarrel was upon the 
▁ seventh cause . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj how seventh cause ? xxmaj good my lord , like this fellow . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . i like him very well . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj god ' ild you , sir ; i desire you of the like . i press in 
▁ here , sir , amongst the rest of the country copulatives , to swear 
▁ and to forswear , according as marriage binds and blood breaks . a 
▁ poor virgin , sir , an ill - favour'd thing , sir , but mine own ; a 
▁ poor humour of mine , sir , to take that that man else will . xxmaj rich 
▁ honesty dwells like a miser , sir , in a poor house ; as your pearl 
▁ in your foul oyster . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj by my faith , he is very swift and sententious . 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj according to the fool 's bolt , sir , and such dulcet 
▁ diseases . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj but , for the seventh cause : how did you find the quarrel on 
▁ the seventh cause ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxmaj upon a lie seven times removed- bear your body more 
▁ seeming , xxmaj audrey- as thus , sir . i did dislike the cut of a certain 
▁ courtier 's beard ; he sent me word , if i said his beard was not 
▁ cut well , he was in the mind it was . xxmaj this is call'd the xxmaj retort 
▁ xxmaj courteous . xxmaj if i sent him word again it was not well cut , he would 
▁ send me word he cut it to please himself . xxmaj this is call'd the xxmaj quip 
▁ xxmaj modest . xxmaj if again it was not well cut , he disabled my judgment . 
▁ xxmaj this is call'd the xxmaj reply xxmaj churlish . xxmaj if again it was not well cut , 
▁ he would answer i spake not true . xxmaj this is call'd the xxmaj reproof 
▁ xxmaj valiant . xxmaj if again it was not well cut , he would say i lie . xxmaj this 
▁ is call'd the xxmaj countercheck xxmaj quarrelsome . xxmaj and so to the xxmaj lie 
▁ xxmaj circumstantial and the xxmaj lie xxmaj direct . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj and how oft did you say his beard was not well cut ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . i durst go no further than the xxmaj lie xxmaj circumstantial , nor 
▁ he durst not give me the xxmaj lie xxmaj direct ; and so we measur'd swords 
▁ and parted . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie ? 
▁ xxup touchstone . xxup o , sir , we quarrel in print by the book , as you have 
▁ books for good manners . i will name you the degrees . xxmaj the first , 
▁ the xxmaj retort xxmaj courteous ; the second , the xxmaj quip xxmaj modest ; the third , the 
▁ xxmaj reply xxmaj churlish ; the fourth , the xxmaj reproof xxmaj valiant ; the fifth , the 
▁ xxmaj countercheck xxmaj quarrelsome ; the sixth , the xxmaj lie with xxmaj circumstance ; 
▁ the seventh , the xxmaj lie xxmaj direct . xxmaj all these you may avoid but the xxmaj lie 
▁ xxmaj direct ; and you may avoid that too with an xxmaj if . i knew when seven 
▁ justices could not take up a quarrel ; but when the parties were 
▁ met themselves , one of them thought but of an xxmaj if , as : ' if you 
▁ said so , then i said so . ' xxmaj and they shook hands , and swore 
▁ brothers . xxmaj your xxmaj if is the only peace - maker ; much virtue in xxmaj if . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj is not this a rare fellow , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj he 's as good at any thing , and yet a fool . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj he uses his folly like a stalking - horse , and under the 
▁ presentation of that he shoots his wit : 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hymen , xxup rosalind , and xxup celia . xxmaj still xxup music 

▁ xxup hymen . xxmaj then is there mirth in heaven , 
▁ xxmaj when earthly things made even 
▁ xxmaj atone together . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj duke , receive thy daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj hymen from heaven brought her , 
▁ xxmaj yea , brought her hither , 
▁ xxmaj that thou mightst join her hand with his , 
▁ xxmaj whose heart within his bosom is . 
▁ xxup rosalind . [ to xxup duke ] xxmaj to you i give myself , for i am yours . 
▁ [ to xxup orlando ] xxmaj to you i give myself , for i am yours . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj if there be truth in sight , you are my daughter . 
▁ xxup orlando . xxmaj if there be truth in sight , you are my xxmaj rosalind . 
▁ xxup phebe . xxmaj if sight and shape be true , 
▁ xxmaj why then , my love adieu ! 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj i 'll have no father , if you be not he ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have no husband , if you be not he ; 
▁ xxmaj nor ne'er we d woman , if you be not she . 
▁ xxup hymen . xxmaj peace , ho ! i bar confusion ; 
▁ ' tis i must make conclusion 
▁ xxmaj of these most strange events . 
▁ xxmaj here 's eight that must take hands 
▁ xxmaj to join in xxmaj hymen 's bands , 
▁ xxmaj if truth holds true contents . 
▁ xxmaj you and you no cross shall part ; 
▁ xxmaj you and you are heart in heart ; 
▁ xxmaj you to his love must accord , 
▁ xxmaj or have a woman to your lord ; 
▁ xxmaj you and you are sure together , 
▁ xxmaj as the winter to foul weather . 
▁ xxmaj whiles a wedlock - hymn we sing , 
▁ xxmaj feed yourselves with questioning , 
▁ xxmaj that reason wonder may diminish , 
▁ xxmaj how thus we met , and these things finish . 

▁ xxup song 
▁ xxmaj wedding is great xxmaj juno 's crown ; 
▁ o blessed bond of board and bed ! 
▁ ' tis xxmaj hymen peoples every town ; 
▁ xxmaj high wedlock then be honoured . 
▁ xxmaj honour , high honour , and renown , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj hymen , god of every town ! 

▁ xxup duke xxup senior . o my dear niece , welcome thou art to me ! 
▁ xxmaj even daughter , welcome in no less degree . 
▁ xxup phebe . i will not eat my word , now thou art mine ; 
▁ xxmaj thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jaques de xxup boys 

▁ xxup jaques de xxup boys . xxmaj let me have audience for a word or two . 
▁ i am the second son of old xxmaj sir xxmaj rowland , 
▁ xxmaj that bring these tidings to this fair assembly . 
▁ xxmaj duke xxmaj frederick , hearing how that every day 
▁ xxmaj men of great worth resorted to this forest , 
▁ xxmaj address'd a mighty power ; which were on foot , 
▁ xxmaj in his own conduct , purposely to take 
▁ xxmaj his brother here , and put him to the sword ; 
▁ xxmaj and to the skirts of this wild wood he came , 
▁ xxmaj where , meeting with an old religious man , 
▁ xxmaj after some question with him , was converted 
▁ xxmaj both from his enterprise and from the world ; 
▁ xxmaj his crown bequeathing to his banish'd brother , 
▁ xxmaj and all their lands restor'd to them again 
▁ xxmaj that were with him exil'd . xxmaj this to be true 
▁ i do engage my life . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj welcome , young man . 
▁ xxmaj thou offer'st fairly to thy brothers ' wedding : 
▁ xxmaj to one , his lands withheld ; and to the other , 
▁ a land itself at large , a potent dukedom . 
▁ xxmaj first , in this forest let us do those ends 
▁ xxmaj that here were well begun and well begot ; 
▁ xxmaj and after , every of this happy number , 
▁ xxmaj that have endur'd shrewd days and nights with us , 
▁ xxmaj shall share the good of our returned fortune , 
▁ xxmaj according to the measure of their states . 
▁ xxmaj meantime , forget this new - fall'n dignity , 
▁ xxmaj and fall into our rustic revelry . 
▁ xxmaj play , music ; and you brides and bridegrooms all , 
▁ xxmaj with measure heap'd in joy , to th ' measures fall . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj sir , by your patience . xxmaj if i heard you rightly , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke hath put on a religious life , 
▁ xxmaj and thrown into neglect the pompous court . 
▁ xxup jaques xxup de xxup boys . xxmaj he hath . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj to him will xxup i. xxmaj out of these convertites 
▁ xxmaj there is much matter to be heard and learn'd . 
▁ [ to xxup duke ] xxmaj you to your former honour i bequeath ; 
▁ xxmaj your patience and your virtue well deserves it . 
▁ [ to xxup orlando ] xxmaj you to a love that your true faith doth merit ; 
▁ [ to xxup oliver ] xxmaj you to your land , and love , and great allies 
▁ [ to xxup silvius ] xxmaj you to a long and well - deserved bed ; 
▁ [ to xxup touchstone ] xxmaj and you to wrangling ; for thy loving voyage 
▁ xxmaj is but for two months victuall'd.- xxmaj so to your pleasures ; 
▁ i am for other than for dancing measures . 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj stay , xxmaj jaques , stay . 
▁ xxup jaques . xxmaj to see no pastime xxup i. xxmaj what you would have 
▁ xxmaj i 'll stay to know at your abandon'd cave . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duke xxup senior . xxmaj proceed , proceed . xxmaj we will begin these rites , 
▁ xxmaj as we do trust they 'll end , in true delights . [ a dance ] xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup epilogue 
▁ xxup epilogue . 
▁ xxup rosalind . xxmaj it is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue ; but 
▁ it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue . xxmaj if it 
▁ be true that good wine needs no bush , ' tis true that a good play 
▁ needs no epilogue . xxmaj yet to good wine they do use good bushes ; and 
▁ good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues . xxmaj what a 
▁ case am i in then , that am neither a good epilogue , nor can not 
▁ insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play ! i am not 
▁ furnish'd like a beggar ; therefore to beg will not become me . xxmaj my 
▁ way is to conjure you ; and xxmaj i 'll begin with the women . i charge 
▁ you , o women , for the love you bear to men , to like as much of 
▁ this play as please you ; and i charge you , o men , for the love 
▁ you bear to women- as i perceive by your simp'ring none of you 
▁ hates them- that between you and the women the play may please . 
▁ xxmaj if i were a woman , i would kiss as many of you as had beards that 
▁ pleas'd me , complexions that lik'd me , and breaths that i defied 
▁ not ; and , i am sure , as many as have good beards , or good faces , 
▁ or sweet breaths , will , for my kind offer , when i make curtsy , 
▁ bid me farewell . 

 xxup the xxup end 





 1593 

 xxup the xxup comedy xxup of xxup errors 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 


 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

 xxup solinus , xxmaj duke of xxmaj ephesus 
 xxup aegeon , a merchant of xxmaj syracuse 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus twin brothers and sons to 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse xxmaj aegion and xxmaj aemelia 

 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus twin brothers , and attendants on 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse the two xxmaj antipholuses 

 xxup balthazar , a merchant 
 xxup angelo , a goldsmith 
 xxup first xxup merchant , friend to xxmaj antipholus of xxmaj syracuse 
 xxup second xxup merchant , to whom xxmaj angelo is a debtor 
 xxup pinch , a schoolmaster 

 xxup aemilia , wife to aegeon ; an abbess at xxmaj ephesus 
 xxup adriana , wife to xxmaj antipholus of xxmaj ephesus 
 xxup luciana , her sister 
 xxup luce , servant to xxmaj adriana 

 a xxup courtezan 

 xxmaj gaoler , xxmaj officers , xxmaj attendants 





 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj ephesus 


 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup the xxup comedy xxup of xxup errors 

 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 

 a hall in the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup ephesus , xxup aegeon , the xxmaj merchant 
 of xxmaj syracuse , xxup gaoler , xxup officers , and other xxup attendants 

 xxup aegeon . xxmaj proceed , xxmaj solinus , to procure my fall , 
▁ xxmaj and by the doom of death end woes and all . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj merchant of xxmaj syracuse , plead no more ; 
▁ i am not partial to infringe our laws . 
▁ xxmaj the enmity and discord which of late 
▁ xxmaj sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke 
▁ xxmaj to merchants , our well - dealing countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj who , wanting guilders to redeem their lives , 
▁ xxmaj have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods , 
▁ xxmaj excludes all pity from our threat'ning looks . 
▁ xxmaj for , since the mortal and intestine jars 
▁ ' twixt thy seditious countrymen and us , 
▁ xxmaj it hath in solemn synods been decreed , 
▁ xxmaj both by the xxmaj syracusians and ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj to admit no traffic to our adverse towns ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , more : if any born at xxmaj ephesus 
▁ xxmaj be seen at any xxmaj syracusian marts and fairs ; 
▁ xxmaj again , if any xxmaj syracusian born 
▁ xxmaj come to the bay of xxmaj ephesus - he dies , 
▁ xxmaj his goods confiscate to the xxmaj duke 's dispose , 
▁ xxmaj unless a thousand marks be levied , 
▁ xxmaj to quit the penalty and to ransom him . 
▁ xxmaj thy substance , valued at the highest rate , 
▁ xxmaj can not amount unto a hundred marks ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore by law thou art condemn'd to die . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj yet this my comfort : when your words are done , 
▁ xxmaj my woes end likewise with the evening sun . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj well , xxmaj syracusian , say in brief the cause 
▁ xxmaj why thou departed'st from thy native home , 
▁ xxmaj and for what cause thou cam'st to xxmaj ephesus . 
 xxup aegeon . a heavier task could not have been impos'd 
▁ xxmaj than i to speak my griefs unspeakable ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , that the world may witness that my end 
▁ xxmaj was wrought by nature , not by vile offence , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll utter what my sorrow gives me leave . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj syracuse was i born , and we d 
▁ xxmaj unto a woman , happy but for me , 
▁ xxmaj and by me , had not our hap been bad . 
▁ xxmaj with her i liv'd in joy ; our wealth increas'd 
▁ xxmaj by prosperous voyages i often made 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj epidamnum ; till my factor 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and the great care of goods at random left , 
▁ xxmaj drew me from kind embracements of my spouse : 
▁ xxmaj from whom my absence was not six months old , 
▁ xxmaj before herself , almost at fainting under 
▁ xxmaj the pleasing punishment that women bear , 
▁ xxmaj had made provision for her following me , 
▁ xxmaj and soon and safe arrived where i was . 
▁ xxmaj there had she not been long but she became 
▁ a joyful mother of two goodly sons ; 
▁ xxmaj and , which was strange , the one so like the other 
▁ xxmaj as could not be disdnguish'd but by names . 
▁ xxmaj that very hour , and in the self - same inn , 
▁ a mean woman was delivered 
▁ xxmaj of such a burden , male twins , both alike . 
▁ xxmaj those , for their parents were exceeding poor , 
▁ i bought , and brought up to attend my sons . 
▁ xxmaj my wife , not meanly proud of two such boys , 
▁ xxmaj made daily motions for our home return ; 
▁ xxmaj unwilling , i agreed . xxmaj alas ! too soon 
▁ xxmaj we came aboard . 
▁ a league from xxmaj epidamnum had we sail'd 
▁ xxmaj before the always - wind - obeying deep 
▁ xxmaj gave any tragic instance of our harm : 
▁ xxmaj but longer did we not retain much hope , 
▁ xxmaj for what obscured light the heavens did grant 
▁ xxmaj did but convey unto our fearful minds 
▁ a doubtful warrant of immediate death ; 
▁ xxmaj which though myself would gladly have embrac'd , 
▁ xxmaj yet the incessant weepings of my wife , 
▁ xxmaj weeping before for what she saw must come , 
▁ xxmaj and piteous plainings of the pretty babes , 
▁ xxmaj that mourn'd for fashion , ignorant what to fear , 
▁ xxmaj forc'd me to seek delays for them and me . 
▁ xxmaj and this it was , for other means was none : 
▁ xxmaj the sailors sought for safety by our boat , 
▁ xxmaj and left the ship , then sinking - ripe , to us ; 
▁ xxmaj my wife , more careful for the latter - born , 
▁ xxmaj had fast'ned him unto a small spare mast , 
▁ xxmaj such as sea - faring men provide for storms ; 
▁ xxmaj to him one of the other twins was bound , 
▁ xxmaj whilst i had been like heedful of the other . 
▁ xxmaj the children thus dispos'd , my wife and xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd , 
▁ xxmaj fast'ned ourselves at either end the mast , 
▁ xxmaj and , floating straight , obedient to the stream , 
▁ xxmaj was carried towards xxmaj corinth , as we thought . 
▁ xxmaj at length the sun , gazing upon the earth , 
▁ xxmaj dispers'd those vapours that offended us ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by the benefit of his wished light , 
▁ xxmaj the seas wax'd calm , and we discovered 
▁ xxmaj two ships from far making amain to us- 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj corinth that , of xxmaj epidaurus this . 
▁ xxmaj but ere they came - o , let me say no more ! 
▁ xxmaj gather the sequel by that went before . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj nay , forward , old man , do not break off so ; 
▁ xxmaj for we may pity , though not pardon thee . 
 xxup aegeon . xxup o , had the gods done so , i had not now 
▁ xxmaj worthily term'd them merciless to us ! 
▁ xxmaj for , ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues , 
▁ xxmaj we were encount'red by a mighty rock , 
▁ xxmaj which being violently borne upon , 
▁ xxmaj our helpful ship was splitted in the midst ; 
▁ xxmaj so that , in this unjust divorce of us , 
▁ xxmaj fortune had left to both of us alike 
▁ xxmaj what to delight in , what to sorrow for . 
▁ xxmaj her part , poor soul , seeming as burdened 
▁ xxmaj with lesser weight , but not with lesser woe , 
▁ xxmaj was carried with more speed before the wind ; 
▁ xxmaj and in our sight they three were taken up 
▁ xxmaj by fishermen of xxmaj corinth , as we thought . 
▁ xxmaj at length another ship had seiz'd on us ; 
▁ xxmaj and , knowing whom it was their hap to save , 
▁ xxmaj gave healthful welcome to their ship - wreck'd guests , 
▁ xxmaj and would have reft the fishers of their prey , 
▁ xxmaj had not their bark been very slow of sail ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore homeward did they bend their course . 
▁ xxmaj thus have you heard me sever'd from my bliss , 
▁ xxmaj that by misfortunes was my life prolong'd , 
▁ xxmaj to tell sad stories of my own mishaps . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj and , for the sake of them thou sorrowest for , 
▁ xxmaj do me the favour to dilate at full 
▁ xxmaj what have befall'n of them and thee till now . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj my youngest boy , and yet my eldest care , 
▁ xxmaj at eighteen years became inquisitive 
▁ xxmaj after his brother , and importun'd me 
▁ xxmaj that his attendant - so his case was like , 
▁ xxmaj reft of his brother , but retain'd his name- 
▁ xxmaj might bear him company in the quest of him ; 
▁ xxmaj whom whilst i laboured of a love to see , 
▁ i hazarded the loss of whom i lov'd . 
▁ xxmaj five summers have i spent in farthest xxmaj greece , 
▁ xxmaj roaming clean through the bounds of xxmaj asia , 
▁ xxmaj and , coasting homeward , came to xxmaj ephesus ; 
▁ xxmaj hopeless to find , yet loath to leave unsought 
▁ xxmaj or that or any place that harbours men . 
▁ xxmaj but here must end the story of my life ; 
▁ xxmaj and happy were i in my timely death , 
▁ xxmaj could all my travels warrant me they live . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj hapless , xxmaj aegeon , whom the fates have mark'd 
▁ xxmaj to bear the extremity of dire mishap ! 
▁ xxmaj now , trust me , were it not against our laws , 
▁ xxmaj against my crown , my oath , my dignity , 
▁ xxmaj which princes , would they , may not disannul , 
▁ xxmaj my soul should sue as advocate for thee . 
▁ xxmaj but though thou art adjudged to the death , 
▁ xxmaj and passed sentence may not be recall'd 
▁ xxmaj but to our honour 's great disparagement , 
▁ xxmaj yet will i favour thee in what i can . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , merchant , xxmaj i 'll limit thee this day 
▁ xxmaj to seek thy help by beneficial hap . 
▁ xxmaj try all the friends thou hast in xxmaj ephesus ; 
▁ xxmaj beg thou , or borrow , to make up the sum , 
▁ xxmaj and live ; if no , then thou art doom'd to die . 
▁ xxmaj gaoler , take him to thy custody . 
 xxup gaoler . i will , my lord . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj hopeless and helpless doth xxmaj aegeon wend , 
▁ xxmaj but to procrastinate his lifeless end . 
 < exeunt 


 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj the mart 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse , xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse , and xxup first xxup merchant 

 xxup first xxup merchant . xxmaj therefore , give out you are of xxmaj epidamnum , 
▁ xxmaj lest that your goods too soon be confiscate . 
▁ xxmaj this very day a xxmaj syracusian merchant 
▁ xxmaj is apprehended for arrival here ; 
▁ xxmaj and , not being able to buy out his life , 
▁ xxmaj according to the statute of the town , 
▁ xxmaj dies ere the weary sun set in the west . 
▁ xxmaj there is your money that i had to keep . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj go bear it to the xxmaj centaur , where we host . 
▁ xxmaj and stay there , xxmaj dromio , till i come to thee . 
▁ xxmaj within this hour it will be dinner - time ; 
▁ xxmaj till that , xxmaj i 'll view the manners of the town , 
▁ xxmaj peruse the traders , gaze upon the buildings , 
▁ xxmaj and then return and sleep within mine inn ; 
▁ xxmaj for with long travel i am stiff and weary . 
▁ xxmaj get thee away . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj many a man would take you at your word , 
▁ xxmaj and go indeed , having so good a mean . 
 < exit 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . a trusty villain , sir , that very oft , 
▁ xxmaj when i am dull with care and melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj lightens my humour with his merry jests . 
▁ xxmaj what , will you walk with me about the town , 
▁ xxmaj and then go to my inn and dine with me ? 
 xxup first xxup merchant . i am invited , sir , to certain merchants , 
▁ xxmaj of whom i hope to make much benefit ; 
▁ i crave your pardon . xxmaj soon at five o'clock , 
▁ xxmaj please you , xxmaj i 'll meet with you upon the mart , 
▁ xxmaj and afterward consort you till bed time . 
▁ xxmaj my present business calls me from you now . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj farewell till then . i will go lose myself , 
▁ xxmaj and wander up and down to view the city . 
 xxup first xxup merchant . xxmaj sir , i commend you to your own content . 
 < exit xxup first xxup merchant 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj he that commends me to mine own content 
▁ xxmaj commends me to the thing i can not get . 
▁ i to the world am like a drop of water 
▁ xxmaj that in the ocean seeks another drop , 
▁ xxmaj who , falling there to find his fellow forth , 
▁ xxmaj unseen , inquisitive , confounds himself . 
▁ xxmaj so xxup i , to find a mother and a brother , 
▁ xxmaj in quest of them , unhappy , lose myself . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus 

▁ xxmaj here comes the almanac of my true date . 
▁ xxmaj what now ? xxmaj how chance thou art return'd so soon ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj return'd so soon ! rather approach'd too late . 
▁ xxmaj the capon burns , the pig falls from the spit ; 
▁ xxmaj the clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell- 
▁ xxmaj my mistress made it one upon my cheek ; 
▁ xxmaj she is so hot because the meat is cold , 
▁ xxmaj the meat is cold because you come not home , 
▁ xxmaj you come not home because you have no stomach , 
▁ xxmaj you have no stomach , having broke your fast ; 
▁ xxmaj but we , that know what ' tis to fast and pray , 
▁ xxmaj are penitent for your default to - day . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj stop in your wind , sir ; tell me this , i pray : 
▁ xxmaj where have you left the money that i gave you ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . o - sixpence that i had a xxmaj wednesday last 
▁ xxmaj to pay the saddler for my mistress ' crupper ? 
▁ xxmaj the saddler had it , sir ; i kept it not . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i am not in a sportive humour now ; 
▁ xxmaj tell me , and dally not , where is the money ? 
▁ xxmaj we being strangers here , how dar'st thou trust 
▁ xxmaj so great a charge from thine own custody ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . i pray you jest , sir , as you sit at dinner . 
▁ i from my mistress come to you in post ; 
▁ xxmaj if i return , i shall be post indeed , 
▁ xxmaj for she will score your fault upon my pate . 
▁ xxmaj methinks your maw , like mine , should be your clock , 
▁ xxmaj and strike you home without a messenger . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj come , xxmaj dromio , come , these jests are out of season ; 
▁ xxmaj reserve them till a merrier hour than this . 
▁ xxmaj where is the gold i gave in charge to thee ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj to me , sir ? xxmaj why , you gave no gold to me . 
▁ xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj come on , sir knave , have done your foolishness , 
▁ xxmaj and tell me how thou hast dispos'd thy charge . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj my charge was but to fetch you from the mart 
▁ xxmaj home to your house , the xxmaj phoenix , sir , to dinner . 
▁ xxmaj my mistress and her sister stays for you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj now , as i am a xxmaj christian , answer me 
▁ xxmaj in what safe place you have bestow'd my money , 
▁ xxmaj or i shall break that merry sconce of yours , 
▁ xxmaj that stands on tricks when i am undispos'd . 
▁ xxmaj where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . i have some marks of yours upon my pate , 
▁ xxmaj some of my mistress ' marks upon my shoulders , 
▁ xxmaj but not a thousand marks between you both . 
▁ xxmaj if i should pay your worship those again , 
▁ xxmaj perchance you will not bear them patiently . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thy mistress ' marks ! xxmaj what mistress , slave , hast thou ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj your worship 's wife , my mistress at the xxmaj phoenix ; 
▁ xxmaj she that doth fast till you come home to dinner , 
▁ xxmaj and prays that you will hie you home to dinner . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what , wilt thou flout me thus unto my face , 
▁ xxmaj being forbid ? xxmaj there , take you that , sir knave . 
 [ beats him ] 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj what mean you , sir ? xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake hold your hands ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , an you will not , sir , xxmaj i 'll take my heels . 
 < exit 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj upon my life , by some device or other 
▁ xxmaj the villain is o'erraught of all my money . 
▁ xxmaj they say this town is full of cozenage ; 
▁ xxmaj as , nimble jugglers that deceive the eye , 
▁ xxmaj dark - working sorcerers that change the mind , 
▁ xxmaj soul - killing witches that deform the body , 
▁ xxmaj disguised cheaters , prating mountebanks , 
▁ xxmaj and many such - like liberties of sin ; 
▁ xxmaj if it prove so , i will be gone the sooner . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj centaur to go seek this slave . 
▁ i greatly fear my money is not safe . 
 < exit 


 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 xxup act xxmaj il . xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj the house of xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus 

 xxmaj enter xxup adriana , wife to xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus , with xxup luciana , her sister 

 xxup adriana . xxmaj neither my husband nor the slave return'd 
▁ xxmaj that in such haste i sent to seek his master ! 
▁ xxmaj sure , xxmaj luciana , it is two o'clock . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj perhaps some merchant hath invited him , 
▁ xxmaj and from the mart he 's somewhere gone to dinner ; 
▁ xxmaj good sister , let us dine , and never fret . 
▁ a man is master of his liberty ; 
▁ xxmaj time is their master , and when they see time , 
▁ xxmaj they 'll go or come . xxmaj if so , be patient , sister . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj why should their liberty than ours be more ? 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj because their business still lies out o ' door . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj look when i serve him so , he takes it ill . 
 xxup luciana . xxup o , know he is the bridle of your will . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj there 's none but asses will be bridled so . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj why , headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe . 
▁ xxmaj there 's nothing situate under heaven 's eye 
▁ xxmaj but hath his bound , in earth , in sea , in sky . 
▁ xxmaj the beasts , the fishes , and the winged fowls , 
▁ xxmaj are their males ' subjects , and at their controls . 
▁ xxmaj man , more divine , the master of all these , 
▁ xxmaj lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas , 
▁ xxmaj indu'd with intellectual sense and souls , 
▁ xxmaj of more pre - eminence than fish and fowls , 
▁ xxmaj are masters to their females , and their lords ; 
▁ xxmaj then let your will attend on their accords . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj this servitude makes you to keep unwed . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj not this , but troubles of the marriage - bed . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj but , were you wedded , you would bear some sway . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj ere i learn love , xxmaj i 'll practise to obey . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj how if your husband start some other where ? 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj till he come home again , i would forbear . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj patience unmov'd ! no marvel though she pause : 
▁ xxmaj they can be meek that have no other cause . 
▁ a wretched soul , bruis'd with adversity , 
▁ xxmaj we bid be quiet when we hear it cry ; 
▁ xxmaj but were we burd'ned with like weight of pain , 
▁ xxmaj as much , or more , we should ourselves complain . 
▁ xxmaj so thou , that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee , 
▁ xxmaj with urging helpless patience would relieve me ; 
▁ xxmaj but if thou live to see like right bereft , 
▁ xxmaj this fool - begg'd patience in thee will be left . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj well , i will marry one day , but to try . 
▁ xxmaj here comes your man , now is your husband nigh . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus 

 xxup adriana . xxmaj say , is your tardy master now at hand ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj nay , he 's at two hands with me , and that my two 
▁ ears can witness . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj say , didst thou speak with him ? xxmaj know'st thou his mind ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj ay , ay , he told his mind upon mine ear . 
▁ xxmaj beshrew his hand , i scarce could understand it . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj spake he so doubtfully thou could'st not feel his meaning ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj nay , he struck so plainly i could to 
▁ well feel his blows ; and withal so doubtfully that i could 
▁ scarce understand them . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj but say , i prithee , is he coming home ? 
▁ xxmaj it seems he hath great care to please his wife . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj why , mistress , sure my master is horn - mad . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj horn - mad , thou villain ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . i mean not cuckold - mad ; 
▁ xxmaj but , sure , he is stark mad . 
▁ xxmaj when i desir'd him to come home to dinner , 
▁ xxmaj he ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold . 
▁ " tis dinner time ' quoth xxup i ; ' my gold ! ' quoth he . 
▁ ' your meat doth burn ' quoth xxup i ; ' my gold ! ' quoth he . 
▁ ' will you come home ? ' quoth xxup i ; ' my gold ! ' quoth he . 
▁ ' where is the thousand marks i gave thee , villain ? ' 
▁ ' the pig ' quoth i ' is burn'd ' ; ' my gold ! ' quoth he . 
▁ ' my mistress , sir , ' quoth xxup i ; ' hang up thy mistress ; 
▁ i know not thy mistress ; out on thy mistress . ' 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj quoth who ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj quoth my master . 
▁ ' i know ' quoth he ' no house , no wife , no mistress . ' 
▁ xxmaj so that my errand , due unto my tongue , 
▁ i thank him , i bare home upon my shoulders ; 
▁ xxmaj for , in conclusion , he did beat me there . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj go back again , thou slave , and fetch him home . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj go back again , and be new beaten home ? 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , send some other messenger . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj back , slave , or i will break thy pate across . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and he will bless that cross with other beating ; 
▁ xxmaj between you i shall have a holy head . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj hence , prating peasant ! xxmaj fetch thy master home . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj am i so round with you , as you with me , 
▁ xxmaj that like a football you do spurn me thus ? 
▁ xxmaj you spurn me hence , and he will spurn me hither ; 
▁ xxmaj if i last in this service , you must case me in leather . 
 < exit 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj fie , how impatience loureth in your face ! 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj his company must do his minions grace , 
▁ xxmaj whilst i at home starve for a merry look . 
▁ xxmaj hath homely age th ' alluring beauty took 
▁ xxmaj from my poor cheek ? xxmaj then he hath wasted it . 
▁ xxmaj are my discourses dull ? xxmaj barren my wit ? 
▁ xxmaj if voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd , 
▁ xxmaj unkindness blunts it more than marble hard . 
▁ xxmaj do their gay vestments his affections bait ? 
▁ xxmaj that 's not my fault ; he 's master of my state . 
▁ xxmaj what ruins are in me that can be found 
▁ xxmaj by him not ruin'd ? xxmaj then is he the ground 
▁ xxmaj of my defeatures . xxmaj my decayed fair 
▁ a sunny look of his would soon repair . 
▁ xxmaj but , too unruly deer , he breaks the pale , 
▁ xxmaj and feeds from home ; poor i am but his stale . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj self - harming jealousy ! fie , beat it hence . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense . 
▁ i know his eye doth homage otherwhere ; 
▁ xxmaj or else what lets it but he would be here ? 
▁ xxmaj sister , you know he promis'd me a chain ; 
▁ xxmaj would that alone a love he would detain , 
▁ xxmaj so he would keep fair quarter with his bed ! 
▁ i see the jewel best enamelled 
▁ xxmaj will lose his beauty ; yet the gold bides still 
▁ xxmaj that others touch and , often touching , will 
▁ xxmaj where gold ; and no man that hath a name 
▁ xxmaj by falsehood and corruption doth it shame . 
▁ xxmaj since that my beauty can not please his eye , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll weep what 's left away , and weeping die . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj how many fond fools serve mad jealousy ! 
 < exeunt 


 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj the mart 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj the gold i gave to xxmaj dromio is laid up 
▁ xxmaj safe at the xxmaj centaur , and the heedful slave 
▁ xxmaj is wand'red forth in care to seek me out . 
▁ xxmaj by computation and mine host 's report 
▁ i could not speak with xxmaj dromio since at first 
▁ i sent him from the mart . xxmaj see , here he comes . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse 

▁ xxmaj how now , sir , is your merry humour alter'd ? 
▁ xxmaj as you love strokes , so jest with me again . 
▁ xxmaj you know no xxmaj centaur ! xxmaj you receiv'd no gold ! 
▁ xxmaj your mistress sent to have me home to dinner ! 
▁ xxmaj my house was at the xxmaj phoenix ! xxmaj wast thou mad , 
▁ xxmaj that thus so madly thou didst answer me ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what answer , sir ? xxmaj when spake i such a word ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj even now , even here , not half an hour since . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i did not see you since you sent me hence , 
▁ xxmaj home to the xxmaj centaur , with the gold you gave me . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj villain , thou didst deny the gold 's receipt , 
▁ xxmaj and told'st me of a mistress and a dinner ; 
▁ xxmaj for which , i hope , thou felt'st i was displeas'd . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i am glad to see you in this merry vein . 
▁ xxmaj what means this jest ? i pray you , master , tell me . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj yea , dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth ? 
▁ xxmaj think'st thou i jest ? xxmaj hold , take thou that , and that . 
 [ beating him ] 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj hold , sir , for xxmaj god 's sake ! xxmaj now your jest is earnest . 
▁ xxmaj upon what bargain do you give it me ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj because that i familiarly sometimes 
▁ xxmaj do use you for my fool and chat with you , 
▁ xxmaj your sauciness will jest upon my love , 
▁ xxmaj and make a common of my serious hours . 
▁ xxmaj when the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport , 
▁ xxmaj but creep in crannies when he hides his beams . 
▁ xxmaj if you will jest with me , know my aspect , 
▁ xxmaj and fashion your demeanour to my looks , 
▁ xxmaj or i will beat this method in your sconce . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj sconce , call you it ? xxmaj so you would 
▁ leave battering , i had rather have it a head . xxmaj an you use 
▁ these blows long , i must get a sconce for my head , and 
▁ insconce it too ; or else i shall seek my wit in my shoulders . 
▁ xxmaj but i pray , sir , why am i beaten ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj dost thou not know ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj nothing , sir , but that i am beaten . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj shall i tell you why ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj ay , sir , and wherefore ; for they say 
▁ every why hath a wherefore . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why , first for flouting me ; and then wherefore , 
▁ xxmaj for urging it the second time to me . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj was there ever any man thus beaten out of season , 
▁ xxmaj when in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme nor reason ? 
▁ xxmaj well , sir , i thank you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thank me , sir ! for what ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , sir , for this something that you gave 
▁ me for nothing . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj i 'll make you amends next , to 
▁ give you nothing for something . xxmaj but say , sir , is it dinnertime ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no , sir ; i think the meat wants that i have . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj in good time , sir , what 's that ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj basting . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj well , sir , then ' twill be dry . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj if it be , sir , i pray you eat none of it . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj your reason ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj lest it make you choleric , and purchase me 
▁ another dry basting . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj well , sir , learn to jest in good time ; 
▁ there 's a time for all things . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i durst have denied that , before you 
▁ were so choleric . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj by what rule , sir ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , sir , by a rule as plain as the 
▁ plain bald pate of xxmaj father xxmaj time himself . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj let 's hear it . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj there 's no time for a man to recover 
▁ his hair that grows bald by nature . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj may he not do it by fine and recovery ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj yes , to pay a fine for a periwig , and 
▁ recover the lost hair of another man . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why is xxmaj time such a niggard of 
▁ hair , being , as it is , so plentiful an excrement ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj because it is a blessing that he bestows 
▁ on beasts , and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath 
▁ given them in wit . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why , but there 's many a man 
▁ hath more hair than wit . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj not a man of those but he hath the 
▁ wit to lose his hair . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why , thou didst conclude hairy 
▁ men plain dealers without wit . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj the plainer dealer , the sooner lost ; 
▁ yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj for what reason ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj for two ; and sound ones too . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj nay , not sound i pray you . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj sure ones , then . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj nay , not sure , in a thing falsing . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj certain ones , then . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj name them . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj the one , to save the money that he spends in 
▁ tiring ; the other , that at dinner they should not drop in his 
▁ porridge . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj you would all this time have prov'd there 
▁ is no time for all things . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , and did , sir ; namely , no time to recover 
▁ hair lost by nature . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj but your reason was not substantial , why 
▁ there is no time to recover . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thus i mend it : xxmaj time himself is bald , 
▁ and therefore to the world 's end will have bald followers . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i knew ' t'would be a bald conclusion . xxmaj but , 
▁ soft , who wafts us yonder ? 

 xxmaj enter xxup adriana and xxup luciana 

 xxup adriana . xxmaj ay , ay , xxmaj antipholus , look strange and frown . 
▁ xxmaj some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects ; 
▁ i am not xxmaj adriana , nor thy wife . 
▁ xxmaj the time was once when thou unurg'd wouldst vow 
▁ xxmaj that never words were music to thine ear , 
▁ xxmaj that never object pleasing in thine eye , 
▁ xxmaj that never touch well welcome to thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj that never meat sweet - savour'd in thy taste , 
▁ xxmaj unless i spake , or look'd , or touch'd , or carv'd to thee . 
▁ xxmaj how comes it now , my husband , xxup o , how comes it , 
▁ xxmaj that thou art then estranged from thyself ? 
▁ xxmaj thyself i call it , being strange to me , 
▁ xxmaj that , undividable , incorporate , 
▁ xxmaj am better than thy dear self 's better part . 
▁ xxmaj ah , do not tear away thyself from me ; 
▁ xxmaj for know , my love , as easy mayst thou fall 
▁ a drop of water in the breaking gulf , 
▁ xxmaj and take unmingled thence that drop again 
▁ xxmaj without addition or diminishing , 
▁ xxmaj as take from me thyself , and not me too . 
▁ xxmaj how dearly would it touch thee to the quick , 
▁ xxmaj should'st thou but hear i were licentious , 
▁ xxmaj and that this body , consecrate to thee , 
▁ xxmaj by ruffian lust should be contaminate ! 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou not spit at me and spurn at me , 
▁ xxmaj and hurl the name of husband in my face , 
▁ xxmaj and tear the stain'd skin off my harlot - brow , 
▁ xxmaj and from my false hand cut the wedding - ring , 
▁ xxmaj and break it with a deep - divorcing vow ? 
▁ i know thou canst , and therefore see thou do it . 
▁ i am possess'd with an adulterate blot ; 
▁ xxmaj my blood is mingled with the crime of lust ; 
▁ xxmaj for if we two be one , and thou play false , 
▁ i do digest the poison of thy flesh , 
▁ xxmaj being strumpeted by thy contagion . 
▁ xxmaj keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed ; 
▁ i live dis - stain'd , thou undishonoured . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj plead you to me , fair dame ? i know you not : 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj ephesus i am but two hours old , 
▁ xxmaj as strange unto your town as to your talk , 
▁ xxmaj who , every word by all my wit being scann'd , 
▁ xxmaj wants wit in all one word to understand . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj fie , brother , how the world is chang'd with you ! 
▁ xxmaj when were you wo nt to use my sister thus ? 
▁ xxmaj she sent for you by xxmaj dromio home to dinner . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj by xxmaj dromio ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj by me ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj by thee ; and this thou didst return from him- 
▁ xxmaj that he did buffet thee , and in his blows 
▁ xxmaj denied my house for his , me for his wife . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj did you converse , sir , with this gentlewoman ? 
▁ xxmaj what is the course and drift of your compact ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup i , xxmaj sir ? i never saw her till this time . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj villain , thou liest ; for even her very words 
▁ xxmaj didst thou deliver to me on the mart . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i never spake with her in all my life . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj how can she thus , then , call us by our names , 
▁ xxmaj unless it be by inspiration ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj how ill agrees it with your gravity 
▁ xxmaj to counterfeit thus grossly with your slave , 
▁ xxmaj abetting him to thwart me in my mood ! 
▁ xxmaj be it my wrong you are from me exempt , 
▁ xxmaj but wrong not that wrong with a more contempt . 
▁ xxmaj come , i will fasten on this sleeve of thine ; 
▁ xxmaj thou art an elm , my husband , i a vine , 
▁ xxmaj whose weakness , married to thy stronger state , 
▁ xxmaj makes me with thy strength to communicate . 
▁ xxmaj if aught possess thee from me , it is dross , 
▁ xxmaj usurping ivy , brier , or idle moss ; 
▁ xxmaj who all , for want of pruning , with intrusion 
▁ xxmaj infect thy sap , and live on thy confusion . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj to me she speaks ; she moves me for her theme . 
▁ xxmaj what , was i married to her in my dream ? 
▁ xxmaj or sleep i now , and think i hear all this ? 
▁ xxmaj what error drives our eyes and ears amiss ? 
▁ xxmaj until i know this sure uncertainty , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll entertain the offer'd fallacy . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj dromio , go bid the servants spread for dinner . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup o , for my beads ! i cross me for sinner .