xxbos xxmaj this is the fairy land . o spite of spites ! 
▁ xxmaj we talk with goblins , owls , and sprites . 
▁ xxmaj if we obey them not , this will ensue : 
▁ xxmaj they 'll suck our breath , or pinch us black and blue . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj why prat'st thou to thyself , and answer'st not ? 
▁ xxmaj dromio , thou drone , thou snail , thou slug , thou sot ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i am transformed , master , am not xxup i ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i think thou art in mind , and so am xxup i. 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj nay , master , both in mind and in my shape . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thou hast thine own form . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no , i am an ape . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj if thou art chang'd to aught , ' tis to an ass . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . ' tis true ; she rides me , and i long for grass . 
▁ ' tis so , i am an ass ; else it could never be 
▁ xxmaj but i should know her as well as she knows me . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj come , come , no longer will i be a fool , 
▁ xxmaj to put the finger in the eye and weep , 
▁ xxmaj whilst man and master laughs my woes to scorn . 
▁ xxmaj come , sir , to dinner . xxmaj dromio , keep the gate . 
▁ xxmaj husband , xxmaj i 'll dine above with you to - day , 
▁ xxmaj and shrive you of a thousand idle pranks . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , if any ask you for your master , 
▁ xxmaj say he dines forth , and let no creature enter . 
▁ xxmaj come , sister . xxmaj dromio , play the porter well . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj am i in earth , in heaven , or in hell ? 
▁ xxmaj sleeping or waking , mad or well - advis'd ? 
▁ xxmaj known unto these , and to myself disguis'd ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll say as they say , and persever so , 
▁ xxmaj and in this mist at all adventures go . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj master , shall i be porter at the gate ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj ay ; and let none enter , lest i break your pate . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj come , come , xxmaj antipholus , we dine too late . 
 < exeunt 


 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj before the house of xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus , xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus , xxup angelo , and xxup balthazar 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj good xxmaj signior xxmaj angelo , you must excuse us all ; 
▁ xxmaj my wife is shrewish when i keep not hours . 
▁ xxmaj say that i linger'd with you at your shop 
▁ xxmaj to see the making of her carcanet , 
▁ xxmaj and that to - morrow you will bring it home . 
▁ xxmaj but here 's a villain that would face me down 
▁ xxmaj he met me on the mart , and that i beat him , 
▁ xxmaj and charg'd him with a thousand marks in gold , 
▁ xxmaj and that i did deny my wife and house . 
▁ xxmaj thou drunkard , thou , what didst thou mean by this ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj say what you will , sir , but i know what i know . 
▁ xxmaj that you beat me at the mart i have your hand to show ; 
▁ xxmaj if the skin were parchment , and the blows you gave were ink , 
▁ xxmaj your own handwriting would tell you what i think . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i think thou art an ass . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj marry , so it doth appear 
▁ xxmaj by the wrongs i suffer and the blows i bear . 
▁ i should kick , being kick'd ; and being at that pass , 
▁ xxmaj you would keep from my heels , and beware of an ass . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj y'are sad , xxmaj signior xxmaj balthazar ; pray xxmaj god our cheer 
▁ xxmaj may answer my good will and your good welcome here . 
 xxup balthazar . i hold your dainties cheap , sir , and your welcome dear . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxup o , xxmaj signior xxmaj balthazar , either at flesh or fish , 
▁ a table full of welcome makes scarce one dainty dish . 
 xxup balthazar . xxmaj good meat , sir , is common ; that every churl affords . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and welcome more common ; for that 's nothing 
▁ but words . 
 xxup balthazar . xxmaj small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj ay , to a niggardly host and more sparing guest . 
▁ xxmaj but though my cates be mean , take them in good part ; 
▁ xxmaj better cheer may you have , but not with better heart . 
▁ xxmaj but , soft , my door is lock'd ; go bid them let us in . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj maud , xxmaj bridget , xxmaj marian , xxmaj cicely , xxmaj gillian , xxmaj ginn ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj mome , malt - horse , capon , coxcomb , idiot , patch ! 
▁ xxmaj either get thee from the door , or sit down at the hatch . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou conjure for wenches , that thou call'st for such store , 
▁ xxmaj when one is one too many ? xxmaj go get thee from the door . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj what patch is made our porter ? 
▁ xxmaj my master stays in the street . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj let him walk from whence he came , 
▁ lest he catch cold on 's feet . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj who talks within there ? xxmaj ho , open the door ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj right , sir ; xxmaj i 'll tell you when , 
▁ an you 'll tell me wherefore . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj wherefore ? xxmaj for my dinner ; 
▁ i have not din'd to - day . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj nor to - day here you must not ; 
▁ come again when you may . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj what art thou that keep'st me out 
▁ from the house i owe ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj the porter for this time , 
▁ sir , and my name is xxmaj dromio . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . o xxmaj villain , thou hast stol'n both mine 
▁ office and my name ! 
▁ xxmaj the one ne'er got me credit , the other mickle blame . 
▁ xxmaj if thou hadst been xxmaj dromio to - day in my place , 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst have chang'd thy face for a name , or thy name for an ass . 

 xxmaj enter xxup luce , within 

 xxup luce . [ within ] xxmaj what a coil is there , xxmaj dromio ? xxmaj who are those at the gate ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj let my master in , xxmaj luce . 
 xxup luce . [ within ] xxmaj faith , no , he comes too late ; 
▁ xxmaj and so tell your master . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . o xxmaj lord , i must laugh ! 
▁ xxmaj have at you with a proverb : xxmaj shall i set in my staff ? 
 xxup luce . [ within ] xxmaj have at you with another : that's - when ? can you tell ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj if thy name be called xxmaj luce 
▁ -luce , thou hast answer'd him well . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj do you hear , you minion ? xxmaj you 'll let us in , i hope ? 
 xxup luce . [ within ] i thought to have ask'd you . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj and you said no . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxup so , xxmaj come , help : well struck ! there was blow for blow . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj thou baggage , let me in . 
 xxup luce . [ within ] xxmaj can you tell for whose sake ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj master , knock the door hard . 
 xxup luce . [ within ] xxmaj let him knock till it ache . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj you 'll cry for this , minion , if beat the door down . 
 xxup luce . [ within ] xxmaj what needs all that , and a pair of stocks in the town ? 

 xxmaj enter xxup adriana , within 

 xxup adriana . [ within ] xxmaj who is that at the door , that keeps all this noise ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj by my troth , your town is 
▁ troubled with unruly boys . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj are you there , wife ? xxmaj you might 
▁ have come before . 
 xxup adriana . [ within ] xxmaj your wife , sir knave ! xxmaj go get you from the door . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj if xxup you went in pain , master , this ' knave ' would go sore . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj here is neither cheer , sir , nor welcome ; we would fain have either . 
 xxup balthazar . xxmaj in debating which was best , we shall part with neither . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj they stand at the door , master ; bid them welcome hither . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj there is something in the wind , that we can not get in . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj you would say so , master , if your garments were thin . 
▁ xxmaj your cake here is warm within ; you stand here in the cold ; 
▁ xxmaj it would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj go fetch me something ; xxmaj i 'll break ope the gate . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj break any breaking here , 
▁ and xxmaj i 'll break your knave 's pate . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . a man may break a word with you , 
▁ sir ; and words are but wind ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , and break it in your face , so he break it not behind . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj it seems thou want'st breaking ; 
▁ out upon thee , hind ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj here 's too much ' out upon thee ! ' pray thee let me in . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . [ within ] xxmaj ay , when fowls have no 
▁ feathers and fish have no fin . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll break in ; go borrow me a crow . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . a crow without feather ? xxmaj master , mean you so ? 
▁ xxmaj for a fish without a fin , there 's a fowl without a feather ; 
▁ xxmaj if a crow help us in , sirrah , we 'll pluck a crow together . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj go get thee gone ; fetch me an iron crow . 
 xxup balthazar . xxmaj have patience , sir ; xxup o , let it not be so ! 
▁ xxmaj herein you war against your reputation , 
▁ xxmaj and draw within the compass of suspect 
▁ xxmaj th ' unviolated honour of your wife . 
▁ xxmaj once this - your long experience of her wisdom , 
▁ xxmaj her sober virtue , years , and modesty , 
▁ xxmaj plead on her part some cause to you unknown ; 
▁ xxmaj and doubt not , sir , but she will well excuse 
▁ xxmaj why at this time the doors are made against you . 
▁ xxmaj be rul'd by me : depart in patience , 
▁ xxmaj and let us to the xxmaj tiger all to dinner ; 
▁ xxmaj and , about evening , come yourself alone 
▁ xxmaj to know the reason of this strange restraint . 
▁ xxmaj if by strong hand you offer to break in 
▁ xxmaj now in the stirring passage of the day , 
▁ a vulgar comment will be made of it , 
▁ xxmaj and that supposed by the common rout 
▁ xxmaj against your yet ungalled estimation 
▁ xxmaj that may with foul intrusion enter in 
▁ xxmaj and dwell upon your grave when you are dead ; 
▁ xxmaj for slander lives upon succession , 
▁ xxmaj for ever hous'd where it gets possession . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj you have prevail'd . i will depart in quiet , 
▁ xxmaj and in despite of mirth mean to be merry . 
▁ i know a wench of excellent discourse , 
▁ xxmaj pretty and witty ; wild , and yet , too , gentle ; 
▁ xxmaj there will we dine . xxmaj this woman that i mean , 
▁ xxmaj my wife - but , i protest , without desert- 
▁ xxmaj hath oftentimes upbraided me withal ; 
▁ xxmaj to her will we to dinner . [ to xxup angelo ] xxmaj get you home 
▁ xxmaj and fetch the chain ; by this i know ' tis made . 
▁ xxmaj bring it , i pray you , to the xxmaj porpentine ; 
▁ xxmaj for there 's the house . xxmaj that chain will i bestow- 
▁ xxmaj be it for nothing but to spite my wife- 
▁ xxmaj upon mine hostess there ; good sir , make haste . 
▁ xxmaj since mine own doors refuse to entertain me , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll knock elsewhere , to see if they 'll disdain me . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj i 'll meet you at that place some hour hence . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj do so ; this jest shall cost me some expense . 
 < exeunt 


 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj before the house of xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus 

 xxmaj enter xxup luciana with xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse 

 xxup luciana . xxmaj and may it be that you have quite forgot 
▁ a husband 's office ? xxmaj shall , xxmaj antipholus , 
▁ xxmaj even in the spring of love , thy love - springs rot ? 
▁ xxmaj shall love , in building , grow so ruinous ? 
▁ xxmaj if you did we d my sister for her wealth , 
▁ xxmaj then for her wealth 's sake use her with more kindness ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if you like elsewhere , do it by stealth ; 
▁ xxmaj muffle your false love with some show of blindness ; 
▁ xxmaj let not my sister read it in your eye ; 
▁ xxmaj be not thy tongue thy own shame 's orator ; 
▁ xxmaj look sweet , speak fair , become disloyalty ; 
▁ xxmaj apparel vice like virtue 's harbinger ; 
▁ xxmaj bear a fair presence , though your heart be tainted ; 
▁ xxmaj teach sin the carriage of a holy saint ; 
▁ xxmaj be secret - false . xxmaj what need she be acquainted ? 
▁ xxmaj what simple thief brags of his own attaint ? 
▁ ' tis double wrong to truant with your bed 
▁ xxmaj and let her read it in thy looks at board ; 
▁ xxmaj shame hath a bastard fame , well managed ; 
▁ xxmaj ill deeds is doubled with an evil word . 
▁ xxmaj alas , poor women ! make us but believe , 
▁ xxmaj being compact of credit , that you love us ; 
▁ xxmaj though others have the arm , show us the sleeve ; 
▁ xxmaj we in your motion turn , and you may move us . 
▁ xxmaj then , gentle brother , get you in again ; 
▁ xxmaj comfort my sister , cheer her , call her wife . 
▁ ' tis holy sport to be a little vain 
▁ xxmaj when the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj sweet mistress - what your name is else , i know not , 
▁ xxmaj nor by what wonder you do hit of mine- 
▁ xxmaj less in your knowledge and your grace you show not 
▁ xxmaj than our earth 's wonder - more than earth , divine . 
▁ xxmaj teach me , dear creature , how to think and speak ; 
▁ xxmaj lay open to my earthy - gross conceit , 
▁ xxmaj smoth'red in errors , feeble , shallow , weak , 
▁ xxmaj the folded meaning of your words ' deceit . 
▁ xxmaj against my soul 's pure truth why labour you 
▁ xxmaj to make it wander in an unknown field ? 
▁ xxmaj are you a god ? xxmaj would you create me new ? 
▁ xxmaj transform me , then , and to your pow'r xxmaj i 'll yield . 
▁ xxmaj but if that i am xxup i , then well i know 
▁ xxmaj your weeping sister is no wife of mine , 
▁ xxmaj nor to her bed no homage do i owe ; 
▁ xxmaj far more , far more , to you do i decline . 
▁ xxup o , train me not , sweet mermaid , with thy note , 
▁ xxmaj to drown me in thy sister 's flood of tears . 
▁ xxmaj sing , siren , for thyself , and i will dote ; 
▁ xxmaj spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs , 
▁ xxmaj and as a bed xxmaj i 'll take them , and there he ; 
▁ xxmaj and in that glorious supposition think 
▁ xxmaj he gains by death that hath such means to die . 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj love , being light , be drowned if she sink . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj what , are you mad , that you do reason so ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj not mad , but mated ; how , i do not know . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj it is a fault that springeth from your eye . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj for gazing on your beams , fair sun , being by . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj gaze where you should , and that will clear your sight . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj as good to wink , sweet love , as look on night . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj why call you me love ? xxmaj call my sister so . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thy sister 's sister . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj that 's my sister . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no ; 
▁ xxmaj it is thyself , mine own self 's better part ; 
▁ xxmaj mine eye 's clear eye , my dear heart 's dearer heart , 
▁ xxmaj my food , my fortune , and my sweet hope 's aim , 
▁ xxmaj my sole earth 's heaven , and my heaven 's claim . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj all this my sister is , or else should be . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj call thyself sister , sweet , for i am thee ; 
▁ xxmaj thee will i love , and with thee lead my life ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast no husband yet , nor i no wife . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand . 
 xxup luciana . xxup o , soft , sir , hold you still ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fetch my sister to get her good will . 
 < exit xxup luciana 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj dromio ! xxmaj where run'st thou 
▁ so fast ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj do you know me , sir ? xxmaj am i xxmaj dromio ? 
▁ xxmaj am i your man ? xxmaj am i myself ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thou art xxmaj dromio , thou art my 
▁ man , thou art thyself . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i am an ass , i am a woman 's man , and besides 
▁ myself . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what woman 's man , and how besides thyself ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , sir , besides myself , i am due 
▁ to a woman - one that claims me , one that haunts me , one 
▁ that will have me . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what claim lays she to thee ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , sir , such claim as you would 
▁ lay to your horse ; and she would have me as a beast : not 
▁ that , i being a beast , she would have me ; but that she , 
▁ being a very beastly creature , lays claim to me . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what is she ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . a very reverent body ; ay , such a one 
▁ as a man may not speak of without he say ' sir - reverence . ' 
▁ i have but lean luck in the match , and yet is she a 
▁ wondrous fat marriage . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj how dost thou mean a fat marriage ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , sir , she 's the kitchen - wench , 
▁ and all grease ; and i know not what use to put her to but 
▁ to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light . 
▁ i warrant , her rags and the tallow in them will burn 
▁ xxmaj poland winter . xxmaj if she lives till doomsday , she 'll burn 
▁ week longer than the whole world . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what complexion is she of ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj swart , like my shoe ; but her face 
▁ nothing like so clean kept ; for why , she sweats , a man may 
▁ go over shoes in the grime of it . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj that 's a fault that water will mend . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no , sir , ' tis in grain ; xxmaj noah 's flood 
▁ could not do it . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what 's her name ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj nell , sir ; but her name and three 
▁ quarters , that 's an ell and three quarters , will not measure 
▁ her from hip to hip . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj then she bears some breadth ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no longer from head to foot than 
▁ from hip to hip : she is spherical , like a globe ; i could find 
▁ out countries in her . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj in what part of her body stands xxmaj ireland ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , sir , in her buttocks ; i found it out by 
▁ the bogs . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj where xxmaj scotland ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i found it by the barrenness , hard in 
▁ the palm of the hand . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj where xxmaj france ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj in her forehead , arm'd and reverted , 
▁ making war against her heir . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj where xxmaj england ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i look'd for the chalky cliffs , but i 
▁ could find no whiteness in them ; but i guess it stood in her 
▁ chin , by the salt rheum that ran between xxmaj france and it . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj where xxmaj spain ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj faith , i saw it not , but i felt it hot in 
▁ her breath . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj where xxmaj america , the xxmaj indies ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup o , sir , upon her nose , an o'er embellished with 
▁ rubies , carbuncles , sapphires , declining their rich aspect to the 
▁ hot breath of xxmaj spain ; who sent whole armadoes of caracks to be 
▁ ballast at her nose . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj where stood xxmaj belgia , the xxmaj netherlands ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup o , xxmaj sir , i did not look so low . xxmaj to 
▁ conclude : this drudge or diviner laid claim to me ; call'd me 
▁ xxmaj dromio ; swore i was assur'd to her ; told me what privy 
▁ marks i had about me , as , the mark of my shoulder , the 
▁ mole in my neck , the great wart on my left arm , that xxup i , 
▁ amaz'd , ran from her as a witch . 
▁ xxmaj and , i think , if my breast had not been made of faith , 
▁ and my heart of steel , 
▁ xxmaj she had transform'd me to a curtal dog , and made me turn i ' th ' wheel . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj go hie thee presently post to the road ; 
▁ xxmaj an if the wind blow any way from shore , 
▁ i will not harbour in this town to - night . 
▁ xxmaj if any bark put forth , come to the mart , 
▁ xxmaj where i will walk till thou return to me . 
▁ xxmaj if every one knows us , and we know none , 
▁ ' tis time , i think , to trudge , pack and be gone . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj as from a bear a man would run for life , 
▁ xxmaj so fly i from her that would be my wife . 
 < exit 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj there 's none but witches do inhabit here , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore ' tis high time that i were hence . 
▁ xxmaj she that doth call me husband , even my soul 
▁ xxmaj doth for a wife abhor . xxmaj but her fair sister , 
▁ xxmaj possess'd with such a gentle sovereign grace , 
▁ xxmaj of such enchanting presence and discourse , 
▁ xxmaj hath almost made me traitor to myself ; 
▁ xxmaj but , lest myself be guilty to self - wrong , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll stop mine ears against the mermaid 's song . 

 xxmaj enter xxup angelo with the chain 

 xxup angelo . xxmaj master xxmaj antipholus ! 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj ay , that 's my name . 
 xxup angelo . i know it well , sir . xxmaj lo , here is the chain . 
▁ i thought to have ta'en you at the xxmaj porpentine ; 
▁ xxmaj the chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what is your will that i shall do with this ? 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj what please yourself , sir ; i have made it for you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj made it for me , sir ! i bespoke it not . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj not once nor twice , but twenty times you have . 
▁ xxmaj go home with it , and please your wife withal ; 
▁ xxmaj and soon at supper - time xxmaj i 'll visit you , 
▁ xxmaj and then receive my money for the chain . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i pray you , sir , receive the money now , 
▁ xxmaj for fear you ne'er see chain nor money more . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj you are a merry man , sir ; fare you well . 
 < exit 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what i should think of this can not tell : 
▁ xxmaj but this i think , there 's no man is so vain 
▁ xxmaj that would refuse so fair an offer'd chain . 
▁ i see a man here needs not live by shifts , 
▁ xxmaj when in the streets he meets such golden gifts . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the mart , and there for xxmaj dromio stay ; 
▁ xxmaj if any ship put out , then straight away . 
 < exit 


 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 

 a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup second xxup merchant , xxup angelo , and an xxup officer 

 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj you know since xxmaj pentecost the sum is due , 
▁ xxmaj and since i have not much importun'd you ; 
▁ xxmaj nor now i had not , but that i am bound 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj persia , and want guilders for my voyage . 
▁ xxmaj therefore make present satisfaction , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj i 'll attach you by this officer . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj even just the sum that i do owe to you 
▁ xxmaj is growing to me by xxmaj antipholus ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the instant that i met with you 
▁ xxmaj he had of me a chain ; at five o'clock 
▁ i shall receive the money for the same . 
▁ xxmaj pleaseth you walk with me down to his house , 
▁ i will discharge my bond , and thank you too . 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus , and xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus , from the xxup courtezan 's 

 xxup officer . xxmaj that labour may you save ; see where he comes . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj while i go to the goldsmith 's house , go thou 
▁ xxmaj and buy a rope 's end ; that will i bestow 
▁ xxmaj among my wife and her confederates , 
▁ xxmaj for locking me out of my doors by day . 
▁ xxmaj but , soft , i see the goldsmith . xxmaj get thee gone ; 
▁ xxmaj buy thou a rope , and bring it home to me . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . i buy a thousand pound a year ; i buy a rope . 
 < exit xxup dromio 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . a man is well holp up that trusts to you ! 
▁ i promised your presence and the chain ; 
▁ xxmaj but neither chain nor goldsmith came to me . 
▁ xxmaj belike you thought our love would last too long , 
▁ xxmaj if it were chain'd together , and therefore came not . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj saving your merry humour , here 's the note 
▁ xxmaj how much your chain weighs to the utmost carat , 
▁ xxmaj the fineness of the gold , and chargeful fashion , 
▁ xxmaj which doth amount to three odd ducats more 
▁ xxmaj than i stand debted to this gentleman . 
▁ i pray you see him presently discharg'd , 
▁ xxmaj for he is bound to sea , and stays but for it . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i am not furnish'd with the present money ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , i have some business in the town . 
▁ xxmaj good signior , take the stranger to my house , 
▁ xxmaj and with you take the chain , and bid my wife 
▁ xxmaj disburse the sum on the receipt thereof . 
▁ xxmaj perchance i will be there as soon as you . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj then you will bring the chain to her yourself ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj no ; bear it with you , lest i come not time enough . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj well , sir , i will . xxmaj have you the chain about you ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj an if i have not , sir , i hope you have ; 
▁ xxmaj or else you may return without your money . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj nay , come , i pray you , sir , give me the chain ; 
▁ xxmaj both wind and tide stays for this gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , to blame , have held him here too long . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj good xxmaj lord ! you use this dalliance to excuse 
▁ xxmaj your breach of promise to the xxmaj porpentine ; 
▁ i should have chid you for not bringing it , 
▁ xxmaj but , like a shrew , you first begin to brawl . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj the hour steals on ; i pray you , sir , dispatch . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj you hear how he importunes me - the chain ! 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj why , give it to my wife , and fetch your money . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj come , come , you know i gave it you even now . 
▁ xxmaj either send the chain or send by me some token . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj fie , now you run this humour out of breath ! 
▁ xxmaj come , where 's the chain ? i pray you let me see it . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj my business can not brook this dalliance . 
▁ xxmaj good sir , say whe'r you 'll answer me or no ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , xxmaj i 'll leave him to the officer . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i answer you ! xxmaj what should i answer you ? 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj the money that you owe me for the chain . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i owe you none till i receive the chain . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj you know i gave it you half an hour since . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj you gave me none ; you wrong me much to say so . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj you wrong me more , sir , in denying it . 
▁ xxmaj consider how it stands upon my credit . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj well , officer , arrest him at my suit . 
 xxup officer . i do ; and charge you in the xxmaj duke 's name to obey me . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj this touches me in reputation . 
▁ xxmaj either consent to pay this sum for me , 
▁ xxmaj or i attach you by this officer . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj consent to pay thee that i never had ! 
▁ xxmaj arrest me , foolish fellow , if thou dar'st . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj here is thy fee ; arrest him , officer . 
▁ i would not spare my brother in this case , 
▁ xxmaj if he should scorn me so apparently . 
 xxup officer . i do arrest you , sir ; you hear the suit . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i do obey thee till i give thee bail . 
▁ xxmaj but , sirrah , you shall buy this sport as dear 
▁ xxmaj as all the metal in your shop will answer . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj sir , sir , i shall have law in xxmaj ephesus , 
▁ xxmaj to your notorious shame , i doubt it not . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse , from the bay 

 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj master , there 's a bark of xxmaj epidamnum 
▁ xxmaj that stays but till her owner comes aboard , 
▁ xxmaj and then , sir , she bears away . xxmaj our fraughtage , sir , 
▁ i have convey'd aboard ; and i have bought 
▁ xxmaj the oil , the balsamum , and aqua - vitx . 
▁ xxmaj the ship is in her trim ; the merry wind 
▁ xxmaj blows fair from land ; they stay for nought at an 
▁ xxmaj but for their owner , master , and yourself . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj how now ! a madman ? xxmaj why , thou peevish sheep , 
▁ xxmaj what ship of xxmaj epidamnum stays for me ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . a ship you sent me to , to hire waftage . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxup thou drunken slave ! i sent the for a rope ; 
▁ xxmaj and told thee to what purpose and what end . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup you sent me for a rope 's end as soon- 
▁ xxmaj you sent me to the bay , sir , for a bark . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i xxmaj will debate this matter at more leisure , 
▁ xxmaj and teach your ears to list me with more heed . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj adriana , villain , hie thee straight ; 
▁ xxmaj give her this key , and tell her in the desk 
▁ xxmaj that 's cover'd o'er with xxmaj turkish tapestry 
▁ xxmaj there is a purse of ducats ; let her send it . 
▁ xxmaj tell her i am arrested in the street , 
▁ xxmaj and that shall bail me ; hie thee , slave , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj on , officer , to prison till it come . 
 < exeunt all but xxup dromio 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj to xxmaj adriana ! that is where we din'd , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj dowsabel did claim me for her husband . 
▁ xxmaj she is too big , i hope , for me to compass . 
▁ xxmaj thither i must , although against my will , 
▁ xxmaj for servants must their masters ' minds fulfil . 
 < exit 


 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj the house of xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus 

 xxmaj enter xxup adriana and xxup luciana 

 xxup adriana . xxmaj ah , xxmaj luciana , did he tempt thee so ? 
▁ xxmaj might'st thou perceive austerely in his eye 
▁ xxmaj that he did plead in earnest ? xxmaj yea or no ? 
▁ xxmaj look'd he or red or pale , or sad or merrily ? 
▁ xxmaj what observation mad'st thou in this case 
▁ xxmaj of his heart 's meteors tilting in his face ? 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj first he denied you had in him no right . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj he meant he did me none - the more my spite . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj then swore he that he was a stranger here . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj and true he swore , though yet forsworn he were . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj then pleaded i for you . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj and what said he ? 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj that love i begg'd for you he begg'd of me . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj with what persuasion did he tempt thy love ? 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj with words that in an honest suit might move . 
▁ xxmaj first he did praise my beauty , then my speech . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj didst speak him fair ? 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj have patience , i beseech . 
 xxup adriana . i can not , nor i will not hold me still ; 
▁ xxmaj my tongue , though not my heart , shall have his will . 
▁ xxmaj he is deformed , crooked , old , and sere , 
▁ xxmaj ill - fac'd , worse bodied , shapeless everywhere ; 
▁ xxmaj vicious , ungentle , foolish , blunt , unkind ; 
▁ xxmaj stigmatical in making , worse in mind . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj who would be jealous then of such a one ? 
▁ xxmaj no evil lost is wail'd when it is gone . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj ah , but i think him better than i say , 
▁ xxmaj and yet would herein others ' eyes were worse . 
▁ xxmaj far from her nest the lapwing cries away ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart prays for him , though my tongue do curse . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . 

 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj here go - the desk , the purse . xxmaj sweet 
▁ now , make haste . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj how hast thou lost thy breath ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj by running fast . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj where is thy master , xxmaj dromio ? xxmaj is he well ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no , he 's in xxmaj tartar limbo , worse than hell . 
▁ a devil in an everlasting garment hath him ; 
▁ xxmaj one whose hard heart is button'd up with steel ; 
▁ a fiend , a fairy , pitiless and rough ; 
▁ a wolf , nay worse , a fellow all in buff ; 
▁ a back - friend , a shoulder - clapper , one that countermands 
▁ xxmaj the passages of alleys , creeks , and narrow lands ; 
▁ a hound that runs counter , and yet draws dry - foot well ; 
▁ xxmaj one that , before the xxmaj judgment , carries poor souls to hell . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj why , man , what is the matter ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i do not know the matter ; he is rested on the case . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj what , is he arrested ? xxmaj tell me , at whose suit ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . i know not at whose suit he is arrested well ; 
▁ xxmaj but he 's in a suit of buff which ' rested him , that can i tell . 
▁ xxmaj will you send him , mistress , redemption , the money in his desk ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj go fetch it , sister . [ exit xxup luciana ] xxmaj this i wonder at : 
▁ xxmaj thus he unknown to me should be in debt . 
▁ xxmaj tell me , was he arrested on a band ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . on a band , but on a stronger thing , 
▁ a chain , a chain . xxmaj do you not hear it ring ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj what , the chain ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no , no , the bell ; ' tis time that i were gone . 
▁ xxmaj it was two ere i left him , and now the clock strikes one . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj the hours come back ! xxmaj that did i never hear . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . o yes . xxmaj if any hour meet a sergeant , 
▁ ' a turns back for very fear . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj as if xxmaj time were in debt ! xxmaj how fondly dost thou reason ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj time is a very bankrupt , and owes 
▁ more than he 's worth to season . 
▁ xxmaj nay , he 's a thief too : have you not heard men say 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj time comes stealing on by night and day ? 
▁ xxmaj if ' a be in debt and theft , and a sergeant in the way , 
▁ xxmaj hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day ? 

 xxmaj re - enter xxup luciana with a purse 

 xxup adriana . xxmaj go , xxmaj dromio , there 's the money ; bear it straight , 
▁ xxmaj and bring thy master home immediately . 
▁ xxmaj come , sister ; i am press'd down with conceit- 
▁ xxmaj conceit , my comfort and my injury . 
 < exeunt 


 xxup scene 3 

 xxmaj the mart 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj there 's not a man i meet but doth salute me 
▁ xxmaj as if i were their well - acquainted friend ; 
▁ xxmaj and every one doth call me by my name . 
▁ xxmaj some tender money to me , some invite me , 
▁ xxmaj some other give me thanks for kindnesses , 
▁ xxmaj some offer me commodities to buy ; 
▁ xxmaj even now a tailor call'd me in his shop , 
▁ xxmaj and show'd me silks that he had bought for me , 
▁ xxmaj and therewithal took measure of my body . 
▁ xxmaj sure , these are but imaginary wiles , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj lapland sorcerers inhabit here . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse 

 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj master , here 's the gold you sent me 
▁ for . xxmaj what , have you got the picture of old xxmaj adam new - apparell'd ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what gold is this ? xxmaj what xxmaj adam dost thou mean ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj not that xxmaj adam that kept the xxmaj paradise , 
▁ but that xxmaj adam that keeps the prison ; he that goes in the 
▁ calf 's skin that was kill'd for the xxmaj prodigal ; he that came behind 
▁ you , sir , like an evil angel , and bid you forsake your liberty . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i understand thee not . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no ? xxmaj why , ' tis a plain case : he that 
▁ went , like a bass - viol , in a case of leather ; the man , sir , 
▁ that , when gentlemen are tired , gives them a sob , and rest 
▁ them ; he , sir , that takes pity on decayed men , and give 
▁ them suits of durance ; he that sets up his rest to do more 
▁ exploits with his mace than a morris - pike . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj what , thou mean'st an officer ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj ay , sir , the sergeant of the band ; 
▁ that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band ; on 
▁ that thinks a man always going to bed , and says ' god give 
▁ you good rest ! ' 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj well , sir , there rest in your foolery . xxmaj is 
▁ there any ship puts forth to - night ? xxmaj may we be gone ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why , sir , i brought you word an 
▁ hour since that the bark xxmaj expedition put forth to - night ; and 
▁ then were you hind'red by the sergeant , to tarry for the 
▁ boy xxmaj delay . xxmaj here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj the fellow is distract , and so am xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj and here we wander in illusions . 
▁ xxmaj some blessed power deliver us from hence ! 

 xxmaj enter a xxup courtezan 

 xxup courtezan . xxmaj well met , well met , xxmaj master xxmaj antipholus . 
▁ i see , sir , you have found the goldsmith now . 
▁ xxmaj is that the chain you promis'd me to - day ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj satan , avoid ! i charge thee , tempt me not . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj master , is this xxmaj mistress xxmaj satan ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj it is the devil . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj nay , she is worse , she is the devil 's 
▁ dam , and here she comes in the habit of a light wench ; and 
▁ thereof comes that the wenches say ' god damn me ! ' xxmaj that 's 
▁ as much to say ' god make me a light wench ! ' xxmaj it is written 
▁ they appear to men like angels of light ; light is an effect 
▁ of fire , and fire will burn ; ergo , light wenches will burn . 
▁ xxmaj come not near her . 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj your man and you are marvellous merry , sir . 
▁ xxmaj will you go with me ? xxmaj we 'll mend our dinner here . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj master , if you do , expect spoon - meat , 
▁ or bespeak a long spoon . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj why , xxmaj dromio ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj marry , he must have a long spoon 
▁ that must eat with the devil . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj avoid then , fiend ! xxmaj what tell'st thou me of supping ? 
▁ xxmaj thou art , as you are all , a sorceress ; 
▁ i conjure thee to leave me and be gone . 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj give me the ring of mine you had at dinner , 
▁ xxmaj or , for my diamond , the chain you promis'd , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be gone , sir , and not trouble you . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj some devils ask but the parings of one 's nail , 
▁ a rush , a hair , a drop of blood , a pin , 
▁ a nut , a cherry - stone ; 
▁ xxmaj but she , more covetous , would have a chain . 
▁ xxmaj master , be wise ; an if you give it her , 
▁ xxmaj the devil will shake her chain , and fright us with it . 
 xxup courtezan . i pray you , sir , my ring , or else the chain ; 
▁ i hope you do not mean to cheat me so . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj avaunt , thou witch ! xxmaj come , xxmaj dromio , let us go . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . ' fly pride ' says the peacock . xxmaj mistress , that you know . 
 < exeunt xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse and xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj now , out of doubt , xxmaj antipholus is mad , 
▁ xxmaj else would he never so demean himself . 
▁ a ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats , 
▁ xxmaj and for the same he promis'd me a chain ; 
▁ xxmaj both one and other he denies me now . 
▁ xxmaj the reason that i gather he is mad , 
▁ xxmaj besides this present instance of his rage , 
▁ xxmaj is a mad tale he told to - day at dinner 
▁ xxmaj of his own doors being shut against his entrance . 
▁ xxmaj belike his wife , acquainted with his fits , 
▁ xxmaj on purpose shut the doors against his way . 
▁ xxmaj my way is now to hie home to his house , 
▁ xxmaj and tell his wife that , being lunatic , 
▁ xxmaj he rush'd into my house and took perforce 
▁ xxmaj my ring away . xxmaj this course i fittest choose , 
▁ xxmaj for forty ducats is too much to lose . 
 < exit 


 xxup scene 4 

 a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus with the xxup officer 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj fear me not , man ; i will not break away . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give thee , ere i leave thee , so much money , 
▁ xxmaj to warrant thee , as i am ' rested for . 
▁ xxmaj my wife is in a wayward mood to - day , 
▁ xxmaj and will not lightly trust the messenger . 
▁ xxmaj that i should be attach'd in xxmaj ephesus , 
▁ i tell you ' twill sound harshly in her cars . 

 xxmaj enter xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus , with a rope's - end 

▁ xxmaj here comes my man ; i think he brings the money . 
▁ xxmaj how now , sir ! xxmaj have you that i sent you for ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj here 's that , i warrant you , will pay them all . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj but where 's the money ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj why , sir , i gave the money for the rope . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj five hundred ducats , villain , for rope ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj i 'll serve you , sir , five hundred at the rate . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj to what end did i bid thee hie thee home ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj to a rope's - end , sir ; and to that end am i 
▁ return'd . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and to that end , sir , i will welcome you . 
 [ beating him ] 
 xxup officer . xxmaj good sir , be patient . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj nay , ' tis for me to be patient ; i am in 
▁ adversity . 
 xxup officer . xxmaj good now , hold thy tongue . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj nay , rather persuade him to hold his hands . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj thou whoreson , senseless villain ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . i would i were senseless , sir , that i 
▁ might not feel your blows . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj thou art sensible in nothing but 
▁ blows , and so is an ass . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . i am an ass indeed ; you may prove it 
▁ by my long ' ears . i have served him from the hour of my 
▁ nativity to this instant , and have nothing at his hands for 
▁ my service but blows . xxmaj when i am cold he heats me with 
▁ beating ; when i am warm he cools me with beating . i am 
▁ wak'd with it when i sleep ; rais'd with it when i sit ; driven 
▁ out of doors with it when i go from home ; welcom'd home 
▁ with it when i return ; nay , i bear it on my shoulders as 
▁ beggar wo nt her brat ; and i think , when he hath lam'd me , 
▁ i shall beg with it from door to door . 

 xxmaj enter xxup adriana , xxup luciana , the xxup courtezan , and a xxup schoolmaster 
 call'd xxup pinch 

 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj come , go along ; my wife is coming yonder . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj mistress , ' respice finem , ' respect your end ; or 
▁ rather , to prophesy like the parrot , ' beware the rope's - end . ' 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj wilt thou still talk ? 
 [ beating him ] 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj how say you now ? xxmaj is not your husband mad ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj his incivility confirms no less . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj doctor xxmaj pinch , you are a conjurer : 
▁ xxmaj establish him in his true sense again , 
▁ xxmaj and i will please you what you will demand . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj alas , how fiery and how sharp he looks ! 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj mark how he trembles in his ecstasy . 
 xxup pinch . xxmaj give me your hand , and let me feel your pulse . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj there is my hand , and let it feel your ear . 
 [ striking him ] 
 xxup pinch . i charge thee , xxmaj satan , hous'd within this man , 
▁ xxmaj to yield possession to my holy prayers , 
▁ xxmaj and to thy state of darkness hie thee straight . 
▁ i conjure thee by all the saints in heaven . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj peace , doting wizard , peace ! i am not mad . 
 xxup adriana . xxup o , that thou wert not , poor distressed soul ! 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj you minion , you , are these your customers ? 
▁ xxmaj did this companion with the saffron face 
▁ xxmaj revel and feast it at my house to - day , 
▁ xxmaj whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut , 
▁ xxmaj and i denied to enter in my house ? 
 xxup adriana . o husband , xxmaj god doth know you din'd at home , 
▁ xxmaj where would you had remain'd until this time , 
▁ xxmaj free from these slanders and this open shame ! 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj din'd at home ! xxmaj thou villain , what sayest thou ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj sir , xxmaj sooth to say , you did not dine at home . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj were not my doors lock'd up and i shut out ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj perdie , your doors were lock'd and you shut out . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and did not she herself revile me there ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj sans fable , she herself revil'd you there . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj did not her kitchen - maid rail , taunt , and scorn me ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj certes , she did ; the kitchen - vestal scorn'd you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and did not i in rage depart from thence ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj in verity , you did . xxmaj my bones bear witness , 
▁ xxmaj that since have felt the vigour of his rage . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj is't good to soothe him in these contraries ? 
 xxup pinch . xxmaj it is no shame ; the fellow finds his vein , 
▁ xxmaj and , yielding to him , humours well his frenzy . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj alas , i sent you money to redeem you , 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj dromio here , who came in haste for it . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj money by me ! xxmaj heart and goodwill you might , 
▁ xxmaj but surely , master , not a rag of money . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj went'st not thou to her for purse of ducats ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj he came to me , and i deliver'd it . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj and i am witness with her that she did . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj god and the rope - maker bear me witness 
▁ xxmaj that i was sent for nothing but a rope ! 
 xxup pinch . xxmaj mistress , both man and master is possess'd ; 
▁ i know it by their pale and deadly looks . 
▁ xxmaj they must be bound , and laid in some dark room . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj say , wherefore didst thou lock me forth to - day ? 
▁ xxmaj and why dost thou deny the bag of gold ? 
 xxup adriana . i did not , gentle husband , lock thee forth . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and , gentle master , i receiv'd no gold ; 
▁ xxmaj but i confess , sir , that we were lock'd out . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj dissembling villain , thou speak'st false in both . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj dissembling harlot , thou art false in all , 
▁ xxmaj and art confederate with a damned pack 
▁ xxmaj to make a loathsome abject scorn of me ; 
▁ xxmaj but with these nails xxmaj i 'll pluck out these false eyes 
▁ xxmaj that would behold in me this shameful sport . 
 xxup adriana . xxup o , bind him , bind him ; let him not come near me . 
 xxup pinch . xxmaj more company ! xxmaj the fiend is strong within him . 

 xxmaj enter three or four , and offer to bind him . xxmaj he strives 

 xxup luciana . xxmaj ay me , poor man , how pale and wan he looks ! 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj what , will you murder me ? xxmaj thou gaoler , thou , 
▁ i am thy prisoner . xxmaj wilt thou suffer them 
▁ xxmaj to make a rescue ? 
 xxup officer . xxmaj masters , let him go ; 
▁ xxmaj he is my prisoner , and you shall not have him . 
 xxup pinch . xxmaj go bind this man , for he is frantic too . 
 [ they bind xxup dromio ] 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj what wilt thou do , thou peevish officer ? 
▁ xxmaj hast thou delight to see a wretched man 
▁ xxmaj do outrage and displeasure to himself ? 
 xxup officer . xxmaj he is my prisoner ; if i let him go , 
▁ xxmaj the debt he owes will be requir'd of me . 
 xxup adriana . i will discharge thee ere i go from thee ; 
▁ xxmaj bear me forthwith unto his creditor , 
▁ xxmaj and , knowing how the debt grows , i will pay it . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , see him safe convey'd 
▁ xxmaj home to my house . o most unhappy day ! 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . o most unhappy strumpet ! 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj master , i am here ent'red in bond for you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj out on thee , villian ! xxmaj wherefore 
▁ dost thou mad me ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj will you be bound for nothing ? 
▁ xxmaj be mad , good master ; cry ' the devil ! ' 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj god help , poor souls , how idly do they talk ! 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj go bear him hence . xxmaj sister , go you with me . 
 < exeunt all but xxup adriana , xxup luciana , xxup officers , and xxup courtezan 
▁ xxmaj say now , whose suit is he arrested at ? 
 xxup officer . xxmaj one xxmaj angelo , a goldsmith ; do you know him ? 
 xxup adriana . i know the man . xxmaj what is the sum he owes ? 
 xxup officer . xxmaj two hundred ducats . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj say , how grows it due ? 
 xxup officer . xxmaj due for a chain your husband had of him . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj he did bespeak a chain for me , but had it not . 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj when as your husband , all in rage , to - day 
▁ xxmaj came to my house , and took away my ring- 
▁ xxmaj the ring i saw upon his finger now- 
▁ xxmaj straight after did i meet him with a chain . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj it may be so , but i did never see it . 
▁ xxmaj come , gaoler , bring me where the goldsmith is ; 
▁ i long to know the truth hereof at large . 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse , with his rapier drawn , and 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . 

 xxup luciana . xxmaj god , for thy mercy ! they are loose again . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj and come with naked swords . 
▁ xxmaj let 's call more help to have them bound again . 
 xxup officer . xxmaj away , they 'll kill us ! 
 < exeunt all but xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse and 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse as fast as may be , frighted 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i see these witches are afraid of swords . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj she that would be your wife now ran from you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj come to the xxmaj centaur ; fetch our stuff from thence . 
▁ i long that we were safe and sound aboard . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj faith , stay here this night ; they will 
▁ surely do us no harm ; you saw they speak us fair , give us 
▁ gold ; methinks they are such a gentle nation that , but for 
▁ the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of me , 
▁ could find in my heart to stay here still and turn witch . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i will not stay to - night for all the town ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore away , to get our stuff aboard . 
 < exeunt 


 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 

 a street before a priory 

 xxmaj enter xxup second xxup merchant and xxup angelo 

 xxup angelo . i am sorry , sir , that i have hind'red you ; 
▁ xxmaj but i protest he had the chain of me , 
▁ xxmaj though most dishonestly he doth deny it . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj how is the man esteem'd here in the city ? 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj of very reverend reputation , sir , 
▁ xxmaj of credit infinite , highly belov'd , 
▁ xxmaj second to none that lives here in the city ; 
▁ xxmaj his word might bear my wealth at any time . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj speak softly ; yonder , as i think , he walks . 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse and xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse 

 xxup angelo . ' tis so ; and that self chain about his neck 
▁ xxmaj which he forswore most monstrously to have . 
▁ xxmaj good sir , draw near to me , xxmaj i 'll speak to him . 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj andpholus , i wonder much 
▁ xxmaj that you would put me to this shame and trouble ; 
▁ xxmaj and , not without some scandal to yourself , 
▁ xxmaj with circumstance and oaths so to deny 
▁ xxmaj this chain , which now you wear so openly . 
▁ xxmaj beside the charge , the shame , imprisonment , 
▁ xxmaj you have done wrong to this my honest friend ; 
▁ xxmaj who , but for staying on our controversy , 
▁ xxmaj had hoisted sail and put to sea to - day . 
▁ xxmaj this chain you had of me ; can you deny it ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i think i had ; i never did deny it . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj yes , that you did , sir , and forswore it too . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj who heard me to deny it or forswear it ? 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj these ears of mine , thou know'st , did hear thee . 
▁ xxmaj fie on thee , wretch ! ' tis pity that thou liv'st 
▁ xxmaj to walk where any honest men resort . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj thou art a villain to impeach me thus ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll prove mine honour and mine honesty 
▁ xxmaj against thee presently , if thou dar'st stand . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . i dare , and do defy thee for a villain . 
 [ they draw ] 

 xxmaj enter xxup adriana , xxup luciana , the xxup courtezan , and xxup others 

 xxup adriana . xxmaj hold , hurt him not , for xxmaj god 's sake ! xxmaj he is mad . 
▁ xxmaj some get within him , take his sword away ;