xxbos xxmaj bind xxmaj dromio too , and bear them to my house . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj run , master , run ; for xxmaj god 's sake take a house . 
▁ xxmaj this is some priory . xxmaj in , or we are spoil'd . 
 < exeunt xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse and xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse to the priory 

 xxmaj enter the xxup lady xxup abbess 

 xxup abbess . xxmaj be quiet , people . xxmaj wherefore throng you hither ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj to fetch my poor distracted husband hence . 
▁ xxmaj let us come in , that we may bind him fast , 
▁ xxmaj and bear him home for his recovery . 
 xxup angelo . i knew he was not in his perfect wits . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . i am sorry now that i did draw on him . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj how long hath this possession held the man ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj this week he hath been heavy , sour , sad , 
▁ xxmaj and much different from the man he was ; 
▁ xxmaj but till this afternoon his passion 
▁ xxmaj ne'er brake into extremity of rage . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea ? 
▁ xxmaj buried some dear friend ? xxmaj hath not else his eye 
▁ xxmaj stray'd his affection in unlawful love ? 
▁ a sin prevailing much in youthful men 
▁ xxmaj who give their eyes the liberty of gazing . 
▁ xxmaj which of these sorrows is he subject to ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj to none of these , except it be the last ; 
▁ xxmaj namely , some love that drew him oft from home . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj you should for that have reprehended him . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj why , so i did . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj ay , but not rough enough . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj as roughly as my modesty would let me . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj haply in private . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj and in assemblies too . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj ay , but not enough . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj it was the copy of our conference . 
▁ xxmaj in bed , he slept not for my urging it ; 
▁ xxmaj at board , he fed not for my urging it ; 
▁ xxmaj alone , it was the subject of my theme ; 
▁ xxmaj in company , i often glanced it ; 
▁ xxmaj still did i tell him it was vile and bad . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj and thereof came it that the man was mad . 
▁ xxmaj the venom clamours of a jealous woman 
▁ xxmaj poisons more deadly than a mad dog 's tooth . 
▁ xxmaj it seems his sleeps were hind'red by thy railing , 
▁ xxmaj and thereof comes it that his head is light . 
▁ xxmaj thou say'st his meat was sauc'd with thy upbraidings : 
▁ xxmaj unquiet meals make ill digestions ; 
▁ xxmaj thereof the raging fire of fever bred ; 
▁ xxmaj and what 's a fever but a fit of madness ? 
▁ xxmaj thou say'st his sports were hind'red by thy brawls . 
▁ xxmaj sweet recreation barr'd , what doth ensue 
▁ xxmaj but moody and dull melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj kinsman to grim and comfortless despair , 
▁ xxmaj and at her heels a huge infectious troop 
▁ xxmaj of pale distemperatures and foes to life ? 
▁ xxmaj in food , in sport , and life - preserving rest , 
▁ xxmaj to be disturb'd would mad or man or beast . 
▁ xxmaj the consequence is , then , thy jealous fits 
▁ xxmaj hath scar'd thy husband from the use of wits . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj she never reprehended him but mildly , 
▁ xxmaj when he demean'd himself rough , rude , and wildly . 
▁ xxmaj why bear you these rebukes , and answer not ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj she did betray me to my own reproof . 
▁ xxmaj good people , enter , and lay hold on him . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj no , not a creature enters in my house . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj then let your servants bring my husband forth . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj neither ; he took this place for sanctuary , 
▁ xxmaj and it shall privilege him from your hands 
▁ xxmaj till i have brought him to his wits again , 
▁ xxmaj or lose my labour in assaying it . 
 xxup adriana . i will attend my husband , be his nurse , 
▁ xxmaj diet his sickness , for it is my office , 
▁ xxmaj and will have no attorney but myself ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore let me have him home with me . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj be patient ; for i will not let him stir 
▁ xxmaj till i have us'd the approved means i have , 
▁ xxmaj with wholesome syrups , drugs , and holy prayers , 
▁ xxmaj to make of him a formal man again . 
▁ xxmaj it is a branch and parcel of mine oath , 
▁ a charitable duty of my order ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore depart , and leave him here with me . 
 xxup adriana . i will not hence and leave my husband here ; 
▁ xxmaj and ill it doth beseem your holiness 
▁ xxmaj to separate the husband and the wife . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj be quiet , and depart ; thou shalt not have him . 
 < exit 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj complain unto the xxmaj duke of this indignity . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj come , go ; i will fall prostrate at his feet , 
▁ xxmaj and never rise until my tears and prayers 
▁ xxmaj have won his xxmaj grace to come in person hither 
▁ xxmaj and take perforce my husband from the xxmaj abbess . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj by this , i think , the dial points at five ; 
▁ xxmaj anon , xxmaj i 'm sure , the xxmaj duke himself in person 
▁ xxmaj comes this way to the melancholy vale , 
▁ xxmaj the place of death and sorry execution , 
▁ xxmaj behind the ditches of the abbey here . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj upon what cause ? 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj to see a reverend xxmaj syracusian merchant , 
▁ xxmaj who put unluckily into this bay 
▁ xxmaj against the laws and statutes of this town , 
▁ xxmaj beheaded publicly for his offence . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj see where they come ; we will behold his death . 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj kneel to the xxmaj duke before he pass the abbey . 

 xxmaj enter the xxup duke , attended ; xxup aegeon , bareheaded ; 
 with the xxup headsman and other xxup officers 

 xxup duke . xxmaj yet once again proclaim it publicly , 
▁ xxmaj if any friend will pay the sum for him , 
▁ xxmaj he shall not die ; so much we tender him . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj justice , most sacred xxmaj duke , against the xxmaj abbess ! 
 xxup duke . xxmaj she is a virtuous and a reverend lady ; 
▁ xxmaj it can not be that she hath done thee wrong . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj may it please your xxmaj grace , xxmaj antipholus , my husband , 
▁ xxmaj who i made lord of me and all i had 
▁ xxmaj at your important letters - this ill day 
▁ a most outrageous fit of madness took him , 
▁ xxmaj that desp'rately he hurried through the street , 
▁ xxmaj with him his bondman all as mad as he , 
▁ xxmaj doing displeasure to the citizens 
▁ xxmaj by rushing in their houses , bearing thence 
▁ xxmaj rings , jewels , anything his rage did like . 
▁ xxmaj once did i get him bound and sent him home , 
▁ xxmaj whilst to take order for the wrongs i went , 
▁ xxmaj that here and there his fury had committed . 
▁ xxmaj anon , i wot not by what strong escape , 
▁ xxmaj he broke from those that had the guard of him , 
▁ xxmaj and with his mad attendant and himself , 
▁ xxmaj each one with ireful passion , with drawn swords , 
▁ xxmaj met us again and , madly bent on us , 
▁ xxmaj chas'd us away ; till , raising of more aid , 
▁ xxmaj we came again to bind them . xxmaj then they fled 
▁ xxmaj into this abbey , whither we pursu'd them ; 
▁ xxmaj and here the xxmaj abbess shuts the gates on us , 
▁ xxmaj and will not suffer us to fetch him out , 
▁ xxmaj nor send him forth that we may bear him hence . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , most gracious xxmaj duke , with thy command 
▁ xxmaj let him be brought forth and borne hence for help . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj long since thy husband serv'd me in my wars , 
▁ xxmaj and i to thee engag'd a prince 's word , 
▁ xxmaj when thou didst make him master of thy bed , 
▁ xxmaj to do him all the grace and good i could . 
▁ xxmaj go , some of you , knock at the abbey gate , 
▁ xxmaj and bid the xxmaj lady xxmaj abbess come to me , 
▁ i will determine this before i stir . 

 xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

 xxup messenger . o mistress , mistress , shift and save yourself ! 
▁ xxmaj my master and his man are both broke loose , 
▁ xxmaj beaten the maids a - row and bound the doctor , 
▁ xxmaj whose beard they have sing'd off with brands of fire ; 
▁ xxmaj and ever , as it blaz'd , they threw on him 
▁ xxmaj great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair . 
▁ xxmaj my master preaches patience to him , and the while 
▁ xxmaj his man with scissors nicks him like a fool ; 
▁ xxmaj and sure , unless you send some present help , 
▁ xxmaj between them they will kill the conjurer . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj peace , fool ! thy master and his man are here , 
▁ xxmaj and that is false thou dost report to us . 
 xxup messenger . xxmaj mistress , upon my life , i tell you true ; 
▁ i have not breath'd almost since i did see it . 
▁ xxmaj he cries for you , and vows , if he can take you , 
▁ xxmaj to scorch your face , and to disfigure you . 
 [ cry within ] 
▁ xxmaj hark , hark , i hear him , mistress ; fly , be gone ! 
 xxup duke . xxmaj come , stand by me ; fear nothing . xxmaj guard with halberds . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj ay me , it is my husband ! xxmaj witness you 
▁ xxmaj that he is borne about invisible . 
▁ xxmaj even now we hous'd him in the abbey here , 
▁ xxmaj and now he 's there , past thought of human reason . 

 xxmaj enter xxup antipholus xxup ofephesus and xxup dromio xxup ofephesus 

 xxup antipholus xxup ofephesus . xxmaj justice , most gracious xxmaj duke ; xxup o , grant me justice ! 
▁ xxmaj even for the service that long since i did thee , 
▁ xxmaj when i bestrid thee in the wars , and took 
▁ xxmaj deep scars to save thy life ; even for the blood 
▁ xxmaj that then i lost for thee , now grant me justice . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj unless the fear of death doth make me dote , 
▁ i see my son xxmaj antipholus , and xxmaj dromio . 
 xxup antipholus xxup ofephesus . xxmaj justice , sweet xxmaj prince , against that woman there ! 
▁ xxmaj she whom thou gav'st to me to be my wife , 
▁ xxmaj that hath abused and dishonoured me 
▁ xxmaj even in the strength and height of injury . 
▁ xxmaj beyond imagination is the wrong 
▁ xxmaj that she this day hath shameless thrown on me . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj discover how , and thou shalt find me just . 
 xxup antipholus xxup ofephesus . xxmaj this day , great xxmaj duke , she shut the doors upon me , 
▁ xxmaj while she with harlots feasted in my house . 
 xxup duke . a grievous fault . xxmaj say , woman , didst thou so ? 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj no , my good lord . xxmaj myself , he , and my sister , 
▁ xxmaj to - day did dine together . xxmaj so befall my soul 
▁ xxmaj as this is false he burdens me withal ! 
 xxup luciana . xxmaj ne'er may i look on day nor sleep on night 
▁ xxmaj but she tells to your xxmaj highness simple truth ! 
 xxup angelo . o peflur'd woman ! xxmaj they are both forsworn . 
▁ xxmaj in this the madman justly chargeth them . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj my liege , i am advised what i say ; 
▁ xxmaj neither disturbed with the effect of wine , 
▁ xxmaj nor heady - rash , provok'd with raging ire , 
▁ xxmaj albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad . 
▁ xxmaj this woman lock'd me out this day from dinner ; 
▁ xxmaj that goldsmith there , were he not pack'd with her , 
▁ xxmaj could witness it , for he was with me then ; 
▁ xxmaj who parted with me to go fetch a chain , 
▁ xxmaj promising to bring it to the xxmaj porpentine , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj balthazar and i did dine together . 
▁ xxmaj our dinner done , and he not coming thither , 
▁ i went to seek him . xxmaj in the street i met him , 
▁ xxmaj and in his company that gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj there did this perjur'd goldsmith swear me down 
▁ xxmaj that i this day of him receiv'd the chain , 
▁ xxmaj which , xxmaj god he knows , i saw not ; for the which 
▁ xxmaj he did arrest me with an officer . 
▁ i did obey , and sent my peasant home 
▁ xxmaj for certain ducats ; he with none return'd . 
▁ xxmaj then fairly i bespoke the officer 
▁ xxmaj to go in person with me to my house . 
▁ xxmaj by th ' way we met my wife , her sister , and a rabble more 
▁ xxmaj of vile confederates . xxmaj along with them 
▁ xxmaj they brought one xxmaj pinch , a hungry lean - fac'd villain , 
▁ a mere anatomy , a mountebank , 
▁ a threadbare juggler , and a fortune - teller , 
▁ a needy , hollow - ey'd , sharp - looking wretch , 
▁ a living dead man . xxmaj this pernicious slave , 
▁ xxmaj forsooth , took on him as a conjurer , 
▁ xxmaj and gazing in mine eyes , feeling my pulse , 
▁ xxmaj and with no face , as ' twere , outfacing me , 
▁ xxmaj cries out i was possess'd . xxmaj then all together 
▁ xxmaj they fell upon me , bound me , bore me thence , 
▁ xxmaj and in a dark and dankish vault at home 
▁ xxmaj there left me and my man , both bound together ; 
▁ xxmaj till , gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder , 
▁ i gain'd my freedom , and immediately 
▁ xxmaj ran hither to your xxmaj grace ; whom i beseech 
▁ xxmaj to give me ample satisfaction 
▁ xxmaj for these deep shames and great indignities . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj my lord , in truth , thus far i witness with him , 
▁ xxmaj that he din'd not at home , but was lock'd out . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj but had he such a chain of thee , or no ? 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj he had , my lord , and when he ran in here , 
▁ xxmaj these people saw the chain about his neck . 
 xxup second xxup merchant . xxmaj besides , i will be sworn these ears of mine 
▁ xxmaj heard you confess you had the chain of him , 
▁ xxmaj after you first forswore it on the mart ; 
▁ xxmaj and thereupon i drew my sword on you , 
▁ xxmaj and then you fled into this abbey here , 
▁ xxmaj from whence , i think , you are come by miracle . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i never came within these abbey walls , 
▁ xxmaj nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me ; 
▁ i never saw the chain , so help me xxmaj heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj and this is false you burden me withal . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj why , what an intricate impeach is this ! 
▁ i think you all have drunk of xxmaj circe 's cup . 
▁ xxmaj if here you hous'd him , here he would have been ; 
▁ xxmaj if he were mad , he would not plead so coldly . 
▁ xxmaj you say he din'd at home : the goldsmith here 
▁ xxmaj denies that saying . xxmaj sirrah , what say you ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj sir , he din'd with her there , at the xxmaj porpentine . 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj he did ; and from my finger snatch'd that ring . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . ' tis true , my liege ; this ring i had of her . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here ? 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj as sure , my liege , as i do see your xxmaj grace . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj why , this is strange . xxmaj go call the xxmaj abbess hither . 
▁ i think you are all mated or stark mad . 
 < exit one to the xxup abbess 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj most mighty xxmaj duke , vouchsafe me speak a word : 
▁ xxmaj haply i see a friend will save my life 
▁ xxmaj and pay the sum that may deliver me . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj speak freely , xxmaj syracusian , what thou wilt . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj is not your name , sir , call'd xxmaj antipholus ? 
▁ xxmaj and is not that your bondman xxmaj dromio ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj within this hour i was his bondman , sir , 
▁ xxmaj but he , i thank him , gnaw'd in two my cords 
▁ xxmaj now am i xxmaj dromio and his man unbound . 
 xxup aegeon . i am sure you both of you remember me . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj ourselves we do remember , sir , by you ; 
▁ xxmaj for lately we were bound as you are now . 
▁ xxmaj you are not xxmaj pinch 's patient , are you , sir ? 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj why look you strange on me ? xxmaj you know me well . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i never saw you in my life till now . 
 xxup aegeon . xxup o ! grief hath chang'd me since you saw me last ; 
▁ xxmaj and careful hours with time 's deformed hand 
▁ xxmaj have written strange defeatures in my face . 
▁ xxmaj but tell me yet , dost thou not know my voice ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj neither . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj dromio , nor thou ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj no , trust me , sir , nor xxup i. 
 xxup aegeon . i am sure thou dost . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj ay , sir , but i am sure i do not ; and 
▁ whatsoever a man denies , you are now bound to believe him . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj not know my voice ! o time 's extremity , 
▁ xxmaj hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue 
▁ xxmaj in seven short years that here my only son 
▁ xxmaj knows not my feeble key of untun'd cares ? 
▁ xxmaj though now this grained face of mine be hid 
▁ xxmaj in sap - consuming winter 's drizzled snow , 
▁ xxmaj and all the conduits of my blood froze up , 
▁ xxmaj yet hath my night of life some memory , 
▁ xxmaj my wasting lamps some fading glimmer left , 
▁ xxmaj my dull deaf ears a little use to hear ; 
▁ xxmaj all these old witnesses - i can not err- 
▁ xxmaj tell me thou art my son xxmaj antipholus . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i never saw my father in my life . 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj but seven years since , in xxmaj syracuse , boy , 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st we parted ; but perhaps , my son , 
▁ xxmaj thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj the xxmaj duke and all that know me in 
▁ the city xxmaj can witness with me that it is not so : 
▁ i ne'er saw xxmaj syracuse in my life . 
 xxup duke . i tell thee , xxmaj syracusian , twenty years 
▁ xxmaj have i been patron to xxmaj antipholus , 
▁ xxmaj during which time he ne'er saw xxmaj syracuse . 
▁ i see thy age and dangers make thee dote . 

 xxmaj re - enter the xxup abbess , with xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse and xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse 

 xxup abbess . xxmaj most mighty xxmaj duke , behold a man much wrong'd . 
 [ all gather to see them ] 
 xxup adriana . i see two husbands , or mine eyes deceive me . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj one of these men is genius to the other ; 
▁ xxmaj and so of these . xxmaj which is the natural man , 
▁ xxmaj and which the spirit ? xxmaj who deciphers them ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup i , sir , am xxmaj dromio ; command him away . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxup i , xxmaj sir , am xxmaj dromio ; pray let me stay . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj aegeon , art thou not ? or else his 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup o , my old master ! who hath bound 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj whoever bound him , i will loose his bonds , 
▁ xxmaj and gain a husband by his liberty . 
▁ xxmaj speak , old xxmaj aegeon , if thou be'st the man 
▁ xxmaj that hadst a wife once call'd xxmaj aemilia , 
▁ xxmaj that bore thee at a burden two fair sons . 
▁ xxup o , if thou be'st the same xxmaj aegeon , speak , 
▁ xxmaj and speak unto the same xxmaj aemilia ! 
 xxup aegeon . xxmaj if i dream not , thou art xxmaj aemilia . 
▁ xxmaj if thou art she , tell me where is that son 
▁ xxmaj that floated with thee on the fatal raft ? 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj by men of xxmaj epidamnum he and i 
▁ xxmaj and the twin xxmaj dromio , all were taken up ; 
▁ xxmaj but by and by rude fishermen of xxmaj corinth 
▁ xxmaj by force took xxmaj dromio and my son from them , 
▁ xxmaj and me they left with those of xxmaj epidamnum . 
▁ xxmaj what then became of them i can not tell ; 
▁ i to this fortune that you see me in . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj why , here begins his morning story right . 
▁ xxmaj these two xxmaj antipholus ' , these two so like , 
▁ xxmaj and these two xxmaj dromios , one in semblance- 
▁ xxmaj besides her urging of her wreck at sea- 
▁ xxmaj these are the parents to these children , 
▁ xxmaj which accidentally are met together . 
▁ xxmaj antipholus , thou cam'st from xxmaj corinth first ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj no , sir , not xxup i ; i came from xxmaj syracuse . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj stay , stand apart ; i know not which is which . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . i came from xxmaj corinth , my most gracious lord . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and i with him . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj brought to this town by that most famous warrior , 
▁ xxmaj duke xxmaj menaphon , your most renowned uncle . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj which of you two did dine with me to - day ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxup i , gentle mistress . 
 xxup adriana . xxmaj and are not you my husband ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj no ; i say nay to that . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj and so do xxup i , yet did she call me so ; 
▁ xxmaj and this fair gentlewoman , her sister here , 
▁ xxmaj did call me brother . [ to xxup luciana ] xxmaj what i told you then , 
▁ i hope i shall have leisure to make good ; 
▁ xxmaj if this be not a dream i see and hear . 
 xxup angelo . xxmaj that is the chain , sir , which you had of me . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . i think it be , sir ; i deny it not . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj and you , sir , for this chain arrested me . 
 xxup angelo . i think i did , sir ; i deny it not . 
 xxup adriana . i sent you money , sir , to be your bail , 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj dromio ; but i think he brought it not . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj no , none by me . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj this purse of ducats i receiv'd from you , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj dromio my man did bring them me . 
▁ i see we still did meet each other 's man , 
▁ xxmaj and i was ta'en for him , and he for me , 
▁ xxmaj and thereupon these xxup errors are arose . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj these ducats pawn i for my father here . 
 xxup duke . xxmaj it shall not need ; thy father hath his life . 
 xxup courtezan . xxmaj sir , i must have that diamond from you . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj there , take it ; and much thanks for my 
▁ good cheer . 
 xxup abbess . xxmaj renowned xxmaj duke , vouchsafe to take the pains 
▁ xxmaj to go with us into the abbey here , 
▁ xxmaj and hear at large discoursed all our fortunes ; 
▁ xxmaj and all that are assembled in this place 
▁ xxmaj that by this sympathized one day 's error 
▁ xxmaj have suffer'd wrong , go keep us company , 
▁ xxmaj and we shall make full satisfaction . 
▁ xxmaj thirty - three years have i but gone in travail 
▁ xxmaj of you , my sons ; and till this present hour 
▁ xxmaj my heavy burden ne'er delivered . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke , my husband , and my children both , 
▁ xxmaj and you the calendars of their nativity , 
▁ xxmaj go to a gossips ' feast , and go with me ; 
▁ xxmaj after so long grief , such nativity ! 
 xxup duke . xxmaj with all my heart , xxmaj i 'll gossip at this feast . 
 < exeunt all but xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse , xxup antipholus xxup of 
 xxup ephesus , xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse , and xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj master , shall i fetch your stuff from shipboard ? 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj dromio , what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj your goods that lay at host , sir , in the xxmaj centaur . 
 xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj he speaks to me . i am your master , xxmaj dromio . 
▁ xxmaj come , go with us ; we 'll look to that anon . 
▁ xxmaj embrace thy brother there ; rejoice with him . 
 < exeunt xxup antipholus xxup of xxup syracuse and xxup antipholus xxup of xxup ephesus 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj there is a fat friend at your master 's house , 
▁ xxmaj that kitchen'd me for you to - day at dinner ; 
▁ xxmaj she now shall be my sister , not my wife . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj methinks you are my glass , and not my brother ; 
▁ i see by you i am a sweet - fac'd youth . 
▁ xxmaj will you walk in to see their gossiping ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj not xxup i , sir ; you are my elder . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj that 's a question ; how shall we try it ? 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup syracuse . xxmaj we 'll draw cuts for the senior ; till then , 
▁ lead thou first . 
 xxup dromio xxup of xxup ephesus . xxmaj nay , then , thus : 
▁ xxmaj we came into the world like brother and brother , 
▁ xxmaj and now let 's go hand in hand , not one before another . 
 < exeunt 


 xxup the xxup end 


 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1608 

 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup coriolanus 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup caius xxup marcius , afterwards xxup caius xxup marcius xxup coriolanus 

▁ xxmaj generals against the xxmaj volscians 
▁ xxup titus xxup lartius 
▁ xxup cominius 

▁ xxup menenius xxup agrippa , friend to xxmaj coriolanus 

▁ xxmaj tribunes of the xxmaj people 
▁ xxup sicinius xxup velutus 
▁ xxup junius xxup brutus 

▁ xxup young xxup marcius , son to xxmaj coriolanus 
▁ a xxup roman xxup herald 
▁ xxup nicanor , a xxmaj roman 
▁ xxup tullus xxup aufidius , xxmaj general of the xxmaj volscians 
▁ xxup lieutenant , to xxmaj aufidius 
▁ xxup conspirators , xxmaj with xxmaj aufidius 
▁ xxup adrian , a xxmaj volscian 
▁ a xxup citizen of xxmaj antium 
▁ xxup two xxup volscian xxup guards 

▁ xxup volumnia , mother to xxmaj coriolanus 
▁ xxup virgilia , wife to xxmaj coriolanus 
▁ xxup valeria , friend to xxmaj virgilia 
▁ xxup gentlewoman attending on xxmaj virgilia 

▁ xxmaj roman and xxmaj volscian xxmaj senators , xxmaj patricians , xxmaj aediles , xxmaj lictors , 
▁ xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj citizens , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj servants to xxmaj aufidius , and other 
▁ xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj rome and the neighbourhood ; xxmaj corioli and the neighbourhood ; xxmaj antium 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . a street 

 xxmaj enter a company of mutinous citizens , with staves , clubs , and other weapons 

▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj before we proceed any further , hear me speak . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj speak , speak . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxup you are all resolv'd rather to die than to famish ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj resolv'd , resolv'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj first , you know xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius is chief enemy to the 
▁ people . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj we know't , we know't . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj let us kill him , and we 'll have corn at our own 
▁ price . xxmaj is't a verdict ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj no more talking on't ; let it be done . xxmaj away , away ! 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj one word , good citizens . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj we are accounted poor citizens , the patricians good . 
▁ xxmaj what authority surfeits on would relieve us ; if they would yield 
▁ us but the superfluity while it were wholesome , we might guess 
▁ they relieved us humanely ; but they think we are too dear . xxmaj the 
▁ leanness that afflicts us , the object of our misery , is as an 
▁ inventory to particularize their abundance ; our sufferance is a 
▁ gain to them . xxmaj let us revenge this with our pikes ere we become 
▁ rakes ; for the gods know i speak this in hunger for bread , not in 
▁ thirst for revenge . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj would you proceed especially against xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj against him first ; he 's a very dog to the 
▁ commonalty . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj consider you what services he has done for his 
▁ country ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj very well , and could be content to give him good 
▁ report for't but that he pays himself with being proud . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj nay , but speak not maliciously . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . i say unto you , what he hath done famously he did it 
▁ to that end ; though soft - conscienc'd men can be content to say it 
▁ was for his country , he did it to please his mother and to be 
▁ partly proud , which he is , even to the altitude of his virtue . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj what he can not help in his nature you account a 
▁ vice in him . xxmaj you must in no way say he is covetous . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj if i must not , i need not be barren of accusations ; 
▁ he hath faults , with surplus , to tire in repetition . [ shouts 
▁ within ] xxmaj what shouts are these ? xxmaj the other side o ' th ' city is 
▁ risen . xxmaj why stay we prating here ? xxmaj to th ' xxmaj capitol ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj come , come . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj soft ! who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup menenius xxup agrippa 

▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj worthy xxmaj menenius xxmaj agrippa ; one that hath always lov'd 
▁ the people . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj he 's one honest enough ; would all the rest were so ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what work 's , my countrymen , in hand ? xxmaj where go you 
▁ xxmaj with bats and clubs ? xxmaj the matter ? xxmaj speak , i pray you . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj our business is not unknown to th ' xxmaj senate ; they have 
▁ had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do , which now we 'll 
▁ show 'em in deeds . xxmaj they say poor suitors have strong breaths ; 
▁ they shall know we have strong arms too . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj why , masters , my good friends , mine honest neighbours , 
▁ xxmaj will you undo yourselves ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj we can not , sir ; we are undone already . 
▁ xxup menenius . i tell you , friends , most charitable care 
▁ xxmaj have the patricians of you . xxmaj for your wants , 
▁ xxmaj your suffering in this dearth , you may as well 
▁ xxmaj strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj roman state ; whose course will on 
▁ xxmaj the way it takes , cracking ten thousand curbs 
▁ xxmaj of more strong link asunder than can ever 
▁ xxmaj appear in your impediment . xxmaj for the dearth , 
▁ xxmaj the gods , not the patricians , make it , and 
▁ xxmaj your knees to them , not arms , must help . xxmaj alack , 
▁ xxmaj you are transported by calamity 
▁ xxmaj thither where more attends you ; and you slander 
▁ xxmaj the helms o ' th ' state , who care for you like fathers , 
▁ xxmaj when you curse them as enemies . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj care for us ! xxmaj true , indeed ! xxmaj they ne'er car'd for us 
▁ yet . xxmaj suffer us to famish , and their storehouses cramm'd with 
▁ grain ; make edicts for usury , to support usurers ; repeal daily 
▁ any wholesome act established against the rich , and provide more 
▁ piercing statutes daily to chain up and restrain the poor . xxmaj if the 
▁ wars eat us not up , they will ; and there 's all the love they bear 
▁ us . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj either you must 
▁ xxmaj confess yourselves wondrous malicious , 
▁ xxmaj or be accus'd of folly . i shall tell you 
▁ a pretty tale . xxmaj it may be you have heard it ; 
▁ xxmaj but , since it serves my purpose , i will venture 
▁ xxmaj to stale't a little more . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll hear it , sir ; yet you must not think to 
▁ fob off our disgrace with a tale . xxmaj but , an't please you , deliver . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj there was a time when all the body 's members 
▁ xxmaj rebell'd against the belly ; thus accus'd it : 
▁ xxmaj that only like a gulf it did remain 
▁ xxup i ' th ' midst o ' th ' body , idle and unactive , 
▁ xxmaj still cupboarding the viand , never bearing 
▁ xxmaj like labour with the rest ; where th ' other instruments 
▁ xxmaj did see and hear , devise , instruct , walk , feel , 
▁ xxmaj and , mutually participate , did minister 
▁ xxmaj unto the appetite and affection common 
▁ xxmaj of the whole body . xxmaj the belly answer'd- 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj well , sir , what answer made the belly ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj sir , i shall tell you . xxmaj with a kind of smile , 
▁ xxmaj which ne'er came from the lungs , but even thus- 
▁ xxmaj for look you , i may make the belly smile 
▁ xxmaj as well as speak- it tauntingly replied 
▁ xxmaj to th ' discontented members , the mutinous parts 
▁ xxmaj that envied his receipt ; even so most fitly 
▁ xxmaj as you malign our senators for that 
▁ xxmaj they are not such as you . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj your belly 's answer- xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxmaj the kingly crowned head , the vigilant eye , 
▁ xxmaj the counsellor heart , the arm our soldier , 
▁ xxmaj our steed the leg , the tongue our trumpeter , 
▁ xxmaj with other muniments and petty helps 
▁ xxmaj is this our fabric , if that they- 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxmaj fore me , this fellow speaks ! xxmaj what then ? xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd , 
▁ xxmaj who is the sink o ' th ' body- 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj well , what then ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj the former agents , if they did complain , 
▁ xxmaj what could the belly answer ? 
▁ xxup menenius . i will tell you ; 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll bestow a small- of what you have little- 
▁ xxmaj patience awhile , you'st hear the belly 's answer . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj y'are long about it . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj note me this , good friend : 
▁ xxmaj your most grave belly was deliberate , 
▁ xxmaj not rash like his accusers , and thus answered . 
▁ ' true is it , my incorporate friends , ' quoth he 
▁ ' that i receive the general food at first 
▁ xxmaj which you do live upon ; and fit it is , 
▁ xxmaj because i am the storehouse and the shop 
▁ xxmaj of the whole body . xxmaj but , if you do remember , 
▁ i send it through the rivers of your blood , 
▁ xxmaj even to the court , the heart , to th ' seat o ' th ' brain ; 
▁ xxmaj and , through the cranks and offices of man , 
▁ xxmaj the strongest nerves and small inferior veins 
▁ xxmaj from me receive that natural competency 
▁ xxmaj whereby they live . xxmaj and though that all at once 
▁ xxmaj you , my good friends'- this says the belly ; mark me . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj ay , sir ; well , well . 
▁ xxup menenius . ' though all at once can not 
▁ xxmaj see what i do deliver out to each , 
▁ xxmaj yet i can make my audit up , that all 
▁ xxmaj from me do back receive the flour of all , 
▁ xxmaj and leave me but the bran . ' xxmaj what say you to ' t ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj it was an answer . xxmaj how apply you this ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj the senators of xxmaj rome are this good belly , 
▁ xxmaj and you the mutinous members ; for , examine 
▁ xxmaj their counsels and their cares , digest things rightly 
▁ xxmaj touching the weal o ' th ' common , you shall find 
▁ xxmaj no public benefit which you receive 
▁ xxmaj but it proceeds or comes from them to you , 
▁ xxmaj and no way from yourselves . xxmaj what do you think , 
▁ xxmaj you , the great toe of this assembly ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . i the great toe ? xxmaj why the great toe ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj for that , being one o ' th ' lowest , basest , poorest , 
▁ xxmaj of this most wise rebellion , thou goest foremost . 
▁ xxmaj thou rascal , that art worst in blood to run , 
▁ xxmaj lead'st first to win some vantage . 
▁ xxmaj but make you ready your stiff bats and clubs . 
▁ xxmaj rome and her rats are at the point of battle ; 
▁ xxmaj the one side must have bale . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caius xxup marcius 

▁ xxmaj hail , noble xxmaj marcius ! 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj thanks . xxmaj what 's the matter , you dissentious rogues 
▁ xxmaj that , rubbing the poor itch of your opinion , 
▁ xxmaj make yourselves scabs ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj we have ever your good word . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj he that will give good words to thee will flatter 
▁ xxmaj beneath abhorring . xxmaj what would you have , you curs , 
▁ xxmaj that like nor peace nor war ? xxmaj the one affrights you , 
▁ xxmaj the other makes you proud . xxmaj he that trusts to you , 
▁ xxmaj where he should find you lions , finds you hares ; 
▁ xxmaj where foxes , geese ; you are no surer , no , 
▁ xxmaj than is the coal of fire upon the ice 
▁ xxmaj or hailstone in the sun . xxmaj your virtue is 
▁ xxmaj to make him worthy whose offence subdues him , 
▁ xxmaj and curse that justice did it . xxmaj who deserves greatness 
▁ xxmaj deserves your hate ; and your affections are 
▁ a sick man 's appetite , who desires most that 
▁ xxmaj which would increase his evil . xxmaj he that depends 
▁ xxmaj upon your favours swims with fins of lead , 
▁ xxmaj and hews down oaks with rushes . xxmaj hang ye ! xxmaj trust ye ? 
▁ xxmaj with every minute you do change a mind 
▁ xxmaj and call him noble that was now your hate , 
▁ xxmaj him vile that was your garland . xxmaj what 's the matter 
▁ xxmaj that in these several places of the city 
▁ xxmaj you cry against the noble xxmaj senate , who , 
▁ xxmaj under the gods , keep you in awe , which else 
▁ xxmaj would feed on one another ? xxmaj what 's their seeking ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj for corn at their own rates , whereof they say 
▁ xxmaj the city is well stor'd . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj hang 'em ! xxmaj they say ! 
▁ xxmaj they 'll sit by th ' fire and presume to know 
▁ xxmaj what 's done i ' th ' xxmaj capitol , who 's like to rise , 
▁ xxmaj who thrives and who declines ; side factions , and give out 
▁ xxmaj conjectural marriages , making parties strong , 
▁ xxmaj and feebling such as stand not in their liking 
▁ xxmaj below their cobbled shoes . xxmaj they say there 's grain enough ! 
▁ xxmaj would the nobility lay aside their ruth 
▁ xxmaj and let me use my sword , xxmaj i 'd make a quarry 
▁ xxmaj with thousands of these quarter'd slaves , as high 
▁ xxmaj as i could pick my lance . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj nay , these are almost thoroughly persuaded ; 
▁ xxmaj for though abundantly they lack discretion , 
▁ xxmaj yet are they passing cowardly . xxmaj but , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj what says the other troop ? 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj they are dissolv'd . xxmaj hang 'em ! 
▁ xxmaj they said they were an - hungry ; sigh'd forth proverbs- 
▁ xxmaj that hunger broke stone walls , that dogs must eat , 
▁ xxmaj that meat was made for mouths , that the gods sent not 
▁ xxmaj corn for the rich men only . xxmaj with these shreds 
▁ xxmaj they vented their complainings ; which being answer'd , 
▁ xxmaj and a petition granted them- a strange one , 
▁ xxmaj to break the heart of generosity 
▁ xxmaj and make bold power look pale- they threw their caps 
▁ xxmaj as they would hang them on the horns o ' th ' moon , 
▁ xxmaj shouting their emulation . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what is granted them ? 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj five tribunes , to defend their vulgar wisdoms , 
▁ xxmaj of their own choice . xxmaj one 's xxmaj junius xxmaj brutus- 
▁ xxmaj sicinius xxmaj velutus , and i know not . ' sdeath ! 
▁ xxmaj the rabble should have first unroof'd the city 
▁ xxmaj ere so prevail'd with me ; it will in time 
▁ xxmaj win upon power and throw forth greater themes 
▁ xxmaj for insurrection 's arguing . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj this is strange . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj go get you home , you fragments . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger , hastily 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj where 's xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius ? 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj here . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the news is , sir , the xxmaj volsces are in arms . 
▁ xxup marcius . i am glad on't ; then we shall ha ' means to vent 
▁ xxmaj our musty superfluity . xxmaj see , our best elders . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cominius , xxup titus xxup lartius , with other xxup senators ; 
▁ xxup junius xxup brutus and xxup sicinius xxup velutus 

▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj marcius , ' tis true that you have lately told us : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj volsces are in arms . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj they have a leader , 
▁ xxmaj tullus xxmaj aufidius , that will put you to't . 
▁ i sin in envying his nobility ; 
▁ xxmaj and were i anything but what i am , 
▁ i would wish me only he . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj you have fought together ? 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj were half to half the world by th ' ears , and he 
▁ xxmaj upon my party , xxmaj i 'd revolt , to make 
▁ xxmaj only my wars with him . xxmaj he is a lion 
▁ xxmaj that i am proud to hunt . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj then , worthy xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj attend upon xxmaj cominius to these wars . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj it is your former promise . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj sir , it is ; 
▁ xxmaj and i am constant . xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius , thou 
▁ xxmaj shalt see me once more strike at xxmaj tullus ' face . 
▁ xxmaj what , art thou stiff ? xxmaj stand'st out ? 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj no , xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other 
▁ xxmaj ere stay behind this business . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxup o , true bred ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj your company to th ' xxmaj capitol ; where , i know , 
▁ xxmaj our greatest friends attend us . 
▁ xxup lartius . [ to xxup cominius ] xxmaj lead you on . 
▁ [ to xxup marcius ] xxmaj follow xxmaj cominius ; we must follow you ; 
▁ xxmaj right worthy you priority . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj noble xxmaj marcius ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . [ to the xxmaj citizens ] xxmaj hence to your homes ; be gone . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj nay , let them follow . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj volsces have much corn : take these rats thither 
▁ xxmaj to gnaw their garners . xxmaj worshipful mutineers , 
▁ xxmaj your valour puts well forth ; pray follow . 
▁ xxmaj ciitzens steal away . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup sicinius and xxup brutus 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj was ever man so proud as is this xxmaj marcius ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he has no equal . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj when we were chosen tribunes for the people- 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj mark'd you his lip and eyes ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj nay , but his taunts ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj being mov'd , he will not spare to gird the gods . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj bemock the modest moon . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the present wars devour him ! xxmaj he is grown 
▁ xxmaj too proud to be so valiant . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj such a nature , 
▁ xxmaj tickled with good success , disdains the shadow 
▁ xxmaj which he treads on at noon . xxmaj but i do wonder 
▁ xxmaj his insolence can brook to be commanded 
▁ xxmaj under xxmaj cominius . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj fame , at the which he aims- 
▁ xxmaj in whom already he is well grac'd- can not 
▁ xxmaj better be held nor more attain'd than by 
▁ a place below the first ; for what miscarries 
▁ xxmaj shall be the general 's fault , though he perform 
▁ xxmaj to th ' utmost of a man , and giddy censure 
▁ xxmaj will then cry out of xxmaj marcius ' o , if he 
▁ xxmaj had borne the business ! ' 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj besides , if things go well , 
▁ xxmaj opinion , that so sticks on xxmaj marcius , shall 
▁ xxmaj of his demerits rob xxmaj cominius . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come . 
▁ xxmaj half all xxmaj cominius ' honours are to xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj marcius earn'd them not ; and all his faults 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj marcius shall be honours , though indeed 
▁ xxmaj in aught he merit not . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj let 's hence and hear 
▁ xxmaj how the dispatch is made , and in what fashion , 
▁ xxmaj more than his singularity , he goes 
▁ xxmaj upon this present action . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj let 's along . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj corioli . xxmaj the xxmaj senate xxmaj house . 

 xxmaj enter xxup tullus xxup aufidius with xxup senators of xxmaj corioli 

▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj so , your opinion is , xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj that they of xxmaj rome are ent'red in our counsels 
▁ xxmaj and know how we proceed . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj is it not yours ? 
▁ xxmaj what ever have been thought on in this state 
▁ xxmaj that could be brought to bodily act ere xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj had circumvention ? ' tis not four days gone 
▁ xxmaj since i heard thence ; these are the words- i think 
▁ i have the letter here;.yes , here it is : 
▁ [ reads ] ' they have press'd a power , but it is not known 
▁ xxmaj whether for east or west . xxmaj the dearth is great ; 
▁ xxmaj the people mutinous ; and it is rumour'd , 
▁ xxmaj cominius , xxmaj marcius your old enemy , 
▁ xxmaj who is of xxmaj rome worse hated than of you , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius , a most valiant xxmaj roman , 
▁ xxmaj these three lead on this preparation 
▁ xxmaj whither ' tis bent . xxmaj most likely ' tis for you ; 
▁ xxmaj consider of it . ' 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj our army 's in the field ; 
▁ xxmaj we never yet made doubt but xxmaj rome was ready 
▁ xxmaj to answer us . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj nor did you think it folly 
▁ xxmaj to keep your great pretences veil'd till when 
▁ xxmaj they needs must show themselves ; which in the hatching , 
▁ xxmaj it seem'd , appear'd to xxmaj rome . xxmaj by the discovery 
▁ xxmaj we shall be short'ned in our aim , which was 
▁ xxmaj to take in many towns ere almost xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj should know we were afoot . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj noble xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj take your commission ; hie you to your bands ; 
▁ xxmaj let us alone to guard xxmaj corioli . 
▁ xxmaj if they set down before 's , for the remove 
▁ xxmaj bring up your army ; but i think you 'll find 
▁ xxmaj th ' have not prepar'd for us . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxup o , doubt not that ! 
▁ i speak from certainties . xxmaj nay more , 
▁ xxmaj some parcels of their power are forth already , 
▁ xxmaj and only hitherward . i leave your honours . 
▁ xxmaj if we and xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius chance to meet , 
▁ ' tis sworn between us we shall ever strike 
▁ xxmaj till one can do no more . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj the gods assist you ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj and keep your honours safe ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj rome . xxup marcius ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup volumnia and xxup virgilia , mother and wife to xxup marcius ; 
 they set them down on two low stools and sew 

▁ xxup volumnia . i pray you , daughter , sing , or express yourself in a more 
▁ comfortable sort . xxmaj if my son were my husband , i should freelier 
▁ rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the 
▁ embracements of his bed where he would show most love . xxmaj when yet 
▁ he was but tender - bodied , and the only son of my womb ; when youth 
▁ with comeliness pluck'd all gaze his way ; when , for a day of 
▁ kings ' entreaties , a mother should not sell him an hour from her 
▁ beholding ; xxup i , considering how honour would become such a person- 
▁ that it was no better than picture - like to hang by th ' wall , if 
▁ renown made it not stir- was pleas'd to let him seek danger where 
▁ he was to find fame . xxmaj to a cruel war i sent him , from whence he 
▁ return'd his brows bound with oak . i tell thee , daughter , i 
▁ sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a man - child than 
▁ now in first seeing he had proved himself a man . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj but had he died in the business , madam , how then ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj then his good report should have been my son ; i therein 
▁ would have found issue . xxmaj hear me profess sincerely : had i a dozen 
▁ sons , each in my love alike , and none less dear than thine and my 
▁ good xxmaj marcius , i had rather had eleven die nobly for their country 
▁ than one voluptuously surfeit out of action . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup gentlewoman 

▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj madam , the xxmaj lady xxmaj valeria is come to visit you . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj beseech you give me leave to retire myself . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj indeed you shall not . 
▁ xxmaj methinks i hear hither your husband 's drum ; 
▁ xxmaj see him pluck xxmaj aufidius down by th ' hair ; 
▁ xxmaj as children from a bear , the xxmaj volsces shunning him . 
▁ xxmaj methinks i see him stamp thus , and call thus : 
▁ ' come on , you cowards ! xxmaj you were got in fear , 
▁ xxmaj though you were born in xxmaj rome . ' xxmaj his bloody brow 
▁ xxmaj with his mail'd hand then wiping , forth he goes , 
▁ xxmaj like to a harvest - man that 's task'd to mow 
▁ xxmaj or all or lose his hire . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj his bloody brow ? o xxmaj jupiter , no blood ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj away , you fool ! xxmaj it more becomes a man 
▁ xxmaj than gilt his trophy . xxmaj the breasts of xxmaj hecuba , 
▁ xxmaj when she did suckle xxmaj hector , look'd not lovelier 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj hector 's forehead when it spit forth blood 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj grecian sword , contemning . xxmaj tell xxmaj valeria 
▁ xxmaj we are fit to bid her welcome . xxmaj exit xxup gentlewoman 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj heavens bless my lord from fell xxmaj aufidius ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj he 'll beat xxmaj aufidius ' head below his knee 
▁ xxmaj and tread upon his neck . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gentlewoman , xxmaj with xxup valeria and an usher 

▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj my ladies both , good day to you . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj sweet madam ! 
▁ xxup virgilia . i am glad to see your ladyship . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj how do you both ? xxmaj you are manifest housekeepers . xxmaj what are 
▁ you sewing here ? a fine spot , in good faith . xxmaj how does your little 
▁ son ? 
▁ xxup virgilia . i thank your ladyship ; well , good madam . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj he had rather see the swords and hear a drum than look 
▁ upon his schoolmaster . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxup o ' my word , the father 's son ! xxmaj i 'll swear ' tis a very 
▁ pretty boy . xxup o ' my troth , i look'd upon him a xxmaj wednesday half an 
▁ hour together ; has such a confirm'd countenance ! i saw him run 
▁ after a gilded butterfly ; and when he caught it he let it go 
▁ again , and after it again , and over and over he comes , and up 
▁ again , catch'd it again ; or whether his fall enrag'd him , or how 
▁ ' twas , he did so set his teeth and tear it . xxup o , i warrant , how he 
▁ mammock'd it ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj one on 's father 's moods . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj indeed , la , ' tis a noble child . 
▁ xxup virgilia . a crack , madam . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj come , lay aside your stitchery ; i must have you play the 
▁ idle huswife with me this afternoon . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj no , good madam ; i will not out of doors . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj not out of doors ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj she shall , she shall . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj indeed , no , by your patience ; xxmaj i 'll not over the threshold 
▁ till my lord return from the wars . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj fie , you confine yourself most unreasonably ; come , you 
▁ must go visit the good lady that lies in . 
▁ xxup virgilia . i will wish her speedy strength , and visit her with my 
▁ prayers ; but i can not go thither . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj why , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup virgilia . ' tis not to save labour , nor that i want love . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj you would be another xxmaj penelope ; yet they say all the yarn 
▁ she spun in xxmaj ulysses ' absence did but fill xxmaj ithaca full of moths . 
▁ xxmaj come , i would your cambric were sensible as your finger , that you 
▁ might leave pricking it for pity . xxmaj come , you shall go with us . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj no , good madam , pardon me ; indeed i will not forth . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj in truth , la , go with me ; and xxmaj i 'll tell you excellent news 
▁ of your husband . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxup o , good madam , there can be none yet . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj verily , i do not jest with you ; there came news from him 
▁ last night . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj indeed , madam ? 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj in earnest , it 's true ; i heard a senator speak it . xxmaj thus it 
▁ is : the xxmaj volsces have an army forth ; against whom xxmaj cominius the 
▁ general is gone , with one part of our xxmaj roman power . xxmaj your lord and 
▁ xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius are set down before their city xxmaj corioli ; they 
▁ nothing doubt prevailing and to make it brief wars . xxmaj this is true , 
▁ on mine honour ; and so , i pray , go with us . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj give me excuse , good madam ; i will obey you in everything 
▁ hereafter . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj let her alone , lady ; as she is now , she will but disease 
▁ our better mirth . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj in troth , i think she would . xxmaj fare you well , then . xxmaj come , 
▁ good sweet lady . xxmaj prithee , xxmaj virgilia , turn thy solemness out o ' 
▁ door and go along with us . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj no , at a word , madam ; indeed i must not . i wish you much 
▁ mirth . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj well then , farewell . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj corioli 

 xxmaj enter xxup marcius , xxup titus xxup lartius , with drum and colours , 
 with xxup captains and soldiers . xxmaj to them a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj yonder comes news ; a wager- they have met . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj my horse to yours- no . 
▁ xxup marcius . ' tis done . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj agreed . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj say , has our general met the enemy ?