xxbos xxup messenger . xxmaj they lie in view , but have not spoke as yet . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj so , the good horse is mine . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj i 'll buy him of you . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll nor sell nor give him ; lend you him i will 
▁ xxmaj for half a hundred years . xxmaj summon the town . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj how far off lie these armies ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj within this mile and half . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj then shall we hear their ' larum , and they ours . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj mars , i prithee , make us quick in work , 
▁ xxmaj that we with smoking swords may march from hence 
▁ xxmaj to help our fielded friends ! xxmaj come , blow thy blast . 

▁ xxmaj they sound a parley . xxmaj enter two xxup senators with others , 
▁ on the walls of xxmaj corioli 

▁ xxmaj tullus xxmaj aufidius , is he within your walls ? 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj no , nor a man that fears you less than he : 
▁ xxmaj that 's lesser than a little . [ drum afar off ] xxmaj hark , our drums 
▁ xxmaj are bringing forth our youth . xxmaj we 'll break our walls 
▁ xxmaj rather than they shall pound us up ; our gates , 
▁ xxmaj which yet seem shut , we have but pinn'd with rushes ; 
▁ xxmaj they 'll open of themselves . [ alarum far off ] xxmaj hark you far off ! 
▁ xxmaj there is xxmaj aufidius . xxmaj list what work he makes 
▁ xxmaj amongst your cloven army . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxup o , they are at it ! 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj their noise be our instruction . xxmaj ladders , ho ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the army of the xxmaj volsces 

▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj they fear us not , but issue forth their city . 
▁ xxmaj now put your shields before your hearts , and fight 
▁ xxmaj with hearts more proof than shields . xxmaj advance , brave xxmaj titus . 
▁ xxmaj they do disdain us much beyond our thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj which makes me sweat with wrath . xxmaj come on , my fellows . 
▁ xxmaj he that retires , xxmaj i 'll take him for a xxmaj volsce , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall feel mine edge . 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj the xxmaj romans are beat back to their trenches . 
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup marcius , cursing 

▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj all the contagion of the south light on you , 
▁ xxmaj you shames of xxmaj rome ! you herd of- xxmaj boils and plagues 
▁ xxmaj plaster you o'er , that you may be abhorr'd 
▁ xxmaj farther than seen , and one infect another 
▁ xxmaj against the wind a mile ! xxmaj you souls of geese 
▁ xxmaj that bear the shapes of men , how have you run 
▁ xxmaj from slaves that apes would beat ! xxmaj pluto and hell ! 
▁ xxmaj all hurt behind ! xxmaj backs red , and faces pale 
▁ xxmaj with flight and agued fear ! xxmaj mend and charge home , 
▁ xxmaj or , by the fires of heaven , xxmaj i 'll leave the foe 
▁ xxmaj and make my wars on you . xxmaj look to't . xxmaj come on ; 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll stand fast we 'll beat them to their wives , 
▁ xxmaj as they us to our trenches . xxmaj follow me . 

▁ xxmaj another alarum . xxmaj the xxmaj volsces fly , and xxup marcius follows 
▁ them to the gates 

▁ xxmaj so , now the gates are ope ; now prove good seconds ; 
▁ ' tis for the followers fortune widens them , 
▁ xxmaj not for the fliers . xxmaj mark me , and do the like . 

▁ [ marcius enters the gates ] 

▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj fool - hardiness ; not xxup i. 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj not xxup i. [ marcius is shut in ] 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj see , they have shut him in . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj to th ' pot , i warrant him . [ alarum continues ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup titus xxup lartius 

▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj what is become of xxmaj marcius ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj slain , sir , doubtless . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj following the fliers at the very heels , 
▁ xxmaj with them he enters ; who , upon the sudden , 
▁ xxmaj clapp'd to their gates . xxmaj he is himself alone , 
▁ xxmaj to answer all the city . 
▁ xxup lartius . o noble fellow ! 
▁ xxmaj who sensibly outdares his senseless sword , 
▁ xxmaj and when it bows stand'st up . xxmaj thou art left , xxmaj marcius ; 
▁ a carbuncle entire , as big as thou art , 
▁ xxmaj were not so rich a jewel . xxmaj thou wast a soldier 
▁ xxmaj even to xxmaj cato 's wish , not fierce and terrible 
▁ xxmaj only in strokes ; but with thy grim looks and 
▁ xxmaj the thunder - like percussion of thy sounds 
▁ xxmaj thou mad'st thine enemies shake , as if the world 
▁ xxmaj were feverous and did tremble . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup marcius , bleeding , assaulted by the enemy 

▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj look , sir . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxup o , ' tis xxmaj marcius ! 
▁ xxmaj let 's fetch him off , or make remain alike . 
▁ [ they fight , and all enter the city ] 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj within xxmaj corioli . a street 

 xxmaj enter certain xxmaj romans , with spoils 

▁ xxup first xxup roman . xxmaj this will i carry to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup second xxup roman . xxmaj and i this . 
▁ xxup third xxup roman . a murrain on ' t ! i took this for silver . 
▁ [ alarum continues still afar off ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup marcius and xxup titus xxup lartius xxmaj with a trumpeter 

▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj see here these movers that do prize their hours 
▁ xxmaj at a crack'd drachma ! xxmaj cushions , leaden spoons , 
▁ xxmaj irons of a doit , doublets that hangmen would 
▁ xxmaj bury with those that wore them , these base slaves , 
▁ xxmaj ere yet the fight be done , pack up . xxmaj down with them ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt pillagers 
▁ xxmaj and hark , what noise the general makes ! xxmaj to him ! 
▁ xxmaj there is the man of my soul 's hate , xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj piercing our xxmaj romans ; then , valiant xxmaj titus , take 
▁ xxmaj convenient numbers to make good the city ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst xxup i , with those that have the spirit , will haste 
▁ xxmaj to help xxmaj cominius . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj worthy sir , thou bleed'st ; 
▁ xxmaj thy exercise hath been too violent 
▁ xxmaj for a second course of fight . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj sir , praise me not ; 
▁ xxmaj my work hath yet not warm'd me . xxmaj fare you well ; 
▁ xxmaj the blood i drop is rather physical 
▁ xxmaj than dangerous to me . xxmaj to xxmaj aufidius thus 
▁ i will appear , and fight . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj now the fair goddess , xxmaj fortune , 
▁ xxmaj fall deep in love with thee , and her great charms 
▁ xxmaj misguide thy opposers ' swords ! xxmaj bold gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj prosperity be thy page ! 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj thy friend no less 
▁ xxmaj than those she placeth highest ! xxmaj so farewell . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj thou worthiest xxmaj marcius ! xxmaj exit xxup marcius 
▁ xxmaj go sound thy trumpet in the market - place ; 
▁ xxmaj call thither all the officers o ' th ' town , 
▁ xxmaj where they shall know our mind . xxmaj away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj near the camp of xxup cominius 

 xxmaj enter xxup cominius , as it were in retire , with soldiers 

▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj breathe you , my friends . xxmaj well fought ; we are come off 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj romans , neither foolish in our stands 
▁ xxmaj nor cowardly in retire . xxmaj believe me , sirs , 
▁ xxmaj we shall be charg'd again . xxmaj whiles we have struck , 
▁ xxmaj by interims and conveying gusts we have heard 
▁ xxmaj the charges of our friends . xxmaj the xxmaj roman gods , 
▁ xxmaj lead their successes as we wish our own , 
▁ xxmaj that both our powers , with smiling fronts encount'ring , 
▁ xxmaj may give you thankful sacrifice ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxmaj thy news ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the citizens of xxmaj corioli have issued 
▁ xxmaj and given to xxmaj lartius and to xxmaj marcius battle ; 
▁ i saw our party to their trenches driven , 
▁ xxmaj and then i came away . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj though thou speak'st truth , 
▁ xxmaj methinks thou speak'st not well . xxmaj how long is't since ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj above an hour , my lord . 
▁ xxup cominius . ' tis not a mile ; briefly we heard their drums . 
▁ xxmaj how couldst thou in a mile confound an hour , 
▁ xxmaj and bring thy news so late ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj spies of the xxmaj volsces 
▁ xxmaj held me in chase , that i was forc'd to wheel 
▁ xxmaj three or four miles about ; else had xxup i , sir , 
▁ xxmaj half an hour since brought my report . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup marcius 

▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj who 's yonder 
▁ xxmaj that does appear as he were flay'd ? o gods ! 
▁ xxmaj he has the stamp of xxmaj marcius , and i have 
▁ xxmaj before - time seen him thus . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj come i too late ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj the shepherd knows not thunder from a tabor 
▁ xxmaj more than i know the sound of xxmaj marcius ' tongue 
▁ xxmaj from every meaner man . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj come i too late ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj ay , if you come not in the blood of others , 
▁ xxmaj but mantled in your own . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxup o ! let me clip ye 
▁ xxmaj in arms as sound as when i woo'd , in heart 
▁ xxmaj as merry as when our nuptial day was done , 
▁ xxmaj and tapers burn'd to bedward . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj flower of warriors , 
▁ xxmaj how is't with xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius ? 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj as with a man busied about decrees : 
▁ xxmaj condemning some to death and some to exile ; 
▁ xxmaj ransoming him or pitying , threat'ning th ' other ; 
▁ xxmaj holding xxmaj corioli in the name of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj even like a fawning greyhound in the leash , 
▁ xxmaj to let him slip at will . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj where is that slave 
▁ xxmaj which told me they had beat you to your trenches ? 
▁ xxmaj where is he ? xxmaj call him hither . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj let him alone ; 
▁ xxmaj he did inform the truth . xxmaj but for our gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj the common file- a plague ! tribunes for them ! 
▁ xxmaj the mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge 
▁ xxmaj from rascals worse than they . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj but how prevail'd you ? 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj will the time serve to tell ? i do not think . 
▁ xxmaj where is the enemy ? xxmaj are you lords o ' th ' field ? 
▁ xxmaj if not , why cease you till you are so ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj we have at disadvantage fought , and did 
▁ xxmaj retire to win our purpose . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj how lies their battle ? xxmaj know you on which side 
▁ xxmaj they have plac'd their men of trust ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj as i guess , xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj their bands i ' th ' vaward are the xxmaj antiates , 
▁ xxmaj of their best trust ; o'er them xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj their very heart of hope . 
▁ xxup marcius . i do beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj by all the battles wherein we have fought , 
▁ xxmaj by th ' blood we have shed together , by th ' vows 
▁ xxmaj we have made to endure friends , that you directly 
▁ xxmaj set me against xxmaj aufidius and his xxmaj antiates ; 
▁ xxmaj and that you not delay the present , but , 
▁ xxmaj filling the air with swords advanc'd and darts , 
▁ xxmaj we prove this very hour . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj though i could wish 
▁ xxmaj you were conducted to a gentle bath 
▁ xxmaj and balms applied to you , yet dare i never 
▁ xxmaj deny your asking : take your choice of those 
▁ xxmaj that best can aid your action . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj those are they 
▁ xxmaj that most are willing . xxmaj if any such be here- 
▁ xxmaj as it were sin to doubt- that love this painting 
▁ xxmaj wherein you see me smear'd ; if any fear 
▁ xxmaj lesser his person than an ill report ; 
▁ xxmaj if any think brave death outweighs bad life 
▁ xxmaj and that his country 's dearer than himself ; 
▁ xxmaj let him alone , or so many so minded , 
▁ xxmaj wave thus to express his disposition , 
▁ xxmaj and follow xxmaj marcius . [ they all shout and wave their 
▁ swords , take him up in their arms and cast up their caps ] 
▁ xxup o , me alone ! xxmaj make you a sword of me ? 
▁ xxmaj if these shows be not outward , which of you 
▁ xxmaj but is four xxmaj volsces ? xxmaj none of you but is 
▁ xxmaj able to bear against the great xxmaj aufidius 
▁ a shield as hard as his . a certain number , 
▁ xxmaj though thanks to all , must i select from all ; the rest 
▁ xxmaj shall bear the business in some other fight , 
▁ xxmaj as cause will be obey'd . xxmaj please you to march ; 
▁ xxmaj and four shall quickly draw out my command , 
▁ xxmaj which men are best inclin'd . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj march on , my fellows ; 
▁ xxmaj make good this ostentation , and you shall 
▁ xxmaj divide in all with us . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj the gates of xxmaj corioli 

 xxup titus xxup lartius , having set a guard upon xxmaj corioli , going with drum and trumpet 
 toward xxup cominius and xxup caius xxup marcius , enters with a xxup lieutenant , other soldiers , 
 and a scout 

▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj so , let the ports be guarded ; keep your duties 
▁ xxmaj as i have set them down . xxmaj if i do send , dispatch 
▁ xxmaj those centuries to our aid ; the rest will serve 
▁ xxmaj for a short holding . xxmaj if we lose the field 
▁ xxmaj we can not keep the town . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj fear not our care , sir . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj hence , and shut your gates upon 's . 
▁ xxmaj our guider , come ; to th ' xxmaj roman camp conduct us . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
 a field of battle between the xxmaj roman and the xxmaj volscian camps 

 xxmaj alarum , as in battle . xxmaj enter xxup marcius and xxup aufidius at several doors 

▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj i 'll fight with none but thee , for i do hate thee 
▁ xxmaj worse than a promise - breaker . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj we hate alike : 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj afric owns a serpent i abhor 
▁ xxmaj more than thy fame and envy . xxmaj fix thy foot . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj let the first budger die the other 's slave , 
▁ xxmaj and the gods doom him after ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj if i fly , xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj halloa me like a hare . 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj within these three hours , xxmaj tullus , 
▁ xxmaj alone i fought in your xxmaj corioli walls , 
▁ xxmaj and made what work i pleas'd . ' tis not my blood 
▁ xxmaj wherein thou seest me mask'd . xxmaj for thy revenge 
▁ xxmaj wrench up thy power to th ' highest . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj wert thou the xxmaj hector 
▁ xxmaj that was the whip of your bragg'd progeny , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst not scape me here . 

▁ xxmaj here they fight , and certain xxmaj volsces come in the aid 
▁ of xxup aufidius . xxup marcius fights till they be driven in 
▁ breathless 

▁ xxmaj officious , and not valiant , you have sham'd me 
▁ xxmaj in your condemned seconds . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ix . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj roman camp 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj alarum . a retreat is sounded . xxmaj enter , at one door , 
 xxup cominius with the xxmaj romans ; at another door , xxup marcius , with his arm in a scarf 

▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj if i should tell thee o'er this thy day 's work , 
▁ xxmaj thou't not believe thy deeds ; but xxmaj i 'll report it 
▁ xxmaj where senators shall mingle tears with smiles ; 
▁ xxmaj where great patricians shall attend , and shrug , 
▁ xxup i ' th ' end admire ; where ladies shall be frighted 
▁ xxmaj and , gladly quak'd , hear more ; where the dull tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj that with the fusty plebeians hate thine honours , 
▁ xxmaj shall say against their hearts ' we thank the gods 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj rome hath such a soldier . ' 
▁ xxmaj yet cam'st thou to a morsel of this feast , 
▁ xxmaj having fully din'd before . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup titus xxup lartius , with his power , from the pursuit 

▁ xxup lartius . o xxmaj general , 
▁ xxmaj here is the steed , we the caparison . 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou beheld- 
▁ xxup marcius . xxmaj pray now , no more ; my mother , 
▁ xxmaj who has a charter to extol her blood , 
▁ xxmaj when she does praise me grieves me . i have done 
▁ xxmaj as you have done- that 's what i can ; induc'd 
▁ xxmaj as you have been- that 's for my country . 
▁ xxmaj he that has but effected his good will 
▁ xxmaj hath overta'en mine act . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj you shall not be 
▁ xxmaj the grave of your deserving ; xxmaj rome must know 
▁ xxmaj the value of her own . ' twere a concealment 
▁ xxmaj worse than a theft , no less than a traducement , 
▁ xxmaj to hide your doings and to silence that 
▁ xxmaj which , to the spire and top of praises vouch'd , 
▁ xxmaj would seem but modest . xxmaj therefore , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj in sign of what you are , not to reward 
▁ xxmaj what you have done , before our army hear me . 
▁ xxup marcius . i have some wounds upon me , and they smart 
▁ xxmaj to hear themselves rememb'red . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj should they not , 
▁ xxmaj well might they fester ' gainst ingratitude 
▁ xxmaj and tent themselves with death . xxmaj of all the horses- 
▁ xxmaj whereof we have ta'en good , and good store- of all 
▁ xxmaj the treasure in this field achiev'd and city , 
▁ xxmaj we render you the tenth ; to be ta'en forth 
▁ xxmaj before the common distribution at 
▁ xxmaj your only choice . 
▁ xxup marcius . i thank you , xxmaj general , 
▁ xxmaj but can not make my heart consent to take 
▁ a bribe to pay my sword . i do refuse it , 
▁ xxmaj and stand upon my common part with those 
▁ xxmaj that have beheld the doing . 

▁ a long flourish . xxmaj they all cry ' marcius , xxmaj marcius ! ' 
▁ cast up their caps and lances . xxup cominius and xxup lartius stand bare 

▁ xxmaj may these same instruments which you profane 
▁ xxmaj never sound more ! xxmaj when drums and trumpets shall 
▁ xxup i ' th ' field prove flatterers , let courts and cities be 
▁ xxmaj made all of false - fac'd soothing . xxmaj when steel grows 
▁ xxmaj soft as the parasite 's silk , let him be made 
▁ xxmaj an overture for th ' wars . xxmaj no more , i say . 
▁ xxmaj for that i have not wash'd my nose that bled , 
▁ xxmaj or foil'd some debile wretch , which without note 
▁ xxmaj here 's many else have done , you shout me forth 
▁ xxmaj in acclamations hyperbolical , 
▁ xxmaj as if i lov'd my little should be dieted 
▁ xxmaj in praises sauc'd with lies . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj too modest are you ; 
▁ xxmaj more cruel to your good report than grateful 
▁ xxmaj to us that give you truly . xxmaj by your patience , 
▁ xxmaj if ' gainst yourself you be incens'd , we 'll put you- 
▁ xxmaj like one that means his proper harm- in manacles , 
▁ xxmaj then reason safely with you . xxmaj therefore be it known , 
▁ xxmaj as to us , to all the world , that xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius 
▁ xxmaj wears this war 's garland ; in token of the which , 
▁ xxmaj my noble steed , known to the camp , i give him , 
▁ xxmaj with all his trim belonging ; and from this time , 
▁ xxmaj for what he did before xxmaj corioli , can him 
▁ xxmaj with all th ' applause - and clamour of the host , 
▁ xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxmaj bear th ' addition nobly ever ! 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj trumpets sound , and drums ] 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius xxmaj coriolanus ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i will go wash ; 
▁ xxmaj and when my face is fair you shall perceive 
▁ xxmaj whether i blush or no . xxmaj howbeit , i thank you ; 
▁ i mean to stride your steed , and at all times 
▁ xxmaj to undercrest your good addition 
▁ xxmaj to th ' fairness of my power . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj so , to our tent ; 
▁ xxmaj where , ere we do repose us , we will write 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj rome of our success . xxmaj you , xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius , 
▁ xxmaj must to xxmaj corioli back . xxmaj send us to xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj the best , with whom we may articulate 
▁ xxmaj for their own good and ours . 
▁ xxup lartius . i shall , my lord . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj the gods begin to mock me . xxup i , that now 
▁ xxmaj refus'd most princely gifts , am bound to beg 
▁ xxmaj of my xxmaj lord xxmaj general . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj take't- ' tis yours ; what is't ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i sometime lay here in xxmaj corioli 
▁ xxmaj at a poor man 's house ; he us'd me kindly . 
▁ xxmaj he cried to me ; i saw him prisoner ; 
▁ xxmaj but then xxmaj aufidius was within my view , 
▁ xxmaj and wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity . i request you 
▁ xxmaj to give my poor host freedom . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxup o , well begg'd ! 
▁ xxmaj were he the butcher of my son , he should 
▁ xxmaj be free as is the wind . xxmaj deliver him , xxmaj titus . 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj marcius , his name ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj by xxmaj jupiter , forgot ! 
▁ i am weary ; yea , my memory is tir'd . 
▁ xxmaj have we no wine here ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj go we to our tent . 
▁ xxmaj the blood upon your visage dries ; ' tis time 
▁ xxmaj it should be look'd to . xxmaj come . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup x. 
 xxmaj the camp of the xxmaj volsces 

 a flourish . xxmaj cornets . xxmaj enter xxup tullus xxup aufidius bloody , with two or three soldiers 

▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj the town is ta'en . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . ' twill be deliver'd back on good condition . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj condition ! 
▁ i would i were a xxmaj roman ; for i can not , 
▁ xxmaj being a xxmaj volsce , be that i am . xxmaj condition ? 
▁ xxmaj what good condition can a treaty find 
▁ xxup i ' th ' part that is at mercy ? xxmaj five times , xxmaj marcius , 
▁ i have fought with thee ; so often hast thou beat me ; 
▁ xxmaj and wouldst do so , i think , should we encounter 
▁ xxmaj as often as we eat . xxmaj by th ' elements , 
▁ xxmaj if e'er again i meet him beard to beard , 
▁ xxmaj he 's mine or i am his . xxmaj mine emulation 
▁ xxmaj hath not that honour in't it had ; for where 
▁ i thought to crush him in an equal force , 
▁ xxmaj true sword to sword , xxmaj i 'll potch at him some way , 
▁ xxmaj or wrath or craft may get him . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj he 's the devil . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj bolder , though not so subtle . xxmaj my valour 's poison'd 
▁ xxmaj with only suff'ring stain by him ; for him 
▁ xxmaj shall fly out of itself . xxmaj nor sleep nor sanctuary , 
▁ xxmaj being naked , sick , nor fane nor xxmaj capitol , 
▁ xxmaj the prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice , 
▁ xxmaj embarquements all of fury , shall lift up 
▁ xxmaj their rotten privilege and custom ' gainst 
▁ xxmaj my hate to xxmaj marcius . xxmaj where i find him , were it 
▁ xxmaj at home , upon my brother 's guard , even there , 
▁ xxmaj against the hospitable canon , would i 
▁ xxmaj wash my fierce hand in 's heart . xxmaj go you to th ' city ; 
▁ xxmaj learn how ' tis held , and what they are that must 
▁ xxmaj be hostages for xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj will not you go ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . i am attended at the cypress grove ; i pray you- 
▁ ' tis south the city mills- bring me word thither 
▁ xxmaj how the world goes , that to the pace of it 
▁ i may spur on my journey . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . i shall , sir . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup menenius , with the two xxmaj tribunes of the people , xxup sicinius and xxup brutus 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj the augurer tells me we shall have news tonight . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj good or bad ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj not according to the prayer of the people , for they love 
▁ not xxmaj marcius . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj nature teaches beasts to know their friends . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj pray you , who does the wolf love ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj the lamb . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj ay , to devour him , as the hungry plebeians would the 
▁ noble xxmaj marcius . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he 's a lamb indeed , that baes like a bear . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj he 's a bear indeed , that lives fike a lamb . xxmaj you two are 
▁ old men ; tell me one thing that i shall ask you . 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj well , sir . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj in what enormity is xxmaj marcius poor in that you two have not 
▁ in abundance ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he 's poor in no one fault , but stor'd with all . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj especially in pride . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj and topping all others in boasting . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj this is strange now . xxmaj do you two know how you are censured 
▁ here in the city- i mean of us o ' th ' right - hand file ? xxmaj do you ? 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj why , how are we censur'd ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj because you talk of pride now- will you not be angry ? 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj well , well , sir , well . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj why , ' tis no great matter ; for a very little thief of 
▁ occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience . xxmaj give your 
▁ dispositions the reins , and be angry at your pleasures- at the 
▁ least , if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so . xxmaj you blame 
▁ xxmaj marcius for being proud ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj we do it not alone , sir . 
▁ xxup menenius . i know you can do very little alone ; for your helps are 
▁ many , or else your actions would grow wondrous single : your 
▁ abilities are too infant - like for doing much alone . xxmaj you talk of 
▁ pride . o that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your 
▁ necks , and make but an interior survey of your good selves ! o 
▁ that you could ! 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj what then , sir ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj why , then you should discover a brace of unmeriting , 
▁ proud , violent , testy magistrates - alias fools- as any in xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj menenius , you are known well enough too . 
▁ xxup menenius . i am known to be a humorous patrician , and one that loves 
▁ a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying xxmaj tiber in't ; said to 
▁ be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint , hasty 
▁ and tinder - like upon too trivial motion ; one that converses more 
▁ with the buttock of the night than with the forehead of the 
▁ morning . xxmaj what i think i utter , and spend my malice in my breath . 
▁ xxmaj meeting two such wealsmen as you are- i can not call you 
▁ xxmaj lycurguses- if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely , i 
▁ make a crooked face at it . i can not say your worships have 
▁ deliver'd the matter well , when i find the ass in compound with 
▁ the major part of your syllables ; and though i must be content to 
▁ bear with those that say you are reverend grave men , yet they lie 
▁ deadly that tell you you have good faces . xxmaj if you see this in the 
▁ map of my microcosm , follows it that i am known well enough too ? 
▁ xxmaj what harm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this 
▁ character , if i be known well enough too ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come , sir , come , we know you well enough . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you know neither me , yourselves , nor any thing . xxmaj you are 
▁ ambitious for poor knaves ' caps and legs ; you wear out a good 
▁ wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange - wife and 
▁ a fosset - seller , and then rejourn the controversy of threepence 
▁ to a second day of audience . xxmaj when you are hearing a matter 
▁ between party and party , if you chance to be pinch'd with the 
▁ colic , you make faces like mummers , set up the bloody flag 
▁ against all patience , and , in roaring for a chamber - pot , dismiss 
▁ the controversy bleeding , the more entangled by your hearing . xxmaj all 
▁ the peace you make in their cause is calling both the parties 
▁ knaves . xxmaj you are a pair of strange ones . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come , come , you are well understood to be a perfecter giber 
▁ for the table than a necessary bencher in the xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj our very priests must become mockers , if they shall 
▁ encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are . xxmaj when you speak 
▁ best unto the purpose , it is not worth the wagging of your 
▁ beards ; and your beards deserve not so honourable a grave as to 
▁ stuff a botcher 's cushion or to be entomb'd in an ass 's 
▁ pack - saddle . xxmaj yet you must be saying xxmaj marcius is proud ; who , in a 
▁ cheap estimation , is worth all your predecessors since xxmaj deucalion ; 
▁ though peradventure some of the best of 'em were hereditary 
▁ hangmen . xxmaj god - den to your worships . xxmaj more of your conversation 
▁ would infect my brain , being the herdsmen of the beastly 
▁ plebeians . i will be bold to take my leave of you . 
▁ [ brutus and xxup sicinius go aside ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup volumnia , xxup virgilia , and xxup valeria 

▁ xxmaj how now , my as fair as noble ladies- and the moon , were she 
▁ earthly , no nobler- whither do you follow your eyes so fast ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj honourable xxmaj menenius , my boy xxmaj marcius approaches ; for the 
▁ love of xxmaj juno , let 's go . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj marcius coming home ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj ay , worthy xxmaj menenius , and with most prosperous 
▁ approbation . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj take my cap , xxmaj jupiter , and i thank thee . xxmaj hoo ! 
▁ xxmaj marcius coming home ! 
▁ xxup volumnia , xxup virgilia . xxmaj nay , ' tis true . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj look , here 's a letter from him ; the state hath another , 
▁ his wife another ; and i think there 's one at home for you . 
▁ xxup menenius . i will make my very house reel to - night . a letter for me ? 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj yes , certain , there 's a letter for you ; i saw't . 
▁ xxup menenius . a letter for me ! xxmaj it gives me an estate of seven years ' 
▁ health ; in which time i will make a lip at the physician . xxmaj the 
▁ most sovereign prescription in xxmaj galen is but empiricutic and , to 
▁ this preservative , of no better report than a horse - drench . xxmaj is he 
▁ not wounded ? xxmaj he was wo nt to come home wounded . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxup o , no , no , no . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxup o , he is wounded , i thank the gods for't . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj so do i too , if it be not too much . xxmaj brings a victory in 
▁ his pocket ? xxmaj the wounds become him . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj on 's brows , xxmaj menenius , he comes the third time home with 
▁ the oaken garland . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj has he disciplin'd xxmaj aufidius soundly ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius writes they fought together , but xxmaj aufidius 
▁ got off . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj and ' twas time for him too , xxmaj i 'll warrant him that ; an he 
▁ had stay'd by him , i would not have been so fidius'd for all the 
▁ chests in xxmaj corioli and the gold that 's in them . xxmaj is the xxmaj senate 
▁ possess'd of this ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj good ladies , let 's go . xxmaj yes , yes , yes : the xxmaj senate has 
▁ letters from the general , wherein he gives my son the whole name 
▁ of the war ; he hath in this action outdone his former deeds 
▁ doubly . 
▁ xxup valeria . xxmaj in troth , there 's wondrous things spoke of him . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj wondrous ! xxmaj ay , i warrant you , and not without his true 
▁ purchasing . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj the gods grant them true ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj true ! pow , waw . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj true ! xxmaj i 'll be sworn they are true . xxmaj where is he wounded ? 
▁ [ to the xxup tribunes ] xxmaj god save your good worships ! xxmaj marcius is coming 
▁ home ; he has more cause to be proud . xxmaj where is he wounded ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxup i ' th ' shoulder and i ' th ' left arm ; there will be large 
▁ cicatrices to show the people when he shall stand for his place . 
▁ xxmaj he received in the repulse of xxmaj tarquin seven hurts i ' th ' body . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj one i ' th ' neck and two i ' th ' thigh- there 's nine that i 
▁ know . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj he had before this last expedition twenty - five wounds 
▁ upon him . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj now it 's twenty - seven ; every gash was an enemy 's grave . 
▁ [ a shout and flourish ] xxmaj hark ! the trumpets . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj these are the ushers of xxmaj marcius . xxmaj before him he carries 
▁ noise , and behind him he leaves tears ; 
▁ xxmaj death , that dark spirit , in 's nervy arm doth lie , 
▁ xxmaj which , being advanc'd , declines , and then men die . 

▁ a sennet . xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj enter xxup cominius the 
▁ xxup general , and xxup titus xxup lartius ; between them , 
▁ xxup coriolanus , crown'd with an oaken garland ; with 
▁ xxup captains and soldiers and a xxup herald 

▁ xxup herald . xxmaj know , xxmaj rome , that all alone xxmaj marcius did fight 
▁ xxmaj within xxmaj corioli gates , where he hath won , 
▁ xxmaj with fame , a name to xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius ; these 
▁ xxmaj in honour follows xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxmaj welcome to xxmaj rome , renowned xxmaj coriolanus ! [ flourish ] 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj welcome to xxmaj rome , renowned xxmaj coriolanus ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj no more of this , it does offend my heart . 
▁ xxmaj pray now , no more . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj look , sir , your mother ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxup o , 
▁ xxmaj you have , i know , petition'd all the gods 
▁ xxmaj for my prosperity ! [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj nay , my good soldier , up ; 
▁ xxmaj my gentle xxmaj marcius , worthy xxmaj caius , and 
▁ xxmaj by deed - achieving honour newly nam'd- 
▁ xxmaj what is it ? xxmaj coriolanus must i can thee ? 
▁ xxmaj but , xxup o , thy wife ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj my gracious silence , hail ! 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou have laugh'd had i come coffin'd home , 
▁ xxmaj that weep'st to see me triumph ? xxmaj ah , my dear , 
▁ xxmaj such eyes the widows in xxmaj corioli wear , 
▁ xxmaj and mothers that lack sons . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj now the gods crown thee ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj and live you yet ? [ to xxup valeria ] o my sweet lady , 
▁ pardon . 
▁ xxup volumnia . i know not where to turn . 
▁ xxup o , welcome home ! xxmaj and welcome , xxmaj general . 
▁ xxmaj and y'are welcome all . 
▁ xxup menenius . a hundred thousand welcomes . i could weep 
▁ xxmaj and i could laugh ; i am light and heavy . xxmaj welcome ! 
▁ a curse begin at very root on 's heart 
▁ xxmaj that is not glad to see thee ! xxmaj you are three 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj rome should dote on ; yet , by the faith of men , 
▁ xxmaj we have some old crab trees here at home that will not 
▁ xxmaj be grafted to your relish . xxmaj yet welcome , warriors . 
▁ xxmaj we call a nettle but a nettle , and 
▁ xxmaj the faults of fools but folly . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj ever right . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj menenius ever , ever . 
▁ xxup herald . xxmaj give way there , and go on . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . [ to his wife and mother ] xxmaj your hand , and yours . 
▁ xxmaj ere in our own house i do shade my head , 
▁ xxmaj the good patricians must be visited ; 
▁ xxmaj from whom i have receiv'd not only greetings , 
▁ xxmaj but with them change of honours . 
▁ xxup volumnia . i have lived 
▁ xxmaj to see inherited my very wishes , 
▁ xxmaj and the buildings of my fancy ; only 
▁ xxmaj there 's one thing wanting , which i doubt not but 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj rome will cast upon thee . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj know , good mother , 
▁ i had rather be their servant in my way 
▁ xxmaj than sway with them in theirs . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj on , to the xxmaj capitol . 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj cornets . xxmaj exeunt in state , as before ] 

▁ xxup brutus and xxup sicinius come forward 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj all tongues speak of him and the bleared sights 
▁ xxmaj are spectacled to see him . xxmaj your prattling nurse 
▁ xxmaj into a rapture lets her baby cry 
▁ xxmaj while she chats him ; the kitchen malkin pins 
▁ xxmaj her richest lockram 'bout her reechy neck , 
▁ xxmaj clamb'ring the walls to eye him ; stalls , bulks , windows , 
▁ xxmaj are smother'd up , leads fill'd and ridges hors'd 
▁ xxmaj with variable complexions , all agreeing 
▁ xxmaj in earnestness to see him . xxmaj seld - shown flamens 
▁ xxmaj do press among the popular throngs and puff 
▁ xxmaj to win a vulgar station ; our veil'd dames 
▁ xxmaj commit the war of white and damask in 
▁ xxmaj their nicely gawded cheeks to th ' wanton spoil 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj phoebus ' burning kisses . xxmaj such a pother , 
▁ xxmaj as if that whatsoever god who leads him 
▁ xxmaj were slily crept into his human powers , 
▁ xxmaj and gave him graceful posture . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj on the sudden 
▁ i warrant him consul . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj then our office may 
▁ xxmaj during his power go sleep . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj he can not temp'rately transport his honours 
▁ xxmaj from where he should begin and end , but will 
▁ xxmaj lose those he hath won . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj in that there 's comfort . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj doubt not 
▁ xxmaj the commoners , for whom we stand , but they 
▁ xxmaj upon their ancient malice will forget 
▁ xxmaj with the least cause these his new honours ; which 
▁ xxmaj that he will give them make i as little question 
▁ xxmaj as he is proud to do't . 
▁ xxup brutus . i heard him swear , 
▁ xxmaj were he to stand for consul , never would he 
▁ xxmaj appear i ' th ' market - place , nor on him put 
▁ xxmaj the napless vesture of humility ; 
▁ xxmaj nor , showing , as the manner is , his wounds 
▁ xxmaj to th ' people , beg their stinking breaths . 
▁ xxup sicinius . ' tis right . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj it was his word . xxup o , he would miss it rather 
▁ xxmaj than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him 
▁ xxmaj and the desire of the nobles . 
▁ xxup sicinius . i wish no better 
▁ xxmaj than have him hold that purpose , and to put it 
▁ xxmaj in execution . 
▁ xxup brutus . ' tis most like he will . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj it shall be to him then as our good wills : 
▁ a sure destruction . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj so it must fall out 
▁ xxmaj to him or our authorities . xxmaj for an end , 
▁ xxmaj we must suggest the people in what hatred 
▁ xxmaj he still hath held them ; that to 's power he would 
▁ xxmaj have made them mules , silenc'd their pleaders , and 
▁ xxmaj dispropertied their freedoms ; holding them 
▁ xxmaj in human action and capacity 
▁ xxmaj of no more soul nor fitness for the world 
▁ xxmaj than camels in their war , who have their provand 
▁ xxmaj only for bearing burdens , and sore blows 
▁ xxmaj for sinking under them . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj this , as you say , suggested 
▁ xxmaj at some time when his soaring insolence 
▁ xxmaj shall touch the people- which time shall not want , 
▁ xxmaj if he be put upon't , and that 's as easy 
▁ xxmaj as to set dogs on sheep- will be his fire 
▁ xxmaj to kindle their dry stubble ; and their blaze 
▁ xxmaj shall darken him for ever . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj you are sent for to the xxmaj capitol . ' tis thought 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj marcius shall be consul . 
▁ i have seen the dumb men throng to see him and 
▁ xxmaj the blind to hear him speak ; matrons flung gloves , 
▁ xxmaj ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers , 
▁ xxmaj upon him as he pass'd ; the nobles bended 
▁ xxmaj as to xxmaj jove 's statue , and the commons made 
▁ a shower and thunder with their caps and shouts . 
▁ i never saw the like . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj let 's to the xxmaj capitol , 
▁ xxmaj and carry with us ears and eyes for th ' time , 
▁ xxmaj but hearts for the event . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj have with you . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj the xxmaj capitol 

 xxmaj enter two xxup officers , to lay cushions , as it were in the xxmaj capitol 

▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj come , come , they are almost here . xxmaj how many stand for 
▁ consulships ? 
▁ xxup second xxup officer . xxmaj three , they say ; but ' tis thought of every one 
▁ xxmaj coriolanus will carry it . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj that 's a brave fellow ; but he 's vengeance proud and 
▁ loves not the common people . 
▁ xxup second xxup officer . xxmaj faith , there have been many great men that have 
▁ flatter'd the people , who ne'er loved them ; and there be many 
▁ that they have loved , they know not wherefore ; so that , if they 
▁ love they know not why , they hate upon no better a ground . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , for xxmaj coriolanus neither to care whether they love or 
▁ hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their 
▁ disposition , and out of his noble carelessness lets them plainly 
▁ see't . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj if he did not care whether he had their love or no , 
▁ he waved indifferently ' twixt doing them neither good nor harm ; 
▁ but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than they can 
▁ render it him , and leaves nothing undone that may fully discover 
▁ him their opposite . xxmaj now to seem to affect the malice and 
▁ displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes- to 
▁ flatter them for their love . 
▁ xxup second xxup officer . xxmaj he hath deserved worthily of his country ; and his 
▁ ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who , having been 
▁ supple and courteous to the people , bonneted , without any further 
▁ deed to have them at all , into their estimation and report ; but 
▁ he hath so planted his honours in their eyes and his actions in 
▁ their hearts that for their tongues to be silent and not confess 
▁ so much were a kind of ingrateful injury ; to report otherwise 
▁ were a malice that , giving itself the lie , would pluck reproof 
▁ and rebuke from every car that heard it . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj no more of him ; he 's a worthy man . xxmaj make way , they 
▁ are coming . 

▁ a sennet . xxmaj enter the xxup patricians and the xxup tribunes 
▁ xxup of xxup the xxup people , xxup lictors before them ; xxup coriolanus , 
▁ xxup menenius , xxup cominius the xxmaj consul . xxup sicinius and 
▁ xxup brutus take their places by themselves . 
▁ xxup coriolanus stands 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj having determin'd of the xxmaj volsces , and 
▁ xxmaj to send for xxmaj titus xxmaj lartius , it remains , 
▁ xxmaj as the main point of this our after - meeting , 
▁ xxmaj to gratify his noble service that 
▁ xxmaj hath thus stood for his country . xxmaj therefore please you , 
▁ xxmaj most reverend and grave elders , to desire 
▁ xxmaj the present consul and last general 
▁ xxmaj in our well - found successes to report 
▁ a little of that worthy work perform'd 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius xxmaj coriolanus ; whom 
▁ xxmaj we met here both to thank and to remember 
▁ xxmaj with honours like himself . [ coriolanus sits ] 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj speak , good xxmaj cominius . 
▁ xxmaj leave nothing out for length , and make us think 
▁ xxmaj rather our state 's defective for requital 
▁ xxmaj than we to stretch it out . xxmaj masters o ' th ' people , 
▁ xxmaj we do request your kindest ears ; and , after , 
▁ xxmaj your loving motion toward the common body , 
▁ xxmaj to yield what passes here . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj we are convented 
▁ xxmaj upon a pleasing treaty , and have hearts 
▁ xxmaj inclinable to honour and advance 
▁ xxmaj the theme of our assembly . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj which the rather 
▁ xxmaj we shall be bless'd to do , if he remember 
▁ a kinder value of the people than 
▁ xxmaj he hath hereto priz'd them at . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj that 's off , that 's off ; 
▁ i would you rather had been silent . xxmaj please you 
▁ xxmaj to hear xxmaj cominius speak ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj most willingly . 
▁ xxmaj but yet my caution was more pertinent 
▁ xxmaj than the rebuke you give it . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj he loves your people ; 
▁ xxmaj but tie him not to be their bedfellow . 
▁ xxmaj worthy xxmaj cominius , speak . 
▁ [ coriolanus rises , and offers to go away ] 
▁ xxmaj nay , keep your place . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj sit , xxmaj coriolanus , never shame to hear 
▁ xxmaj what you have nobly done . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj your xxmaj honours ' pardon . 
▁ i had rather have my wounds to heal again 
▁ xxmaj than hear say how i got them . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj sir , i hope 
▁ xxmaj my words disbench'd you not . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj no , sir ; yet oft , 
▁ xxmaj when blows have made me stay , i fled from words . 
▁ xxmaj you sooth'd not , therefore hurt not . xxmaj but your people , 
▁ i love them as they weigh- 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj pray now , sit down . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i had rather have one scratch my head i ' th ' sun 
▁ xxmaj when the alarum were struck than idly sit 
▁ xxmaj to hear my nothings monster'd . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj masters of the people , 
▁ xxmaj your multiplying spawn how can he flatter- 
▁ xxmaj that 's thousand to one good one- when you now see 
▁ xxmaj he had rather venture all his limbs for honour 
▁ xxmaj than one on 's ears to hear it ? xxmaj proceed , xxmaj cominius . 
▁ xxup cominius . i shall lack voice ; the deeds of xxmaj coriolanus 
▁ xxmaj should not be utter'd feebly . xxmaj it is held 
▁ xxmaj that valour is the chiefest virtue and 
▁ xxmaj most dignifies the haver . xxmaj if it be , 
▁ xxmaj the man i speak of can not in the world 
▁ xxmaj be singly counterpois'd . xxmaj at sixteen years , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj tarquin made a head for xxmaj rome , he fought 
▁ xxmaj beyond the mark of others ; our then xxmaj dictator , 
▁ xxmaj whom with all praise i point at , saw him fight 
▁ xxmaj when with his xxmaj amazonian chin he drove 
▁ xxmaj the bristled lips before him ; he bestrid 
▁ xxmaj an o'erpress'd xxmaj roman and i ' th ' consul 's view 
▁ xxmaj slew three opposers ; xxmaj tarquin 's self he met , 
▁ xxmaj and struck him on his knee . xxmaj in that day 's feats , 
▁ xxmaj when he might act the woman in the scene , 
▁ xxmaj he prov'd best man i ' th ' field , and for his meed 
▁ xxmaj was brow - bound with the oak . xxmaj his pupil age 
▁ xxmaj man - ent'red thus , he waxed like a sea , 
▁ xxmaj and in the brunt of seventeen battles since 
▁ xxmaj he lurch'd all swords of the garland . xxmaj for this last , 
▁ xxmaj before and in xxmaj corioli , let me say 
▁ i can not speak him home . xxmaj he stopp'd the fliers , 
▁ xxmaj and by his rare example made the coward 
▁ xxmaj turn terror into sport ; as weeds before 
▁ a vessel under sail , so men obey'd 
▁ xxmaj and fell below his stem . xxmaj his sword , death 's stamp , 
▁ xxmaj where it did mark , it took ; from face to foot 
▁ xxmaj he was a thing of blood , whose every motion 
▁ xxmaj was tim'd with dying cries . xxmaj alone he ent'red 
▁ xxmaj the mortal gate of th ' city , which he painted 
▁ xxmaj with shunless destiny ; aidless came off , 
▁ xxmaj and with a sudden re - enforcement struck 
▁ xxmaj corioli like a planet . xxmaj now all 's his . 
▁ xxmaj when by and by the din of war ' gan pierce 
▁ xxmaj his ready sense , then straight his doubled spirit 
▁ xxmaj re - quick'ned what in flesh was fatigate , 
▁ xxmaj and to the battle came he ; where he did 
▁ xxmaj run reeking o'er the lives of men , as if 
▁ ' twere a perpetual spoil ; and till we call'd 
▁ xxmaj both field and city ours he never stood 
▁ xxmaj to ease his breast with panting . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj worthy man ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj he can not but with measure fit the honours 
▁ xxmaj which we devise him . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj our spoils he kick'd at , 
▁ xxmaj and look'd upon things precious as they were 
▁ xxmaj the common muck of the world . xxmaj he covets less 
▁ xxmaj than misery itself would give , rewards 
▁ xxmaj his deeds with doing them , and is content 
▁ xxmaj to spend the time to end it . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj he 's right noble ; 
▁ xxmaj let him be call'd for . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj call xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxup officer . xxmaj he doth appear . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup coriolanus 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj the xxmaj senate , xxmaj coriolanus , are well pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj to make thee consul . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i do owe them still 
▁ xxmaj my life and services . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj it then remains 
▁ xxmaj that you do speak to the people . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i do beseech you 
▁ xxmaj let me o'erleap that custom ; for i can not 
▁ xxmaj put on the gown , stand naked , and entreat them 
▁ xxmaj for my wounds ' sake to give their suffrage . xxmaj please you 
▁ xxmaj that i may pass this doing . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj sir , the people 
▁ xxmaj must have their voices ; neither will they bate 
▁ xxmaj one jot of ceremony . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj put them not to't . 
▁ xxmaj pray you go fit you to the custom , and 
▁ xxmaj take to you , as your predecessors have , 
▁ xxmaj your honour with your form . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj it is a part 
▁ xxmaj that i shall blush in acting , and might well 
▁ xxmaj be taken from the people . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj mark you that ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj to brag unto them ' thus i did , and thus ! ' 
▁ xxmaj show them th ' unaching scars which i should hide , 
▁ xxmaj as if i had receiv'd them for the hire 
▁ xxmaj of their breath only ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj do not stand upon't . 
▁ xxmaj we recommend to you , xxmaj tribunes of the xxmaj people , 
▁ xxmaj our purpose to them ; and to our noble consul 
▁ xxmaj wish we all joy and honour . 
▁ xxup senators . xxmaj to xxmaj coriolanus come all joy and honour ! 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj cornets . xxmaj then exeunt all 
▁ but xxup sicinius and xxup brutus ] 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you see how he intends to use the people . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj may they perceive 's intent ! xxmaj he will require them 
▁ xxmaj as if he did contemn what he requested 
▁ xxmaj should be in them to give . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come , we 'll inform them 
▁ xxmaj of our proceedings here . xxmaj on th ' market - place 
▁ i know they do attend us . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj the xxmaj forum 

 xxmaj enter seven or eight citizens 

▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj once , if he do require our voices , we ought not to 
▁ deny him .