xxbos xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj we may , sir , if we will . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj we have power in ourselves to do it , but it is a 
▁ power that we have no power to do ; for if he show us his wounds 
▁ and tell us his deeds , we are to put our tongues into those 
▁ wounds and speak for them ; so , if he tell us his noble deeds , we 
▁ must also tell him our noble acceptance of them . xxmaj ingratitude is 
▁ monstrous , and for the multitude to be ingrateful were to make a 
▁ monster of the multitude ; of the which we being members should 
▁ bring ourselves to be monstrous members . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj and to make us no better thought of , a little help 
▁ will serve ; for once we stood up about the corn , he himself stuck 
▁ not to call us the many - headed multitude . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj we have been call'd so of many ; not that our heads 
▁ are some brown , some black , some abram , some bald , but that our 
▁ wits are so diversely colour'd ; and truly i think if all our wits 
▁ were to issue out of one skull , they would fly east , west , north , 
▁ south , and their consent of one direct way should be at once to 
▁ all the points o ' th ' compass . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj think you so ? xxmaj which way do you judge my wit would 
▁ fly ? 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj nay , your wit will not so soon out as another man 's 
▁ will- ' tis strongly wedg'd up in a block - head ; but if it were at 
▁ liberty ' twould sure southward . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj why that way ? 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj to lose itself in a fog ; where being three parts 
▁ melted away with rotten dews , the fourth would return for 
▁ conscience ' sake , to help to get thee a wife . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxup you are never without your tricks ; you may , you 
▁ may . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj are you all resolv'd to give your voices ? xxmaj but that 's 
▁ no matter , the greater part carries it . i say , if he would 
▁ incline to the people , there was never a worthier man . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , in a gown of humility , 
▁ with xxup menenius 

▁ xxmaj here he comes , and in the gown of humility . xxmaj mark his behaviour . 
▁ xxmaj we are not to stay all together , but to come by him where he 
▁ stands , by ones , by twos , and by threes . xxmaj he 's to make his 
▁ requests by particulars , wherein every one of us has a single 
▁ honour , in giving him our own voices with our own tongues ; 
▁ therefore follow me , and xxmaj i 'll direct you how you shall go by him . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj content , content . xxmaj exeunt citizens 
▁ xxup menenius . o sir , you are not right ; have you not known 
▁ xxmaj the worthiest men have done't ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what must i say ? 
▁ ' i pray , sir'- xxmaj plague upon't ! i can not bring 
▁ xxmaj my tongue to such a pace . ' look , sir , my wounds 
▁ i got them in my country 's service , when 
▁ xxmaj some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran 
▁ xxmaj from th ' noise of our own drums . ' 
▁ xxup menenius . o me , the gods ! 
▁ xxmaj you must not speak of that . xxmaj you must desire them 
▁ xxmaj to think upon you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj think upon me ? xxmaj hang 'em ! 
▁ i would they would forget me , like the virtues 
▁ xxmaj which our divines lose by 'em . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you 'll mar all . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave you . xxmaj pray you speak to 'em , i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj in wholesome manner . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter three of the citizens 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj bid them wash their faces 
▁ xxmaj and keep their teeth clean . xxmaj so , here comes a brace . 
▁ xxmaj you know the cause , sir , of my standing here . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj we do , sir ; tell us what hath brought you to't . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj mine own desert . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj your own desert ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj ay , not mine own desire . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj how , not your own desire ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj no , sir , ' twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor 
▁ with begging . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxup you xxup must think , if we give you anything , we hope to 
▁ gain by you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj well then , i pray , your price o ' th ' consulship ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj the price is to ask it kindly . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj kindly , sir , i pray let me ha't . i have wounds to show 
▁ you , which shall be yours in private . xxmaj your good voice , sir ; what 
▁ say you ? 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj you shall ha ' it , worthy sir . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . a match , sir . xxmaj there 's in all two worthy voices begg'd . 
▁ i have your alms . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj but this is something odd . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj an ' twere to give again- but ' tis no matter . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt the three citizens 

▁ xxmaj re - enter two other citizens 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj pray you now , if it may stand with the tune of your 
▁ voices that i may be consul , i have here the customary gown . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj you have deserved nobly of your country , and you 
▁ have not deserved nobly . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj your enigma ? 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj you have been a scourge to her enemies ; you have 
▁ been a rod to her friends . xxmaj you have not indeed loved the common 
▁ people . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj you should account me the more virtuous , that i have 
▁ not been common in my love . i will , sir , flatter my sworn 
▁ brother , the people , to earn a dearer estimation of them ; ' tis a 
▁ condition they account gentle ; and since the wisdom of their 
▁ choice is rather to have my hat than my heart , i will practise 
▁ the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly . xxmaj that 
▁ is , sir , i will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man 
▁ and give it bountiful to the desirers . xxmaj therefore , beseech you i 
▁ may be consul . 
▁ xxup fifth xxup citizen . xxmaj we hope to find you our friend ; and therefore give 
▁ you our voices heartily . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj you have received many wounds for your country . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i will not seal your knowledge with showing them . i 
▁ will make much of your voices , and so trouble you no farther . 
▁ xxup both xxup citizens . xxmaj the gods give you joy , sir , heartily ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt citizens 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj most sweet voices ! 
▁ xxmaj better it is to die , better to starve , 
▁ xxmaj than crave the hire which first we do deserve . 
▁ xxmaj why in this wolvish toge should i stand here 
▁ xxmaj to beg of xxmaj hob and xxmaj dick that do appear 
▁ xxmaj their needless vouches ? xxmaj custom calls me to't . 
▁ xxmaj what custom wills , in all things should we do't , 
▁ xxmaj the dust on antique time would lie unswept , 
▁ xxmaj and mountainous error be too highly heap'd 
▁ xxmaj for truth to o'erpeer . xxmaj rather than fool it so , 
▁ xxmaj let the high office and the honour go 
▁ xxmaj to one that would do thus . i am half through : 
▁ xxmaj the one part suffered , the other will i do . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter three citizens more 

▁ xxmaj here come moe voices . 
▁ xxmaj your voices . xxmaj for your voices i have fought ; 
▁ xxmaj watch'd for your voices ; for your voices bear 
▁ xxmaj of wounds two dozen odd ; battles thrice six 
▁ i have seen and heard of ; for your voices have 
▁ xxmaj done many things , some less , some more . xxmaj your voices ? 
▁ xxmaj indeed , i would be consul . 
▁ xxup sixth xxup citizen . xxmaj he has done nobly , and can not go without any honest 
▁ man 's voice . 
▁ xxup seventh xxup citizen . xxmaj therefore let him be consul . xxmaj the gods give him 
▁ joy , and make him good friend to the people ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj amen , amen . xxmaj god save thee , noble consul ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt citizens 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj worthy voices ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup menenius with xxup brutus and xxup sicinius 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you have stood your limitation , and the tribunes 
▁ xxmaj endue you with the people 's voice . xxmaj remains 
▁ xxmaj that , in th ' official marks invested , you 
▁ xxmaj anon do meet the xxmaj senate . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj is this done ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj the custom of request you have discharg'd . 
▁ xxmaj the people do admit you , and are summon'd 
▁ xxmaj to meet anon , upon your approbation . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj where ? xxmaj at the xxmaj senate xxmaj house ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj there , xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj may i change these garments ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj you may , sir . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj that xxmaj i 'll straight do , and , knowing myself again , 
▁ xxmaj repair to th ' xxmaj senate xxmaj house . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj i 'll keep you company . xxmaj will you along ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj we stay here for the people . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup coriolanus and xxup menenius 
▁ xxmaj he has it now ; and by his looks methinks 
▁ ' tis warm at 's heart . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj with a proud heart he wore 
▁ xxmaj his humble weeds . xxmaj will you dismiss the people ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter citizens 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj how now , my masters ! xxmaj have you chose this man ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj he has our voices , sir . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj we pray the gods he may deserve your loves . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj amen , sir . xxmaj to my poor unworthy notice , 
▁ xxmaj he mock'd us when he begg'd our voices . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj certainly ; 
▁ xxmaj he flouted us downright . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj no , ' tis his kind of speech- he did not mock us . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj not one amongst us , save yourself , but says 
▁ xxmaj he us'd us scornfully . xxmaj he should have show'd us 
▁ xxmaj his marks of merit , wounds receiv'd for 's country . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj why , so he did , i am sure . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj no , no ; no man saw 'em . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj he said he had wounds which he could show in 
▁ private , 
▁ xxmaj and with his hat , thus waving it in scorn , 
▁ ' i would be consul , ' says he ; ' aged custom 
▁ xxmaj but by your voices will not so permit me ; 
▁ xxmaj your voices therefore . ' xxmaj when we granted that , 
▁ xxmaj here was ' i thank you for your voices . xxmaj thank you , 
▁ xxmaj your most sweet voices . xxmaj now you have left your voices , 
▁ i have no further with you . ' xxmaj was not this mockery ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj why either were you ignorant to see't , 
▁ xxmaj or , seeing it , of such childish friendliness 
▁ xxmaj to yield your voices ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj could you not have told him- 
▁ xxmaj as you were lesson'd- when he had no power 
▁ xxmaj but was a petty servant to the state , 
▁ xxmaj he was your enemy ; ever spake against 
▁ xxmaj your liberties and the charters that you bear 
▁ xxup i ' th ' body of the weal ; and now , arriving 
▁ a place of potency and sway o ' th ' state , 
▁ xxmaj if he should still malignantly remain 
▁ xxmaj fast foe to th ' plebeii , your voices might 
▁ xxmaj be curses to yourselves ? xxmaj you should have said 
▁ xxmaj that as his worthy deeds did claim no less 
▁ xxmaj than what he stood for , so his gracious nature 
▁ xxmaj would think upon you for your voices , and 
▁ xxmaj translate his malice towards you into love , 
▁ xxmaj standing your friendly lord . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj thus to have said , 
▁ xxmaj as you were fore - advis'd , had touch'd his spirit 
▁ xxmaj and tried his inclination ; from him pluck'd 
▁ xxmaj either his gracious promise , which you might , 
▁ xxmaj as cause had call'd you up , have held him to ; 
▁ xxmaj or else it would have gall'd his surly nature , 
▁ xxmaj which easily endures not article 
▁ xxmaj tying him to aught . xxmaj so , putting him to rage , 
▁ xxmaj you should have ta'en th ' advantage of his choler 
▁ xxmaj and pass'd him unelected . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj did you perceive 
▁ xxmaj he did solicit you in free contempt 
▁ xxmaj when he did need your loves ; and do you think 
▁ xxmaj that his contempt shall not be bruising to you 
▁ xxmaj when he hath power to crush ? xxmaj why , had your bodies 
▁ xxmaj no heart among you ? xxmaj or had you tongues to cry 
▁ xxmaj against the rectorship of judgment ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj have you 
▁ xxmaj ere now denied the asker , and now again , 
▁ xxmaj of him that did not ask but mock , bestow 
▁ xxmaj your su'd - for tongues ? 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj he 's not confirm'd : we may deny him yet . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizens . xxmaj and will deny him ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have five hundred voices of that sound . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . i twice five hundred , and their friends to piece 
▁ 'em . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj get you hence instantly , and tell those friends 
▁ xxmaj they have chose a consul that will from them take 
▁ xxmaj their liberties , make them of no more voice 
▁ xxmaj than dogs , that are as often beat for barking 
▁ xxmaj as therefore kept to do so . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj let them assemble ; 
▁ xxmaj and , on a safer judgment , all revoke 
▁ xxmaj your ignorant election . xxmaj enforce his pride 
▁ xxmaj and his old hate unto you ; besides , forget not 
▁ xxmaj with what contempt he wore the humble weed ; 
▁ xxmaj how in his suit he scorn'd you ; but your loves , 
▁ xxmaj thinking upon his services , took from you 
▁ xxmaj th ' apprehension of his present portance , 
▁ xxmaj which , most gibingly , ungravely , he did fashion 
▁ xxmaj after the inveterate hate he bears you . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj lay 
▁ a fault on us , your tribunes , that we labour'd , 
▁ xxmaj no impediment between , but that you must 
▁ xxmaj cast your election on him . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj say you chose him 
▁ xxmaj more after our commandment than as guided 
▁ xxmaj by your own true affections ; and that your minds , 
▁ xxmaj pre - occupied with what you rather must do 
▁ xxmaj than what you should , made you against the grain 
▁ xxmaj to voice him consul . xxmaj lay the fault on us . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj ay , spare us not . xxmaj say we read lectures to you , 
▁ xxmaj how youngly he began to serve his country , 
▁ xxmaj how long continued ; and what stock he springs of- 
▁ xxmaj the noble house o ' th ' xxmaj marcians ; from whence came 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj ancus xxmaj marcius , xxmaj numa 's daughter 's son , 
▁ xxmaj who , after great xxmaj hostilius , here was king ; 
▁ xxmaj of the same house xxmaj publius and xxmaj quintus were , 
▁ xxmaj that our best water brought by conduits hither ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj censorinus , nobly named so , 
▁ xxmaj twice being by the people chosen censor , 
▁ xxmaj was his great ancestor . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj one thus descended , 
▁ xxmaj that hath beside well in his person wrought 
▁ xxmaj to be set high in place , we did commend 
▁ xxmaj to your remembrances ; but you have found , 
▁ xxmaj scaling his present bearing with his past , 
▁ xxmaj that he 's your fixed enemy , and revoke 
▁ xxmaj your sudden approbation . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj say you ne'er had done't- 
▁ xxmaj harp on that still- but by our putting on ; 
▁ xxmaj and presently , when you have drawn your number , 
▁ xxmaj repair to th ' xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup citizens . will will so ; almost all 
▁ xxmaj repent in their election . xxmaj exeunt plebeians 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj let them go on ; 
▁ xxmaj this mutiny were better put in hazard 
▁ xxmaj than stay , past doubt , for greater . 
▁ xxmaj if , as his nature is , he fall in rage 
▁ xxmaj with their refusal , both observe and answer 
▁ xxmaj the vantage of his anger . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj to th ' xxmaj capitol , come . 
▁ xxmaj we will be there before the stream o ' th ' people ; 
▁ xxmaj and this shall seem , as partly ' tis , their own , 
▁ xxmaj which we have goaded onward . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . a street 

 xxmaj cornets . xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , xxup menenius , all the xxup gentry , xxup cominius , 
 xxup titus xxup lartius , and other xxup senators 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj tullus xxmaj aufidius , then , had made new head ? 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj he had , my lord ; and that it was which caus'd 
▁ xxmaj our swifter composition . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj so then the xxmaj volsces stand but as at first , 
▁ xxmaj ready , when time shall prompt them , to make road 
▁ xxmaj upon 's again . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj they are worn , xxmaj lord xxmaj consul , so 
▁ xxmaj that we shall hardly in our ages see 
▁ xxmaj their banners wave again . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj saw you xxmaj aufidius ? 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj on safeguard he came to me , and did curse 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj volsces , for they had so vilely 
▁ xxmaj yielded the town . xxmaj he is retir'd to xxmaj antium . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj spoke he of me ? 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj he did , my lord . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj how ? xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj how often he had met you , sword to sword ; 
▁ xxmaj that of all things upon the earth he hated 
▁ xxmaj your person most ; that he would pawn his fortunes 
▁ xxmaj to hopeless restitution , so he might 
▁ xxmaj be call'd your vanquisher . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj at xxmaj antium lives he ? 
▁ xxup lartius . xxmaj at xxmaj antium . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i wish i had a cause to seek him there , 
▁ xxmaj to oppose his hatred fully . xxmaj welcome home . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sicinius and xxup brutus 

▁ xxmaj behold , these are the tribunes of the people , 
▁ xxmaj the tongues o ' th ' common mouth . i do despise them , 
▁ xxmaj for they do prank them in authority , 
▁ xxmaj against all noble sufferance . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj pass no further . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj what is that ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj it will be dangerous to go on- no further . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what makes this change ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj the matter ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj hath he not pass'd the noble and the common ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj cominius , no . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj have i had children 's voices ? 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj tribunes , give way : he shall to th ' market - place . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the people are incens'd against him . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj stop , 
▁ xxmaj or all will fall in broil . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj are these your herd ? 
▁ xxmaj must these have voices , that can yield them now 
▁ xxmaj and straight disclaim their tongues ? xxmaj what are your offices ? 
▁ xxmaj you being their mouths , why rule you not their teeth ? 
▁ xxmaj have you not set them on ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj be calm , be calm . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj it is a purpos'd thing , and grows by plot , 
▁ xxmaj to curb the will of the nobility ; 
▁ xxmaj suffer't , and live with such as can not rule 
▁ xxmaj nor ever will be rul'd . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj call't not a plot . 
▁ xxmaj the people cry you mock'd them ; and of late , 
▁ xxmaj when corn was given them gratis , you repin'd ; 
▁ xxmaj scandal'd the suppliants for the people , call'd them 
▁ xxmaj time - pleasers , flatterers , foes to nobleness . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj why , this was known before . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj not to them all . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj have you inform'd them sithence ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj how ? i inform them ! 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj you are like to do such business . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj not unlike 
▁ xxmaj each way to better yours . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj why then should i be consul ? xxmaj by yond clouds , 
▁ xxmaj let me deserve so ill as you , and make me 
▁ xxmaj your fellow tribune . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj you show too much of that 
▁ xxmaj for which the people stir ; if you will pass 
▁ xxmaj to where you are bound , you must enquire your way , 
▁ xxmaj which you are out of , with a gentler spirit , 
▁ xxmaj or never be so noble as a consul , 
▁ xxmaj nor yoke with him for tribune . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj let 's be calm . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj the people are abus'd ; set on . xxmaj this palt'ring 
▁ xxmaj becomes not xxmaj rome ; nor has xxmaj coriolanus 
▁ xxmaj deserved this so dishonour'd rub , laid falsely 
▁ xxup i ' th ' plain way of his merit . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj tell me of corn ! 
▁ xxmaj this was my speech , and i will speak't again- 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj not now , not now . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj not in this heat , sir , now . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj now , as i live , i will . 
▁ xxmaj my nobler friends , i crave their pardons . 
▁ xxmaj for the mutable , rank - scented meiny , let them 
▁ xxmaj regard me as i do not flatter , and 
▁ xxmaj therein behold themselves . i say again , 
▁ xxmaj in soothing them we nourish ' gainst our xxmaj senate 
▁ xxmaj the cockle of rebellion , insolence , sedition , 
▁ xxmaj which we ourselves have plough'd for , sow'd , and scatter'd , 
▁ xxmaj by mingling them with us , the honour'd number , 
▁ xxmaj who lack not virtue , no , nor power , but that 
▁ xxmaj which they have given to beggars . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj well , no more . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj no more words , we beseech you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj how ? no more ! 
▁ xxmaj as for my country i have shed my blood , 
▁ xxmaj not fearing outward force , so shall my lungs 
▁ xxmaj coin words till their decay against those measles 
▁ xxmaj which we disdain should tetter us , yet sought 
▁ xxmaj the very way to catch them . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you speak o ' th ' people 
▁ xxmaj as if you were a god , to punish ; not 
▁ a man of their infirmity . 
▁ xxup sicinius . ' twere well 
▁ xxmaj we let the people know't . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what , what ? his choler ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj choler ! 
▁ xxmaj were i as patient as the midnight sleep , 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj jove , ' twould be my mind ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj it is a mind 
▁ xxmaj that shall remain a poison where it is , 
▁ xxmaj not poison any further . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj shall remain ! 
▁ xxmaj hear you this xxmaj triton of the minnows ? xxmaj mark you 
▁ xxmaj his absolute ' shall ' ? 
▁ xxup cominius . ' twas from the canon . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . ' shall ' ! 
▁ o good but most unwise patricians ! xxmaj why , 
▁ xxmaj you grave but reckless senators , have you thus 
▁ xxmaj given xxmaj hydra here to choose an officer 
▁ xxmaj that with his peremptory ' shall , ' being but 
▁ xxmaj the horn and noise o ' th ' monster 's , wants not spirit 
▁ xxmaj to say he 'll turn your current in a ditch , 
▁ xxmaj and make your channel his ? xxmaj if he have power , 
▁ xxmaj then vail your ignorance ; if none , awake 
▁ xxmaj your dangerous lenity . xxmaj if you are learn'd , 
▁ xxmaj be not as common fools ; if you are not , 
▁ xxmaj let them have cushions by you . xxmaj you are plebeians , 
▁ xxmaj if they be senators ; and they are no less , 
▁ xxmaj when , both your voices blended , the great'st taste 
▁ xxmaj most palates theirs . xxmaj they choose their magistrate ; 
▁ xxmaj and such a one as he , who puts his ' shall , ' 
▁ xxmaj his popular ' shall , ' against a graver bench 
▁ xxmaj than ever frown'd in xxmaj greece . xxmaj by xxmaj jove himself , 
▁ xxmaj it makes the consuls base ; and my soul aches 
▁ xxmaj to know , when two authorities are up , 
▁ xxmaj neither supreme , how soon confusion 
▁ xxmaj may enter ' twixt the gap of both and take 
▁ xxmaj the one by th ' other . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj well , on to th ' market - place . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj whoever gave that counsel to give forth 
▁ xxmaj the corn o ' th ' storehouse gratis , as ' twas us'd 
▁ xxmaj sometime in xxmaj greece- 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj well , well , no more of that . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj though there the people had more absolute pow'r- 
▁ i say they nourish'd disobedience , fed 
▁ xxmaj the ruin of the state . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why shall the people give 
▁ xxmaj one that speaks thus their voice ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj i 'll give my reasons , 
▁ xxmaj more worthier than their voices . xxmaj they know the corn 
▁ xxmaj was not our recompense , resting well assur'd 
▁ xxmaj they ne'er did service for't ; being press'd to th ' war 
▁ xxmaj even when the navel of the state was touch'd , 
▁ xxmaj they would not thread the gates . xxmaj this kind of service 
▁ xxmaj did not deserve corn gratis . xxmaj being i ' th ' war , 
▁ xxmaj their mutinies and revolts , wherein they show'd 
▁ xxmaj most valour , spoke not for them . xxmaj th ' accusation 
▁ xxmaj which they have often made against the xxmaj senate , 
▁ xxmaj all cause unborn , could never be the native 
▁ xxmaj of our so frank donation . xxmaj well , what then ? 
▁ xxmaj how shall this bosom multiplied digest 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj senate 's courtesy ? xxmaj let deeds express 
▁ xxmaj what 's like to be their words : ' we did request it ; 
▁ xxmaj we are the greater poll , and in true fear 
▁ xxmaj they gave us our demands . ' xxmaj thus we debase 
▁ xxmaj the nature of our seats , and make the rabble 
▁ xxmaj call our cares fears ; which will in time 
▁ xxmaj break ope the locks o ' th ' xxmaj senate and bring in 
▁ xxmaj the crows to peck the eagles . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj come , enough . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj enough , with over measure . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj no , take more . 
▁ xxmaj what may be sworn by , both divine and human , 
▁ xxmaj seal what i end withal ! xxmaj this double worship , 
▁ xxmaj where one part does disdain with cause , the other 
▁ xxmaj insult without all reason ; where gentry , title , wisdom , 
▁ xxmaj can not conclude but by the yea and no 
▁ xxmaj of general ignorance- it must omit 
▁ xxmaj real necessities , and give way the while 
▁ xxmaj to unstable slightness . xxmaj purpose so barr'd , it follows 
▁ xxmaj nothing is done to purpose . xxmaj therefore , beseech you- 
▁ xxmaj you that will be less fearful than discreet ; 
▁ xxmaj that love the fundamental part of state 
▁ xxmaj more than you doubt the change on't ; that prefer 
▁ a noble life before a long , and wish 
▁ xxmaj to jump a body with a dangerous physic 
▁ xxmaj that 's sure of death without it- at once pluck out 
▁ xxmaj the multitudinous tongue ; let them not lick 
▁ xxmaj the sweet which is their poison . xxmaj your dishonour 
▁ xxmaj mangles true judgment , and bereaves the state 
▁ xxmaj of that integrity which should become't , 
▁ xxmaj not having the power to do the good it would , 
▁ xxmaj for th ' ill which doth control't . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj has said enough . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj has spoken like a traitor and shall answer 
▁ xxmaj as traitors do . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj thou wretch , despite o'erwhelm thee ! 
▁ xxmaj what should the people do with these bald tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj on whom depending , their obedience fails 
▁ xxmaj to the greater bench ? xxmaj in a rebellion , 
▁ xxmaj when what 's not meet , but what must be , was law , 
▁ xxmaj then were they chosen ; in a better hour 
▁ xxmaj let what is meet be said it must be meet , 
▁ xxmaj and throw their power i ' th ' dust . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj manifest treason ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj this a consul ? xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the aediles , ho ! 

▁ xxmaj enter an xxup aedile 

▁ xxmaj let him be apprehended . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj go call the people , [ exit xxup aedile ] in whose name myself 
▁ xxmaj attach thee as a traitorous innovator , 
▁ a foe to th ' public weal . xxmaj obey , i charge thee , 
▁ xxmaj and follow to thine answer . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj hence , old goat ! 
▁ xxup patricians . xxmaj we 'll surety him . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj ag'd sir , hands off . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj hence , rotten thing ! or i shall shake thy bones 
▁ xxmaj out of thy garments . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj help , ye citizens ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a rabble of plebeians , with the xxup aediles 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj on both sides more respect . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj here 's he that would take from you all your power . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj seize him , aediles . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj down with him ! down with him ! 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj weapons , weapons , weapons ! 
▁ [ they all bustle about xxup coriolanus ] 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj tribunes ! patricians ! citizens ! xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj sicinius ! 
▁ xxmaj brutus ! xxmaj coriolanus ! xxmaj citizens ! 
▁ xxup patricians . xxmaj peace , peace , peace ; stay , hold , peace ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what is about to be ? i am out of breath ; 
▁ xxmaj confusion 's near ; i can not speak . xxmaj you tribunes 
▁ xxmaj to th ' people- xxmaj coriolanus , patience ! 
▁ xxmaj speak , good xxmaj sicinius . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj hear me , people ; peace ! 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj let 's hear our tribune . xxmaj peace ! xxmaj speak , speak , speak . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj you are at point to lose your liberties . 
▁ xxmaj marcius would have all from you ; xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj whom late you have nam'd for consul . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj fie , fie , fie ! 
▁ xxmaj this is the way to kindle , not to quench . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj to unbuild the city , and to lay all flat . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj what is the city but the people ? 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj true , 
▁ xxmaj the people are the city . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj by the consent of all we were establish'd 
▁ xxmaj the people 's magistrates . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj you so remain . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj and so are like to do . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj that is the way to lay the city flat , 
▁ xxmaj to bring the roof to the foundation , 
▁ xxmaj and bury all which yet distinctly ranges 
▁ xxmaj in heaps and piles of ruin . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj this deserves death . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj or let us stand to our authority 
▁ xxmaj or let us lose it . xxmaj we do here pronounce , 
▁ xxmaj upon the part o ' th ' people , in whose power 
▁ xxmaj we were elected theirs : xxmaj marcius is worthy 
▁ xxmaj of present death . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj therefore lay hold of him ; 
▁ xxmaj bear him to th ' rock xxmaj tarpeian , and from thence 
▁ xxmaj into destruction cast him . 
▁ xxup brutus . aediles , seize him . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj yield , xxmaj marcius , yield . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj hear me one word ; beseech you , xxmaj tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj hear me but a word . 
▁ xxup aediles . xxmaj peace , peace ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj be that you seem , truly your country 's friend , 
▁ xxmaj and temp'rately proceed to what you would 
▁ xxmaj thus violently redress . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj sir , those cold ways , 
▁ xxmaj that seem like prudent helps , are very poisonous 
▁ xxmaj where the disease is violent . xxmaj lay hands upon him 
▁ xxmaj and bear him to the rock . 
▁ [ coriolanus draws his sword ] 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj no : xxmaj i 'll die here . 
▁ xxmaj there 's some among you have beheld me fighting ; 
▁ xxmaj come , try upon yourselves what you have seen me . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj down with that sword ! xxmaj tribunes , withdraw awhile . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj lay hands upon him . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj help xxmaj marcius , help , 
▁ xxmaj you that be noble ; help him , young and old . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj down with him , down with him ! 
▁ [ in this mutiny the xxup tribunes , the xxup aediles , 
▁ and the people are beat in ] 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj go , get you to your house ; be gone , away . 
▁ xxmaj all will be nought else . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj get you gone . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj stand fast ; 
▁ xxmaj we have as many friends as enemies . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj shall it be put to that ? 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj the gods forbid ! 
▁ i prithee , noble friend , home to thy house ; 
▁ xxmaj leave us to cure this cause . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj for ' tis a sore upon us 
▁ xxmaj you can not tent yourself ; be gone , beseech you . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj come , sir , along with us . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i would they were barbarians , as they are , 
▁ xxmaj though in xxmaj rome litter'd ; not xxmaj romans , as they are not , 
▁ xxmaj though calved i ' th ' porch o ' th ' xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj be gone . 
▁ xxmaj put not your worthy rage into your tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj one time will owe another . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj on fair ground 
▁ i could beat forty of them . 
▁ xxup menenius . i could myself 
▁ xxmaj take up a brace o ' th ' best of them ; yea , the two tribunes . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj but now ' tis odds beyond arithmetic , 
▁ xxmaj and manhood is call'd foolery when it stands 
▁ xxmaj against a falling fabric . xxmaj will you hence , 
▁ xxmaj before the tag return ? whose rage doth rend 
▁ xxmaj like interrupted waters , and o'erbear 
▁ xxmaj what they are us'd to bear . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj pray you be gone . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll try whether my old wit be in request 
▁ xxmaj with those that have but little ; this must be patch'd 
▁ xxmaj with cloth of any colour . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj nay , come away . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup coriolanus and xxup cominius , with others 
▁ xxup patricians . xxmaj this man has marr'd his fortune . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj his nature is too noble for the world : 
▁ xxmaj he would not flatter xxmaj neptune for his trident , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj jove for 's power to thunder . xxmaj his heart 's his mouth ; 
▁ xxmaj what his breast forges , that his tongue must vent ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being angry , does forget that ever 
▁ xxmaj he heard the name of death . [ a noise within ] 
▁ xxmaj here 's goodly work ! 
▁ xxup patricians . i would they were a - bed . 
▁ xxup menenius . i would they were in xxmaj tiber . 
▁ xxmaj what the vengeance , could he not speak 'em fair ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup brutus and xxup sicinius , the rabble again 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj where is this viper 
▁ xxmaj that would depopulate the city and 
▁ xxmaj be every man himself ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you worthy xxmaj tribunes- 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj he shall be thrown down the xxmaj tarpeian rock 
▁ xxmaj with rigorous hands ; he hath resisted law , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore law shall scorn him further trial 
▁ xxmaj than the severity of the public power , 
▁ xxmaj which he so sets at nought . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj he shall well know 
▁ xxmaj the noble tribunes are the people 's mouths , 
▁ xxmaj and we their hands . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj he shall , sure on't . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj sir , sir- 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj do not cry havoc , where you should but hunt 
▁ xxmaj with modest warrant . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj sir , how comes't that you 
▁ xxmaj have holp to make this rescue ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj hear me speak . 
▁ xxmaj as i do know the consul 's worthiness , 
▁ xxmaj so can i name his faults . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj consul ! xxmaj what consul ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj the consul xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he consul ! 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj no , no , no , no , no . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj if , by the tribunes ' leave , and yours , good people , 
▁ i may be heard , i would crave a word or two ; 
▁ xxmaj the which shall turn you to no further harm 
▁ xxmaj than so much loss of time . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj speak briefly , then , 
▁ xxmaj for we are peremptory to dispatch 
▁ xxmaj this viperous traitor ; to eject him hence 
▁ xxmaj were but one danger , and to keep him here 
▁ xxmaj our certain death ; therefore it is decreed 
▁ xxmaj he dies to - night . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj now the good gods forbid 
▁ xxmaj that our renowned xxmaj rome , whose gratitude 
▁ xxmaj towards her deserved children is enroll'd 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj jove 's own book , like an unnatural dam 
▁ xxmaj should now eat up her own ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj he 's a disease that must be cut away . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxup o , he 's a limb that has but a disease- 
▁ xxmaj mortal , to cut it off : to cure it , easy . 
▁ xxmaj what has he done to xxmaj rome that 's worthy death ? 
▁ xxmaj killing our enemies , the blood he hath lost- 
▁ xxmaj which i dare vouch is more than that he hath 
▁ xxmaj by many an ounce- he dropt it for his country ; 
▁ xxmaj and what is left , to lose it by his country 
▁ xxmaj were to us all that do't and suffer it 
▁ a brand to th ' end o ' th ' world . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj this is clean kam . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj merely awry . xxmaj when he did love his country , 
▁ xxmaj it honour'd him . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj the service of the foot , 
▁ xxmaj being once gangren'd , is not then respected 
▁ xxmaj for what before it was . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj we 'll hear no more . 
▁ xxmaj pursue him to his house and pluck him thence , 
▁ xxmaj lest his infection , being of catching nature , 
▁ xxmaj spread further . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj one word more , one word 
▁ xxmaj this tiger - footed rage , when it shall find 
▁ xxmaj the harm of unscann'd swiftness , will , too late , 
▁ xxmaj tie leaden pounds to 's heels . xxmaj proceed by process , 
▁ xxmaj lest parties- as he is belov'd- break out , 
▁ xxmaj and sack great xxmaj rome with xxmaj romans . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj if it were so- 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj what do ye talk ? 
▁ xxmaj have we not had a taste of his obedience- 
▁ xxmaj our aediles smote , ourselves resisted ? xxmaj come ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj consider this : he has been bred i ' th ' wars 
▁ xxmaj since ' a could draw a sword , and is ill school'd 
▁ xxmaj in bolted language ; meal and bran together 
▁ xxmaj he throws without distinction . xxmaj give me leave , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll go to him and undertake to bring him 
▁ xxmaj where he shall answer by a lawful form , 
▁ xxmaj in peace , to his utmost peril . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj noble xxmaj tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj it is the humane way ; the other course 
▁ xxmaj will prove too bloody , and the end of it 
▁ xxmaj unknown to the beginning . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj noble xxmaj menenius , 
▁ xxmaj be you then as the people 's officer . 
▁ xxmaj masters , lay down your weapons . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj go not home . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj meet on the market - place . xxmaj we 'll attend you there ; 
▁ xxmaj where , if you bring not xxmaj marcius , we 'll proceed 
▁ xxmaj in our first way . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj i 'll bring him to you . 
▁ [ to the xxup senators ] xxmaj let me desire your company ; he must come , 
▁ xxmaj or what is worst will follow . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj pray you let 's to him . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj the house of xxup coriolanus 

 xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus with xxup nobles 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj let them pull all about mine ears , present me 
▁ xxmaj death on the wheel or at wild horses ' heels ; 
▁ xxmaj or pile ten hills on the xxmaj tarpeian rock , 
▁ xxmaj that the precipitation might down stretch 
▁ xxmaj below the beam of sight ; yet will i still 
▁ xxmaj be thus to them . 
▁ xxup first xxup patrician . xxmaj you do the nobler . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i muse my mother 
▁ xxmaj does not approve me further , who was wo nt 
▁ xxmaj to call them woollen vassals , things created 
▁ xxmaj to buy and sell with groats ; to show bare heads 
▁ xxmaj in congregations , to yawn , be still , and wonder , 
▁ xxmaj when one but of my ordinance stood up 
▁ xxmaj to speak of peace or war . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup volumnia 
▁
▁ i talk of you : 
▁ xxmaj why did you wish me milder ? xxmaj would you have me 
▁ xxmaj false to my nature ? xxmaj rather say i play 
▁ xxmaj the man i am . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxup o , sir , sir , sir , 
▁ i would have had you put your power well on 
▁ xxmaj before you had worn it out . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj let go . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj you might have been enough the man you are 
▁ xxmaj with striving less to be so ; lesser had been 
▁ xxmaj the thwartings of your dispositions , if 
▁ xxmaj you had not show'd them how ye were dispos'd , 
▁ xxmaj ere they lack'd power to cross you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj let them hang . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj ay , and burn too . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup menenius with the xxup senators 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj come , come , you have been too rough , something too rough ; 
▁ xxmaj you must return and mend it . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj there 's no remedy , 
▁ xxmaj unless , by not so doing , our good city 
▁ xxmaj cleave in the midst and perish . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj pray be counsell'd ; 
▁ i have a heart as little apt as yours , 
▁ xxmaj but yet a brain that leads my use of anger 
▁ xxmaj to better vantage . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj well said , noble woman ! 
▁ xxmaj before he should thus stoop to th ' herd , but that 
▁ xxmaj the violent fit o ' th ' time craves it as physic 
▁ xxmaj for the whole state , i would put mine armour on , 
▁ xxmaj which i can scarcely bear . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what must i do ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj return to th ' tribunes . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj well , what then , what then ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj repent what you have spoke . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj for them ! i can not do it to the gods ; 
▁ xxmaj must i then do't to them ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj you are too absolute ; 
▁ xxmaj though therein you can never be too noble 
▁ xxmaj but when extremities speak . i have heard you say 
▁ xxmaj honour and policy , like unsever'd friends , 
▁ xxup i ' th ' war do grow together ; grant that , and tell me 
▁ xxmaj in peace what each of them by th ' other lose 
▁ xxmaj that they combine not there . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj tush , tush ! 
▁ xxup menenius . a good demand . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj if it be honour in your wars to seem 
▁ xxmaj the same you are not , which for your best ends 
▁ xxmaj you adopt your policy , how is it less or worse 
▁ xxmaj that it shall hold companionship in peace 
▁ xxmaj with honour as in war ; since that to both 
▁ xxmaj it stands in like request ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj why force you this ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj because that now it lies you on to speak 
▁ xxmaj to th ' people , not by your own instruction , 
▁ xxmaj nor by th ' matter which your heart prompts you , 
▁ xxmaj but with such words that are but roted in 
▁ xxmaj your tongue , though but bastards and syllables 
▁ xxmaj of no allowance to your bosom 's truth . 
▁ xxmaj now , this no more dishonours you at all 
▁ xxmaj than to take in a town with gentle words , 
▁ xxmaj which else would put you to your fortune and 
▁ xxmaj the hazard of much blood . 
▁ i would dissemble with my nature where 
▁ xxmaj my fortunes and my friends at stake requir'd 
▁ i should do so in honour . i am in this 
▁ xxmaj your wife , your son , these senators , the nobles ; 
▁ xxmaj and you will rather show our general louts 
▁ xxmaj how you can frown , than spend a fawn upon 'em 
▁ xxmaj for the inheritance of their loves and safeguard 
▁ xxmaj of what that want might ruin . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj noble lady ! 
▁ xxmaj come , go with us , speak fair ; you may salve so , 
▁ xxmaj not what is dangerous present , but the los 
▁ xxmaj of what is past . 
▁ xxup volumnia . i prithee now , xxmaj my son , 
▁ xxmaj go to them with this bonnet in thy hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and thus far having stretch'd it- here be with them- 
▁ xxmaj thy knee bussing the stones- for in such busines 
▁ xxmaj action is eloquence , and the eyes of th ' ignorant 
▁ xxmaj more learned than the ears- waving thy head , 
▁ xxmaj which often thus correcting thy - stout heart , 
▁ xxmaj now humble as the ripest mulberry 
▁ xxmaj that will not hold the handling . xxmaj or say to them 
▁ xxmaj thou art their soldier and , being bred in broils , 
▁ xxmaj hast not the soft way which , thou dost confess , 
▁ xxmaj were fit for thee to use , as they to claim , 
▁ xxmaj in asking their good loves ; but thou wilt frame 
▁ xxmaj thyself , forsooth , hereafter theirs , so far 
▁ xxmaj as thou hast power and person . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj this but done 
▁ xxmaj even as she speaks , why , their hearts were yours ; 
▁ xxmaj for they have pardons , being ask'd , as free 
▁ xxmaj as words to little purpose . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj prithee now , 
▁ xxmaj go , and be rul'd ; although i know thou hadst rather 
▁ xxmaj follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf 
▁ xxmaj than flatter him in a bower . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup cominius 

▁ xxmaj here is xxmaj cominius . 
▁ xxup cominius . i have been i ' th ' market - place ; and , sir , ' tis fit 
▁ xxmaj you make strong party , or defend yourself 
▁ xxmaj by calmness or by absence ; all 's in anger . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj only fair speech . 
▁ xxup cominius . i think ' twill serve , if he 
▁ xxmaj can thereto frame his spirit . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj he must and will . 
▁ xxmaj prithee now , say you will , and go about it . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj must i go show them my unbarb'd sconce ? xxmaj must i 
▁ xxmaj with my base tongue give to my noble heart 
▁ a lie that it must bear ? xxmaj well , i will do't ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , were there but this single plot to lose , 
▁ xxmaj this mould of xxmaj marcius , they to dust should grind it , 
▁ xxmaj and throw't against the wind . xxmaj to th ' market - place ! 
▁ xxmaj you have put me now to such a part which never 
▁ i shall discharge to th ' life . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj come , come , we 'll prompt you . 
▁ xxup volumnia . i prithee now , sweet son , as thou hast said 
▁ xxmaj my praises made thee first a soldier , so , 
▁ xxmaj to have my praise for this , perform a part 
▁ xxmaj thou hast not done before . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj well , i must do't . 
▁ xxmaj away , my disposition , and possess me 
▁ xxmaj some harlot 's spirit ! xxmaj my throat of war be turn'd , 
▁ xxmaj which quier'd with my drum , into a pipe 
▁ xxmaj small as an eunuch or the virgin voice 
▁ xxmaj that babies lulls asleep ! xxmaj the smiles of knaves 
▁ xxmaj tent in my cheeks , and schoolboys ' tears take up 
▁ xxmaj the glasses of my sight ! a beggar 's tongue 
▁ xxmaj make motion through my lips , and my arm'd knees , 
▁ xxmaj who bow'd but in my stirrup , bend like his 
▁ xxmaj that hath receiv'd an alms ! i will not do't , 
▁ xxmaj lest i surcease to honour mine own truth , 
▁ xxmaj and by my body 's action teach my mind 
▁ a most inherent baseness . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj at thy choice , then . 
▁ xxmaj to beg of thee , it is my more dishonour 
▁ xxmaj than thou of them . xxmaj come all to ruin . xxmaj let 
▁ xxmaj thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear 
▁ xxmaj thy dangerous stoutness ; for i mock at death 
▁ xxmaj with as big heart as thou . xxmaj do as thou list . 
▁ xxmaj thy valiantness was mine , thou suck'dst it from me ; 
▁ xxmaj but owe thy pride thyself . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj pray be content . 
▁ xxmaj mother , i am going to the market - place ; 
▁ xxmaj chide me no more . xxmaj i 'll mountebank their loves , 
▁ xxmaj cog their hearts from them , and come home belov'd 
▁ xxmaj of all the trades in xxmaj rome . xxmaj look , i am going . 
▁ xxmaj commend me to my wife . xxmaj i 'll return consul , 
▁ xxmaj or never trust to what my tongue can do 
▁ xxup i ' th ' way of flattery further . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj do your will . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj away ! xxmaj the tribunes do attend you . xxmaj arm yourself 
▁ xxmaj to answer mildly ; for they are prepar'd 
▁ xxmaj with accusations , as i hear , more strong 
▁ xxmaj than are upon you yet . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj the word is ' mildly . ' xxmaj pray you let us go . 
▁ xxmaj let them accuse me by invention ; i 
▁ xxmaj will answer in mine honour . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj ay , but mildly . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj well , mildly be it then- mildly . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj the xxmaj forum 

 xxmaj enter xxup sicinius and xxup brutus 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj in this point charge him home , that he affects 
▁ xxmaj tyrannical power . xxmaj if he evade us there , 
▁ xxmaj enforce him with his envy to the people , 
▁ xxmaj and that the spoil got on the xxmaj antiates 
▁ xxmaj was ne'er distributed . 

▁ xxmaj enter an xxup aedile 

▁ xxmaj what , will he come ? 
▁ xxup aedile . xxmaj he 's coming . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj how accompanied ? 
▁ xxup aedile . xxmaj with old xxmaj menenius , and those senators 
▁ xxmaj that always favour'd him . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj have you a catalogue 
▁ xxmaj of all the voices that we have procur'd , 
▁ xxmaj set down by th ' poll ? 
▁ xxup aedile . i have ; ' tis ready . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj have you corrected them by tribes ? 
▁ xxup aedile . i have . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj assemble presently the people hither ; 
▁ xxmaj and when they hear me say ' it shall be so 
▁ xxup i ' th ' right and strength o ' th ' commons ' be it either 
▁ xxmaj for death , for fine , or banishment , then let them , 
▁ xxmaj if i say fine , cry ' fine!'- if death , cry ' death ! ' 
▁ xxmaj insisting on the old prerogative 
▁ xxmaj and power i ' th ' truth o ' th ' cause . 
▁ xxup aedile . i shall inform them . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj and when such time they have begun to cry , 
▁ xxmaj let them not cease , but with a din confus'd 
▁ xxmaj enforce the present execution 
▁ xxmaj of what we chance to sentence . 
▁ xxup aedile . xxmaj very well . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj make them be strong , and ready for this hint , 
▁ xxmaj when we shall hap to give't them . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj go about it . xxmaj exit xxup aedile 
▁ xxmaj put him to choler straight . xxmaj he hath been us'd 
▁ xxmaj ever to conquer , and to have his worth 
▁ xxmaj of contradiction ; being once chaf'd , he can not 
▁ xxmaj be rein'd again to temperance ; then he speaks 
▁ xxmaj what 's in his heart , and that is there which looks 
▁ xxmaj with us to break his neck . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , xxup menenius and xxup cominius , with others 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj well , here he comes . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj calmly , i do beseech you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj ay , as an ostler , that for th ' poorest piece 
▁ xxmaj will bear the knave by th ' volume . xxmaj th ' honour'd gods 
▁ xxmaj keep xxmaj rome in safety , and the chairs of justice 
▁ xxmaj supplied with worthy men ! plant love among 's ! 
▁ xxmaj throng our large temples with the shows of peace , 
▁ xxmaj and not our streets with war ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj amen , amen ! 
▁ xxup menenius . a noble wish . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the.aedile , with the plebeians 
▁
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj draw near , ye people . 
▁ xxup aedile . xxmaj list to your tribunes . xxmaj audience ! peace , i say ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj first , hear me speak . 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj well , say . xxmaj peace , ho ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj shall i be charg'd no further than this present ?