xxbos xxmaj must all determine here ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . i do demand , 
▁ xxmaj if you submit you to the people 's voices , 
▁ xxmaj allow their officers , and are content 
▁ xxmaj to suffer lawful censure for such faults 
▁ xxmaj as shall be prov'd upon you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i am content . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj lo , citizens , he says he is content . 
▁ xxmaj the warlike service he has done , consider ; think 
▁ xxmaj upon the wounds his body bears , which show 
▁ xxmaj like graves i ' th ' holy churchyard . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj scratches with briers , 
▁ xxmaj scars to move laughter only . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj consider further , 
▁ xxmaj that when he speaks not like a citizen , 
▁ xxmaj you find him like a soldier ; do not take 
▁ xxmaj his rougher accents for malicious sounds , 
▁ xxmaj but , as i say , such as become a soldier 
▁ xxmaj rather than envy you . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj well , well ! xxmaj no more . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what is the matter , 
▁ xxmaj that being pass'd for consul with full voice , 
▁ i am so dishonour'd that the very hour 
▁ xxmaj you take it off again ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj answer to us . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj say then ; ' tis true , i ought so . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj we charge you that you have contriv'd to take 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj rome all season'd office , and to wind 
▁ xxmaj yourself into a power tyrannical ; 
▁ xxmaj for which you are a traitor to the people . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj how- traitor ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj nay , temperately ! xxmaj your promise . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj the fires i ' th ' lowest hell fold in the people ! 
▁ xxmaj call me their traitor ! xxmaj thou injurious tribune ! 
▁ xxmaj within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths , 
▁ xxmaj in thy hands clutch'd as many millions , in 
▁ xxmaj thy lying tongue both numbers , i would say 
▁ ' thou liest ' unto thee with a voice as free 
▁ xxmaj as i do pray the gods . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj mark you this , people ? 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj to th ' rock , to th ' rock , with him ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxmaj we need not put new matter to his charge . 
▁ xxmaj what you have seen him do and heard him speak , 
▁ xxmaj beating your officers , cursing yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj opposing laws with strokes , and here defying 
▁ xxmaj those whose great power must try him- even this , 
▁ xxmaj so criminal and in such capital kind , 
▁ xxmaj deserves th ' extremest death . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj but since he hath 
▁ xxmaj serv'd well for xxmaj rome- 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what do you prate of service ? 
▁ xxup brutus . i talk of that that know it . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj you ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj is this the promise that you made your mother ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj know , i pray you- 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj i 'll know no further . 
▁ xxmaj let them pronounce the steep xxmaj tarpeian death , 
▁ xxmaj vagabond exile , flaying , pent to linger 
▁ xxmaj but with a grain a day , i would not buy 
▁ xxmaj their mercy at the price of one fair word , 
▁ xxmaj nor check my courage for what they can give , 
▁ xxmaj to have't with saying ' good morrow . ' 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj for that he has- 
▁ xxmaj as much as in him lies- from time to time 
▁ xxmaj envied against the people , seeking means 
▁ xxmaj to pluck away their power ; as now at last 
▁ xxmaj given hostile strokes , and that not in the presence 
▁ xxmaj of dreaded justice , but on the ministers 
▁ xxmaj that do distribute it- in the name o ' th ' people , 
▁ xxmaj and in the power of us the tribunes , we , 
▁ xxmaj ev'n from this instant , banish him our city , 
▁ xxmaj in peril of precipitation 
▁ xxmaj from off the rock xxmaj tarpeian , never more 
▁ xxmaj to enter our xxmaj rome gates . xxup i ' th ' people 's name , 
▁ i say it shall be so . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj it shall be so , it shall be so ! xxmaj let him away ! 
▁ xxmaj he 's banish'd , and it shall be so . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj hear me , my masters and my common friends- 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj he 's sentenc'd ; no more hearing . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj let me speak . 
▁ i have been consul , and can show for xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj her enemies ' marks upon me . i do love 
▁ xxmaj my country 's good with a respect more tender , 
▁ xxmaj more holy and profound , than mine own life , 
▁ xxmaj my dear wife 's estimate , her womb 's increase 
▁ xxmaj and treasure of my loins . xxmaj then if i would 
▁ xxmaj speak that- 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj we know your drift . xxmaj speak what ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj there 's no more to be said , but he is banish'd , 
▁ xxmaj as enemy to the people and his country . 
▁ xxmaj it shall be so . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj it shall be so , it shall be so . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxup you common cry of curs , whose breath i hate 
▁ xxmaj as reek o ' th ' rotten fens , whose loves i prize 
▁ xxmaj as the dead carcasses of unburied men 
▁ xxmaj that do corrupt my air- i banish you . 
▁ xxmaj and here remain with your uncertainty ! 
▁ xxmaj let every feeble rumour shake your hearts ; 
▁ xxmaj your enemies , with nodding of their plumes , 
▁ xxmaj fan you into despair ! xxmaj have the power still 
▁ xxmaj to banish your defenders , till at length 
▁ xxmaj your ignorance- which finds not till it feels , 
▁ xxmaj making but reservation of yourselves 
▁ xxmaj still your own foes- deliver you 
▁ xxmaj as most abated captives to some nation 
▁ xxmaj that won you without blows ! xxmaj despising 
▁ xxmaj for you the city , thus i turn my back ; 
▁ xxmaj there is a world elsewhere . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup coriolanus , 
▁ xxup cominius , xxup menenius , with the other xxup patricians 
▁ xxup aedile . xxmaj the people 's enemy is gone , is gone ! 
▁ [ they all shout and throw up their caps ] 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj our enemy is banish'd , he is gone ! xxmaj hoo - oo ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj go see him out at gates , and follow him , 
▁ xxmaj as he hath follow'd you , with all despite ; 
▁ xxmaj give him deserv'd vexation . xxmaj let a guard 
▁ xxmaj attend us through the city . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj come , come , let 's see him out at gates ; come ! 
▁ xxmaj the gods preserve our noble tribunes ! xxmaj come . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj before a gate of the city 

 xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , xxup volumnia , xxup virgilia , xxup menenius , xxup cominius , 
 with the young xxup nobility of xxmaj rome 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj come , leave your tears ; a brief farewell . xxmaj the beast 
▁ xxmaj with many heads butts me away . xxmaj nay , mother , 
▁ xxmaj where is your ancient courage ? xxmaj you were us'd 
▁ xxmaj to say extremities was the trier of spirits ; 
▁ xxmaj that common chances common men could bear ; 
▁ xxmaj that when the sea was calm all boats alike 
▁ xxmaj show'd mastership in floating ; fortune 's blows , 
▁ xxmaj when most struck home , being gentle wounded craves 
▁ a noble cunning . xxmaj you were us'd to load me 
▁ xxmaj with precepts that would make invincible 
▁ xxmaj the heart that conn'd them . 
▁ xxup virgilia . o heavens ! o heavens ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj nay , i prithee , woman- 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj now the red pestilence strike all trades in xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and occupations perish ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what , what , what ! 
▁ i shall be lov'd when i am lack'd . xxmaj nay , mother , 
▁ xxmaj resume that spirit when you were wo nt to say , 
▁ xxmaj if you had been the wife of xxmaj hercules , 
▁ xxmaj six of his labours you 'd have done , and sav'd 
▁ xxmaj your husband so much sweat . xxmaj cominius , 
▁ xxmaj droop not ; adieu . xxmaj farewell , my wife , my mother . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do well yet . xxmaj thou old and true xxmaj menenius , 
▁ xxmaj thy tears are salter than a younger man 's 
▁ xxmaj and venomous to thine eyes . xxmaj my sometime xxmaj general , 
▁ i have seen thee stern , and thou hast oft beheld 
▁ xxmaj heart - hard'ning spectacles ; tell these sad women 
▁ ' tis fond to wail inevitable strokes , 
▁ xxmaj as ' tis to laugh at 'em . xxmaj my mother , you wot well 
▁ xxmaj my hazards still have been your solace ; and 
▁ xxmaj believe't not lightly- though i go alone , 
▁ xxmaj like to a lonely dragon , that his fen 
▁ xxmaj makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen- your son 
▁ xxmaj will or exceed the common or be caught 
▁ xxmaj with cautelous baits and practice . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj my first son , 
▁ xxmaj whither wilt thou go ? xxmaj take good xxmaj cominius 
▁ xxmaj with thee awhile ; determine on some course 
▁ xxmaj more than a wild exposture to each chance 
▁ xxmaj that starts i ' th ' way before thee . 
▁ xxup virgilia . o the gods ! 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj i 'll follow thee a month , devise with the 
▁ xxmaj where thou shalt rest , that thou mayst hear of us , 
▁ xxmaj and we of thee ; so , if the time thrust forth 
▁ a cause for thy repeal , we shall not send 
▁ xxmaj o'er the vast world to seek a single man , 
▁ xxmaj and lose advantage , which doth ever cool 
▁ xxup i ' th ' absence of the needer . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj fare ye well ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast years upon thee , and thou art too full 
▁ xxmaj of the wars ' surfeits to go rove with one 
▁ xxmaj that 's yet unbruis'd ; bring me but out at gate . 
▁ xxmaj come , my sweet wife , my dearest mother , and 
▁ xxmaj my friends of noble touch ; when i am forth , 
▁ xxmaj bid me farewell , and smile . i pray you come . 
▁ xxmaj while i remain above the ground you shall 
▁ xxmaj hear from me still , and never of me aught 
▁ xxmaj but what is like me formerly . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj that 's worthily 
▁ xxmaj as any ear can hear . xxmaj come , let 's not weep . 
▁ xxmaj if i could shake off but one seven years 
▁ xxmaj from these old arms and legs , by the good gods , 
▁ xxmaj i 'd with thee every foot . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj give me thy hand . 
▁ xxmaj come . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . a street near the gate 

 xxmaj enter the two xxmaj tribunes , xxup sicinius and xxup brutus with the xxup aedile 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj bid them all home ; he 's gone , and we 'll no further . 
▁ xxmaj the nobility are vex'd , whom we see have sided 
▁ xxmaj in his behalf . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj now we have shown our power , 
▁ xxmaj let us seem humbler after it is done 
▁ xxmaj than when it was a - doing . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj bid them home . 
▁ xxmaj say their great enemy is gone , and they 
▁ xxmaj stand in their ancient strength . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj dismiss them home . xxmaj exit xxup aedile 
▁ xxmaj here comes his mother . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup volumnia , xxup virgilia , and xxup menenius 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj let 's not meet her . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj they say she 's mad . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj they have ta'en note of us ; keep on your way . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxup o , xxmaj y'are well met ; th ' hoarded plague o ' th ' gods 
▁ xxmaj requite your love ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj peace , peace , be not so loud . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj if that i could for weeping , you should hear- 
▁ xxmaj nay , and you shall hear some . [ to xxup brutus ] xxmaj will you be gone ? 
▁ xxup virgilia . [ to xxup sicinius ] xxmaj you shall stay too . i would i had the 
▁ power 
▁ xxmaj to say so to my husband . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj are you mankind ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj ay , fool ; is that a shame ? xxmaj note but this , fool : 
▁ xxmaj was not a man my father ? xxmaj hadst thou foxship 
▁ xxmaj to banish him that struck more blows for xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj than thou hast spoken words ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . o blessed heavens ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj moe noble blows than ever thou wise words ; 
▁ xxmaj and for xxmaj rome 's good . xxmaj i 'll tell thee what- yet go ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , but thou shalt stay too . i would my son 
▁ xxmaj were in xxmaj arabia , and thy tribe before him , 
▁ xxmaj his good sword in his hand . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj what then ! 
▁ xxmaj he 'd make an end of thy posterity . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj bastards and all . 
▁ xxmaj good man , the wounds that he does bear for xxmaj rome ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj come , come , peace . 
▁ xxup sicinius . i would he had continued to his country 
▁ xxmaj as he began , and not unknit himself 
▁ xxmaj the noble knot he made . 
▁ xxup brutus . i would he had . 
▁ xxup volumnia . ' i would he had ! ' ' twas you incens'd the rabble- 
▁ xxmaj cats that can judge as fitly of his worth 
▁ xxmaj as i can of those mysteries which heaven 
▁ xxmaj will not have earth to know . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj pray , let 's go . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj now , pray , sir , get you gone ; 
▁ xxmaj you have done a brave deed . xxmaj ere you go , hear this : 
▁ xxmaj as far as doth the xxmaj capitol exceed 
▁ xxmaj the meanest house in xxmaj rome , so far my son- 
▁ xxmaj this lady 's husband here , this , do you see?- 
▁ xxmaj whom you have banish'd does exceed you an . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj well , well , we 'll leave you . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj why stay we to be baited 
▁ xxmaj with one that wants her wits ? xxmaj exeunt xxup tribunes 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj take my prayers with you . 
▁ i would the gods had nothing else to do 
▁ xxmaj but to confirm my curses . xxmaj could i meet 'em 
▁ xxmaj but once a day , it would unclog my heart 
▁ xxmaj of what lies heavy to't . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you have told them home , 
▁ xxmaj and , by my troth , you have cause . xxmaj you 'll sup with me ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj anger 's my meat ; i sup upon myself , 
▁ xxmaj and so shall starve with feeding . xxmaj come , let 's go . 
▁ xxmaj leave this faint puling and lament as i do , 
▁ xxmaj in anger , xxmaj juno - like . xxmaj come , come , come . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup volumnia and xxup virgilia 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj fie , fie , fie ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a highway between xxmaj rome and xxmaj antium 

 xxmaj enter a xxup roman and a xxup volsce , meeting 

▁ xxup roman . i know you well , sir , and you know me ; your name , i think , 
▁ is xxmaj adrian . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj it is so , sir . xxmaj truly , i have forgot you . 
▁ xxup roman . i am a xxmaj roman ; and my services are , as you are , against 'em . 
▁ xxmaj know you me yet ? 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj nicanor ? xxmaj no ! 
▁ xxup roman . xxmaj the same , sir . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxup you had more beard when i last saw you , but your favour is 
▁ well appear'd by your tongue . xxmaj what 's the news in xxmaj rome ? i have a 
▁ note from the xxmaj volscian state , to find you out there . xxmaj you have 
▁ well saved me a day 's journey . 
▁ xxup roman . xxmaj there hath been in xxmaj rome strange insurrections : the people 
▁ against the senators , patricians , and nobles . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj hath been ! xxmaj is it ended , then ? xxmaj our state thinks not so ; they 
▁ are in a most warlike preparation , and hope to come upon them in 
▁ the heat of their division . 
▁ xxup roman . xxmaj the main blaze of it is past , but a small thing would make 
▁ it flame again ; for the nobles receive so to heart the banishment 
▁ of that worthy xxmaj coriolanus that they are in a ripe aptness to take 
▁ all power from the people , and to pluck from them their tribunes 
▁ for ever . xxmaj this lies glowing , i can tell you , and is almost mature 
▁ for the violent breaking out . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj coriolanus banish'd ! 
▁ xxup roman . xxmaj banish'd , sir . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj you will be welcome with this intelligence , xxmaj nicanor . 
▁ xxup roman . xxmaj the day serves well for them now . i have heard it said the 
▁ fittest time to corrupt a man 's wife is when she 's fall'n out 
▁ with her husband . xxmaj your noble xxmaj tullus xxmaj aufidius will appear well in 
▁ these wars , his great opposer , xxmaj coriolanus , being now in no 
▁ request of his country . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj he can not choose . i am most fortunate thus accidentally to 
▁ encounter you ; you have ended my business , and i will merrily 
▁ accompany you home . 
▁ xxup roman . i shall between this and supper tell you most strange things 
▁ from xxmaj rome , all tending to the good of their adversaries . xxmaj have you 
▁ an army ready , say you ? 
▁ xxup volsce . a most royal one : the centurions and their charges , 
▁ distinctly billeted , already in th ' entertainment , and to be on 
▁ foot at an hour 's warning . 
▁ xxup roman . i am joyful to hear of their readiness , and am the man , i 
▁ think , that shall set them in present action . xxmaj so , sir , heartily 
▁ well met , and most glad of your company . 
▁ xxup volsce . xxmaj you take my part from me , sir . i have the most cause to be 
▁ glad of yours . 
▁ xxup roman . xxmaj well , let us go together . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj antium . xxmaj before xxup aufidius ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , in mean apparel , disguis'd and muffled 

▁ xxup coriolanus . a goodly city is this xxmaj antium . xxmaj city , 
▁ ' tis i that made thy widows : many an heir 
▁ xxmaj of these fair edifices fore my wars 
▁ xxmaj have i heard groan and drop . xxmaj then know me not . 
▁ xxmaj lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones , 
▁ xxmaj in puny battle slay me . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup citizen 

▁ xxmaj save you , sir . 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj and you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj direct me , if it be your will , 
▁ xxmaj where great xxmaj aufidius lies . xxmaj is he in xxmaj antium ? 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj he is , and feasts the nobles of the state 
▁ xxmaj at his house this night . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj which is his house , beseech you ? 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj this here before you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj thank you , sir ; farewell . xxmaj exit xxup citizen 
▁ o world , thy slippery turns ! xxmaj friends now fast sworn , 
▁ xxmaj whose double bosoms seems to wear one heart , 
▁ xxmaj whose hours , whose bed , whose meal and exercise 
▁ xxmaj are still together , who twin , as ' twere , in love , 
▁ xxmaj unseparable , shall within this hour , 
▁ xxmaj on a dissension of a doit , break out 
▁ xxmaj to bitterest enmity ; so fellest foes , 
▁ xxmaj whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep 
▁ xxmaj to take the one the other , by some chance , 
▁ xxmaj some trick not worth an egg , shall grow dear friends 
▁ xxmaj and interjoin their issues . xxmaj so with me : 
▁ xxmaj my birthplace hate xxup i , and my love 's upon 
▁ xxmaj this enemy town . xxmaj i 'll enter . xxmaj if he slay me , 
▁ xxmaj he does fair justice : if he give me way , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do his country service . 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj antium . xxup aufidius ' house 

 xxmaj music plays . xxmaj enter a xxup servingman 

▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj wine , wine , wine ! xxmaj what service is here ! i think our 
▁ fellows are asleep . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup servingman 

▁ xxup second servant.where 's xxmaj cotus ? xxmaj my master calls for him . 
▁ xxmaj cotus ! xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus 

▁ xxup coriolanus . a goodly house . xxmaj the feast smells well , but i 
▁ xxmaj appear not like a guest . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the first xxup servingman 

▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj what would you have , friend ? 
▁ xxmaj whence are you ? xxmaj here 's no place for you : pray go to the door . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i have deserv'd no better entertainment 
▁ xxmaj in being xxmaj coriolanus . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter second xxup servingman 

▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj whence are you , sir ? xxmaj has the porter his eyes in his 
▁ head that he gives entrance to such companions ? xxmaj pray get you out . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj away ! 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj away ? xxmaj get you away . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj now th ' art troublesome . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj are you so brave ? xxmaj i 'll have you talk'd with anon . 

▁ xxmaj enter a third xxup servingman . xxmaj the first meets him 

▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj what fellow 's this ? 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . a strange one as ever i look'd on . i can not get him 
▁ out o ' th ' house . xxmaj prithee call my master to him . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj what have you to do here , fellow ? xxmaj pray you avoid the 
▁ house . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj let me but stand- i will not hurt your hearth . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . a gentleman . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . a marv'llous poor one . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj true , so i am . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj pray you , poor gentleman , take up some other 
▁ station ; here 's no place for you . xxmaj pray you avoid . xxmaj come . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj follow your function , go and batten on cold bits . 
▁ [ pushes him away from him ] 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj what , you will not ? xxmaj prithee tell my master what a 
▁ strange guest he has here . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj and i shall . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj where dwell'st thou ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj under the canopy . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj under the canopy ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj where 's that ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxup i ' th ' city of kites and crows . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxup i ' th ' city of kites and crows ! 
▁ xxmaj what an ass it is ! xxmaj then thou dwell'st with daws too ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj no , i serve not thy master . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj how , sir ! xxmaj do you meddle with my master ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj ay ; ' tis an honester service than to meddle with thy 
▁ mistress . xxmaj thou prat'st and prat'st ; serve with thy trencher ; 
▁ hence ! [ beats him away ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aufidius with the second xxup servingman 

▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj where is this fellow ? 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj here , sir ; xxmaj i 'd have beaten him like a dog , but for 
▁ disturbing the lords within . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj whence com'st thou ? xxmaj what wouldst thou ? xxmaj thy name ? 
▁ xxmaj why speak'st not ? xxmaj speak , man . xxmaj what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . [ unmuffling ] xxmaj if , xxmaj tullus , 
▁ xxmaj not yet thou know'st me , and , seeing me , dost not 
▁ xxmaj think me for the man i am , necessity 
▁ xxmaj commands me name myself . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj what is thy name ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . a name unmusical to the xxmaj volscians ' ears , 
▁ xxmaj and harsh in sound to thine . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj say , what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxmaj thou has a grim appearance , and thy face 
▁ xxmaj bears a command in't ; though thy tackle 's torn , 
▁ xxmaj thou show'st a noble vessel . xxmaj what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj prepare thy brow to frown- know'st thou me yet ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . i know thee not . xxmaj thy name ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj my name is xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius , who hath done 
▁ xxmaj to thee particularly , and to all the xxmaj volsces , 
▁ xxmaj great hurt and mischief ; thereto witness may 
▁ xxmaj my surname , xxmaj coriolanus . xxmaj the painful service , 
▁ xxmaj the extreme dangers , and the drops of blood 
▁ xxmaj shed for my thankless country , are requited 
▁ xxmaj but with that surname- a good memory 
▁ xxmaj and witness of the malice and displeasure 
▁ xxmaj which thou shouldst bear me . xxmaj only that name remains ; 
▁ xxmaj the cruelty and envy of the people , 
▁ xxmaj permitted by our dastard nobles , who 
▁ xxmaj have all forsook me , hath devour'd the rest , 
▁ xxmaj an suffer'd me by th ' voice of slaves to be 
▁ xxmaj whoop'd out of xxmaj rome . xxmaj now this extremity 
▁ xxmaj hath brought me to thy hearth ; not out of hope , 
▁ xxmaj mistake me not , to save my life ; for if 
▁ i had fear'd death , of all the men i ' th ' world 
▁ i would have ' voided thee ; but in mere spite , 
▁ xxmaj to be full quit of those my banishers , 
▁ xxmaj stand i before thee here . xxmaj then if thou hast 
▁ a heart of wreak in thee , that wilt revenge 
▁ xxmaj thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims 
▁ xxmaj of shame seen through thy country , speed thee straight 
▁ xxmaj and make my misery serve thy turn . xxmaj so use it 
▁ xxmaj that my revengeful services may prove 
▁ xxmaj as benefits to thee ; for i will fight 
▁ xxmaj against my cank'red country with the spleen 
▁ xxmaj of all the under fiends . xxmaj but if so be 
▁ xxmaj thou dar'st not this , and that to prove more fortunes 
▁ xxmaj th'art tir'd , then , in a word , i also am 
▁ xxmaj longer to live most weary , and present 
▁ xxmaj my throat to thee and to thy ancient malice ; 
▁ xxmaj which not to cut would show thee but a fool , 
▁ xxmaj since i have ever followed thee with hate , 
▁ xxmaj drawn tuns of blood out of thy country 's breast , 
▁ xxmaj and can not live but to thy shame , unless 
▁ xxmaj it be to do thee service . 
▁ xxup aufidius . o xxmaj marcius , xxmaj marcius ! 
▁ xxmaj each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart 
▁ a root of ancient envy . xxmaj if xxmaj jupiter 
▁ xxmaj should from yond cloud speak divine things , 
▁ xxmaj and say '' tis true , ' xxmaj i 'd not believe them more 
▁ xxmaj than thee , all noble xxmaj marcius . xxmaj let me twine 
▁ xxmaj mine arms about that body , where against 
▁ xxmaj my grained ash an hundred times hath broke 
▁ xxmaj and scarr'd the moon with splinters ; here i clip 
▁ xxmaj the anvil of my sword , and do contest 
▁ xxmaj as hotly and as nobly with thy love 
▁ xxmaj as ever in ambitious strength i did 
▁ xxmaj contend against thy valour . xxmaj know thou first , 
▁ i lov'd the maid i married ; never man 
▁ xxmaj sigh'd truer breath ; but that i see thee here , 
▁ xxmaj thou noble thing , more dances my rapt heart 
▁ xxmaj than when i first my wedded mistress saw 
▁ xxmaj bestride my threshold . xxmaj why , thou xxmaj mars , i tell the 
▁ xxmaj we have a power on foot , and i had purpose 
▁ xxmaj once more to hew thy target from thy brawn , 
▁ xxmaj or lose mine arm for't . xxmaj thou hast beat me out 
▁ xxmaj twelve several times , and i have nightly since 
▁ xxmaj dreamt of encounters ' twixt thyself and me- 
▁ xxmaj we have been down together in my sleep , 
▁ xxmaj unbuckling helms , fisting each other 's throat- 
▁ xxmaj and wak'd half dead with nothing . xxmaj worthy xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj had we no other quarrel else to xxmaj rome but that 
▁ xxmaj thou art thence banish'd , we would muster all 
▁ xxmaj from twelve to seventy , and , pouring war 
▁ xxmaj into the bowels of ungrateful xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj like a bold flood o'erbeat . xxup o , come , go in , 
▁ xxmaj and take our friendly senators by th ' hands , 
▁ xxmaj who now are here , taking their leaves of me 
▁ xxmaj who am prepar'd against your territories , 
▁ xxmaj though not for xxmaj rome itself . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj you bless me , gods ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj therefore , most . absolute sir , if thou wilt have 
▁ xxmaj the leading of thine own revenges , take 
▁ xxmaj th ' one half of my commission , and set down- 
▁ xxmaj as best thou art experienc'd , since thou know'st 
▁ xxmaj thy country 's strength and weakness- thine own ways , 
▁ xxmaj whether to knock against the gates of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj or rudely visit them in parts remote 
▁ xxmaj to fright them ere destroy . xxmaj but come in ; 
▁ xxmaj let me commend thee first to those that shall 
▁ xxmaj say yea to thy desires . a thousand welcomes ! 
▁ xxmaj and more a friend than e'er an enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , xxmaj marcius , that was much . xxmaj your hand ; most welcome ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup coriolanus and xxup aufidius 

▁ xxmaj the two xxup servingmen come forward 

▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj here 's a strange alteration ! 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj by my hand , i had thought to have strucken him with 
▁ a cudgel ; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a false report 
▁ of him . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj what an arm he has ! xxmaj he turn'd me about with his 
▁ finger and his thumb , as one would set up a top . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj nay , i knew by his face that there was something in 
▁ him ; he had , sir , a kind of face , methought- i can not tell how to 
▁ term it . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj he had so , looking as it were- xxmaj would i were hang'd , 
▁ but i thought there was more in him than i could think . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj so did xxup i , xxmaj i 'll be sworn . xxmaj he is simply the rarest 
▁ man i ' th ' world . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . i think he is ; but a greater soldier than he you wot 
▁ on . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj who , my master ? 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj nay , it 's no matter for that . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj worth six on him . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj nay , not so neither ; but i take him to be the 
▁ greater soldier . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj faith , look you , one can not tell how to say that ; 
▁ for the defence of a town our general is excellent . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj ay , and for an assault too . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the third xxup servingman 

▁ xxup third xxup servant . o slaves , i can tell you news- news , you rascals ! 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj what , what , what ? xxmaj let 's partake . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . i would not be a xxmaj roman , of all nations ; 
▁ i had as lief be a condemn'd man . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj wherefore ? wherefore ? 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj why , here 's he that was wo nt to thwack our general- 
▁ xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj why do you say ' thwack our general ' ? 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . i do not say ' thwack our general , ' but he was always 
▁ good enough for him . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj come , we are fellows and friends . xxmaj he was ever too 
▁ hard for him , i have heard him say so himself . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj he was too hard for him directly , to say the troth 
▁ on't ; before xxmaj corioli he scotch'd him and notch'd him like a 
▁ carbonado . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj an he had been cannibally given , he might have 
▁ broil'd and eaten him too . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj but more of thy news ! 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj why , he is so made on here within as if he were son 
▁ and heir to xxmaj mars ; set at upper end o ' th ' table ; no question 
▁ asked him by any of the senators but they stand bald before him . 
▁ xxmaj our general himself makes a mistress of him , sanctifies himself 
▁ with 's hand , and turns up the white o ' th ' eye to his discourse . 
▁ xxmaj but the bottom of the news is , our general is cut i ' th ' middle 
▁ and but one half of what he was yesterday , for the other has half 
▁ by the entreaty and grant of the whole table . xxmaj he 'll go , he says , 
▁ and sowl the porter of xxmaj rome gates by th ' ears ; he will mow all 
▁ down before him , and leave his passage poll'd . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj and he 's as like to do't as any man i can imagine . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj do't ! xxmaj he will do't ; for look you , sir , he has as 
▁ many friends as enemies ; which friends , sir , as it were , durst 
▁ not- look you , sir- show themselves , as we term it , his friends , 
▁ whilst he 's in directitude . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj directitude ? xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj but when they shall see , sir , his crest up again and 
▁ the man in blood , they will out of their burrows , like conies 
▁ after rain , and revel an with him . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj but when goes this forward ? 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj to - morrow , to - day , presently . xxmaj you shall have the 
▁ drum struck up this afternoon ; ' tis as it were parcel of their 
▁ feast , and to be executed ere they wipe their lips . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj why , then we shall have a stirring world again . 
▁ xxmaj this peace is nothing but to rust iron , increase tailors , and 
▁ breed ballad - makers . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj let me have war , say xxup i ; it exceeds peace as far as 
▁ day does night ; it 's spritely , waking , audible , and full of vent . 
▁ xxmaj peace is a very apoplexy , lethargy ; mull'd , deaf , sleepy , 
▁ insensible ; a getter of more bastard children than war 's a 
▁ destroyer of men . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . ' tis so ; and as war in some sort may be said to be 
▁ a ravisher , so it can not be denied but peace is a great maker of 
▁ cuckolds . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj ay , and it makes men hate one another . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj reason : because they then less need one another . xxmaj the 
▁ wars for my money . i hope to see xxmaj romans as cheap as xxmaj volscians . 
▁ xxmaj they are rising , they are rising . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj in , in , in , in ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj rome . a public place 

 xxmaj enter the two xxmaj tribunes , xxup sicinius and xxup brutus 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj we hear not of him , neither need we fear him . 
▁ xxmaj his remedies are tame . xxmaj the present peace 
▁ xxmaj and quietness of the people , which before 
▁ xxmaj were in wild hurry , here do make his friends 
▁ xxmaj blush that the world goes well ; who rather had , 
▁ xxmaj though they themselves did suffer by't , behold 
▁ xxmaj dissentious numbers pest'ring streets than see 
▁ xxmaj our tradesmen singing in their shops , and going 
▁ xxmaj about their functions friendly . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup menenius 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj we stood to't in good time . xxmaj is this xxmaj menenius ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . ' tis he , ' tis he . xxup o , he is grown most kind 
▁ xxmaj of late . xxmaj hail , sir ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj hail to you both ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj your xxmaj coriolanus is not much miss'd 
▁ xxmaj but with his friends . xxmaj the commonwealth doth stand , 
▁ xxmaj and so would do , were he more angry at it . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj all 's well , and might have been much better 
▁ xxmaj he could have temporiz'd . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj where is he , hear you ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj nay , i hear nothing ; his mother and his wife 
▁ xxmaj hear nothing from him . 

▁ xxmaj enter three or four citizens 

▁ xxup citizens . xxmaj the gods preserve you both ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj god - den , our neighbours . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj god - den to you all , god - den to you an . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj ourselves , our wives , and children , on our knees 
▁ xxmaj are bound to pray for you both . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj live and thrive ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj farewell , kind neighbours ; we wish'd xxmaj coriolanus 
▁ xxmaj had lov'd you as we did . 
▁ xxup citizens . xxmaj now the gods keep you ! 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj farewell , farewell . xxmaj exeunt citizens 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj this is a happier and more comely time 
▁ xxmaj than when these fellows ran about the streets 
▁ xxmaj crying confusion . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius was 
▁ a worthy officer i ' the war , but insolent , 
▁ xxmaj o'ercome with pride , ambitious past all thinking , 
▁ xxmaj self - loving- 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj and affecting one sole throne , 
▁ xxmaj without assistance . 
▁ xxup menenius . i think not so . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj we should by this , to all our lamentation , 
▁ xxmaj if he had gone forth consul , found it so . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the gods have well prevented it , and xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj sits safe and still without him . 

▁ xxmaj enter an xxup aedile 

▁ xxup aedile . xxmaj worthy tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj there is a slave , whom we have put in prison , 
▁ xxmaj reports the xxmaj volsces with several powers 
▁ xxmaj are ent'red in the xxmaj roman territories , 
▁ xxmaj and with the deepest malice of the war 
▁ xxmaj destroy what lies before 'em . 
▁ xxup menenius . ' tis xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj who , hearing of our xxmaj marcius ' banishment , 
▁ xxmaj thrusts forth his horns again into the world , 
▁ xxmaj which were inshell'd when xxmaj marcius stood for xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and durst not once peep out . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj come , what talk you of xxmaj marcius ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj go see this rumourer whipp'd . xxmaj it can not be 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj volsces dare break with us . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj can not be ! 
▁ xxmaj we have record that very well it can ; 
▁ xxmaj and three examples of the like hath been 
▁ xxmaj within my age . xxmaj but reason with the fellow 
▁ xxmaj before you punish him , where he heard this , 
▁ xxmaj lest you shall chance to whip your information 
▁ xxmaj and beat the messenger who bids beware 
▁ xxmaj of what is to be dreaded . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj tell not me . 
▁ i know this can not be . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj not xxmaj possible . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the nobles in great earnestness are going 
▁ xxmaj all to the xxmaj senate xxmaj house ; some news is come 
▁ xxmaj that turns their countenances . 
▁ xxup sicinius . ' tis this slave- 
▁ xxmaj go whip him fore the people 's eyes- his raising , 
▁ xxmaj nothing but his report . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj yes , worthy sir , 
▁ xxmaj the slave 's report is seconded , and more , 
▁ xxmaj more fearful , is deliver'd . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj what more fearful ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj it is spoke freely out of many mouths- 
▁ xxmaj how probable i do not know- that xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj join'd with xxmaj aufidius , leads a power ' gainst xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and vows revenge as spacious as between 
▁ xxmaj the young'st and oldest thing . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj this is most likely ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj rais'd only that the weaker sort may wish 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj marcius home again . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj the very trick on ' t. 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj this is unlikely . 
▁ xxmaj he and xxmaj aufidius can no more atone 
▁ xxmaj than violent'st contrariety . 

▁ xxmaj enter a second xxup messenger 

▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj you are sent for to the xxmaj senate . 
▁ a fearful army , led by xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius 
▁ xxmaj associated with xxmaj aufidius , rages 
▁ xxmaj upon our territories , and have already 
▁ xxmaj o'erborne their way , consum'd with fire and took 
▁ xxmaj what lay before them . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cominius 

▁ xxup cominius . xxup o , you have made good work ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what news ? what news ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj you have holp to ravish your own daughters and 
▁ xxmaj to melt the city leads upon your pates , 
▁ xxmaj to see your wives dishonour'd to your noses- 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what 's the news ? xxmaj what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj your temples burned in their cement , and 
▁ xxmaj your franchises , whereon you stood , confin'd 
▁ xxmaj into an auger 's bore . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj pray now , your news ? 
▁ xxmaj you have made fair work , i fear me . xxmaj pray , your news . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj marcius should be join'd wi ' th ' xxmaj volscians- 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj if ! 
▁ xxmaj he is their god ; he leads them like a thing 
▁ xxmaj made by some other deity than xxmaj nature , 
▁ xxmaj that shapes man better ; and they follow him 
▁ xxmaj against us brats with no less confidence 
▁ xxmaj than boys pursuing summer butterflies , 
▁ xxmaj or butchers killing flies . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you have made good work , 
▁ xxmaj you and your apron men ; you that stood so much 
▁ xxmaj upon the voice of occupation and 
▁ xxmaj the breath of garlic - eaters ! 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj he 'll shake 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj rome about your ears . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj as xxmaj hercules 
▁ xxmaj did shake down mellow fruit . xxmaj you have made fair work ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj but is this true , sir ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj ay ; and you 'll look pale 
▁ xxmaj before you find it other . xxmaj all the regions 
▁ xxmaj do smilingly revolt , and who resists 
▁ xxmaj are mock'd for valiant ignorance , 
▁ xxmaj and perish constant fools . xxmaj who is't can blame him ? 
▁ xxmaj your enemies and his find something in him . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj we are all undone unless 
▁ xxmaj the noble man have mercy . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj who shall ask it ? 
▁ xxmaj the tribunes can not do't for shame ; the people 
▁ xxmaj deserve such pity of him as the wolf 
▁ xxmaj does of the shepherds ; for his best friends , if they 
▁ xxmaj should say ' be good to xxmaj rome'- they charg'd him even 
▁ xxmaj as those should do that had deserv'd his hate , 
▁ xxmaj and therein show'd fike enemies . 
▁ xxup menenius . ' tis true ; 
▁ xxmaj if he were putting to my house the brand 
▁ xxmaj that should consume it , i have not the face 
▁ xxmaj to say ' beseech you , cease . ' xxmaj you have made fair hands , 
▁ xxmaj you and your crafts ! xxmaj you have crafted fair ! 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj you have brought 
▁ a trembling upon xxmaj rome , such as was never 
▁ xxup s ' incapable of help . 
▁ xxup both xxup tribunes . xxmaj say not we brought it . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj how ! xxmaj was't we ? xxmaj we lov'd him , but , like beasts 
▁ xxmaj and cowardly nobles , gave way unto your clusters , 
▁ xxmaj who did hoot him out o ' th ' city . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj but i fear 
▁ xxmaj they 'll roar him in again . xxmaj tullus xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj the second name of men , obeys his points 
▁ xxmaj as if he were his officer . xxmaj desperation 
▁ xxmaj is all the policy , strength , and defence , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj rome can make against them . 

▁ xxmaj enter a troop of citizens 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj here comes the clusters . 
▁ xxmaj and is xxmaj aufidius with him ? xxmaj you are they 
▁ xxmaj that made the air unwholesome when you cast 
▁ xxmaj your stinking greasy caps in hooting at 
▁ xxmaj coriolanus ' exile . xxmaj now he 's coming , 
▁ xxmaj and not a hair upon a soldier 's head 
▁ xxmaj which will not prove a whip ; as many coxcombs 
▁ xxmaj as you threw caps up will he tumble down , 
▁ xxmaj and pay you for your voices . ' tis no matter ; 
▁ xxmaj if he could burn us all into one coal 
▁ xxmaj we have deserv'd it . 
▁ xxup plebeians . xxmaj faith , we hear fearful news . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj for mine own part , 
▁ xxmaj when i said banish him , i said ' twas pity . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj and so did xxup i. 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj and so did xxup i ; and , to say the truth , so did very 
▁ many of us . xxmaj that we did , we did for the best ; and though we 
▁ willingly consented to his banishment , yet it was against our 
▁ will . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj y'are goodly things , you voices ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you have made 
▁ xxmaj good work , you and your cry ! xxmaj shall 's to the xxmaj capitol ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxup o , ay , what else ? 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cominius and xxup menenius 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj go , masters , get you be not dismay'd ; 
▁ xxmaj these are a side that would be glad to have 
▁ xxmaj this true which they so seem to fear . xxmaj go home , 
▁ xxmaj and show no sign of fear . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj the gods be good to us ! xxmaj come , masters , let 's home . i 
▁ ever said we were i ' th ' wrong when we banish'd him . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj so did we all . xxmaj but come , let 's home . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt citizens 
▁ xxup brutus . i do not like this news . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj let 's to the xxmaj capitol . xxmaj would half my wealth 
▁ xxmaj would buy this for a lie ! 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj pray let 's go . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 a camp at a short distance from xxmaj rome 

 xxmaj enter xxup aufidius with his xxup lieutenant 

▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj do they still fly to th ' xxmaj roman ? 
▁ xxup lieutenant . i do not know what witchcraft 's in him , but 
▁ xxmaj your soldiers use him as the grace fore meat , 
▁ xxmaj their talk at table , and their thanks at end ; 
▁ xxmaj and you are dark'ned in this action , sir , 
▁ xxmaj even by your own . 
▁ xxup aufidius . i can not help it now , 
▁ xxmaj unless by using means i lame the foot 
▁ xxmaj of our design . xxmaj he bears himself more proudlier , 
▁ xxmaj even to my person , than i thought he would 
▁ xxmaj when first i did embrace him ; yet his nature 
▁ xxmaj in that 's no changeling , and i must excuse 
▁ xxmaj what can not be amended . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj yet i wish , sir- 
▁ i mean , for your particular- you had not 
▁ xxmaj join'd in commission with him , but either 
▁ xxmaj had borne the action of yourself , or else 
▁ xxmaj to him had left it solely . 
▁ xxup aufidius . i understand thee well ; and be thou sure , 
▁ xxmaj when he shall come to his account , he knows not 
▁ xxmaj what i can urge against him . xxmaj although it seems , 
▁ xxmaj and so he thinks , and is no less apparent 
▁ xxmaj to th ' vulgar eye , that he bears all things fairly 
▁ xxmaj and shows good husbandry for the xxmaj volscian state , 
▁ xxmaj fights dragon - like , and does achieve as soon 
▁ xxmaj as draw his sword ; yet he hath left undone 
▁ xxmaj that which shall break his neck or hazard mine 
▁ xxmaj whene'er we come to our account . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj sir , i beseech you , think you he 'll carry xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj all places yield to him ere he sits down , 
▁ xxmaj and the nobility of xxmaj rome are his ; 
▁ xxmaj the senators and patricians love him too . 
▁ xxmaj the tribunes are no soldiers , and their people 
▁ xxmaj will be as rash in the repeal as hasty 
▁ xxmaj to expel him thence . i think he 'll be to xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj as is the osprey to the fish , who takes it 
▁ xxmaj by sovereignty of nature . xxmaj first he was 
▁ a noble servant to them , but he could not 
▁ xxmaj carry his honours even . xxmaj whether ' twas pride , 
▁ xxmaj which out of daily fortune ever taints 
▁ xxmaj the happy man ; whether defect of judgment , 
▁ xxmaj to fail in the disposing of those chances 
▁ xxmaj which he was lord of ; or whether nature , 
▁ xxmaj not to be other than one thing , not moving 
▁ xxmaj from th ' casque to th ' cushion , but commanding peace 
▁ xxmaj even with the same austerity and garb 
▁ xxmaj as he controll'd the war ; but one of these- 
▁ xxmaj as he hath spices of them all- not all , 
▁ xxmaj for i dare so far free him- made him fear'd , 
▁ xxmaj so hated , and so banish'd . xxmaj but he has a merit 
▁ xxmaj to choke it in the utt'rance . xxmaj so our virtues 
▁ xxmaj lie in th ' interpretation of the time ; 
▁ xxmaj and power , unto itself most commendable , 
▁ xxmaj hath not a tomb so evident as a chair 
▁ xxup t ' extol what it hath done . 
▁ xxmaj one fire drives out one fire ; one nail , one nail ; 
▁ xxmaj rights by rights falter , strengths by strengths do fail . 
▁ xxmaj come , let 's away . xxmaj when , xxmaj caius , xxmaj rome is thine , 
▁ xxmaj thou art poor'st of all ; then shortly art thou mine . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup menenius , xxup cominius , xxup sicinius and xxup brutus , the two xxmaj tribunes , with others 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll not go . xxmaj you hear what he hath said 
▁ xxmaj which was sometime his general , who lov'd him 
▁ xxmaj in a most dear particular . xxmaj he call'd me father ; 
▁ xxmaj but what o ' that ? xxmaj go , you that banish'd him : 
▁ a mile before his tent fall down , and knee 
▁ xxmaj the way into his mercy . xxmaj nay , if he coy'd 
▁ xxmaj to hear xxmaj cominius speak , xxmaj i 'll keep at home . 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj he would not seem to know me . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj do you hear ? 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj yet one time he did call me by my name . 
▁ i urg'd our old acquaintance , and the drops 
▁ xxmaj that we have bled together . ' coriolanus ' 
▁ xxmaj he would not answer to ; forbid all names ; 
▁ xxmaj he was a kind of nothing , titleless , 
▁ xxmaj till he had forg'd himself a name i ' th ' fire 
▁ xxmaj of burning xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj why , so ! xxmaj you have made good work . 
▁ a pair of tribunes that have wrack'd for xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj to make coals cheap- a noble memory ! 
▁ xxup cominius . i minded him how royal ' twas to pardon 
▁ xxmaj when it was less expected ; he replied , 
▁ xxmaj it was a bare petition of a state 
▁ xxmaj to one whom they had punish'd . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj very well . 
▁ xxmaj could he say less ? 
▁ xxup cominius . i offer'd to awaken his regard 
▁ xxmaj for 's private friends ; his answer to me was , 
▁ xxmaj he could not stay to pick them in a pile 
▁ xxmaj of noisome musty chaff . xxmaj he said ' twas folly , 
▁ xxmaj for one poor grain or two , to leave unburnt 
▁ xxmaj and still to nose th ' offence . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj for one poor grain or two ! 
▁ i am one of those . xxmaj his mother , wife , his child , 
▁ xxmaj and this brave fellow too- we are the grains : 
▁ xxmaj you are the musty chaff , and you are smelt 
▁ xxmaj above the moon . xxmaj we must be burnt for you .