xxbos xxup sicinius . xxmaj nay , pray be patient ; if you refuse your aid 
▁ xxmaj in this so never - needed help , yet do not 
▁ xxmaj upbraid 's with our distress . xxmaj but sure , if you 
▁ xxmaj would be your country 's pleader , your good tongue , 
▁ xxmaj more than the instant army we can make , 
▁ xxmaj might stop our countryman . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj no ; xxmaj i 'll not meddle . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj pray you go to him . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj what should i do ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj only make trial what your love can do 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj rome , towards xxmaj marcius . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj well , and say that xxmaj marcius 
▁ xxmaj return me , as xxmaj cominius is return'd , 
▁ xxmaj unheard- what then ? 
▁ xxmaj but as a discontented friend , grief - shot 
▁ xxmaj with his unkindness ? xxmaj say't be so ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj yet your good will 
▁ xxmaj must have that thanks from xxmaj rome after the measure 
▁ xxmaj as you intended well . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj i 'll undertake't ; 
▁ i think he 'll hear me . xxmaj yet to bite his lip 
▁ xxmaj and hum at good xxmaj cominius much unhearts me . 
▁ xxmaj he was not taken well : he had not din'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the veins unfill'd , our blood is cold , and then 
▁ xxmaj we pout upon the morning , are unapt 
▁ xxmaj to give or to forgive ; but when we have stuff'd 
▁ xxmaj these pipes and these conveyances of our blood 
▁ xxmaj with wine and feeding , we have suppler souls 
▁ xxmaj than in our priest - like fasts . xxmaj therefore xxmaj i 'll watch him 
▁ xxmaj till he be dieted to my request , 
▁ xxmaj and then xxmaj i 'll set upon him . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you know the very road into his kindness 
▁ xxmaj and can not lose your way . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj good faith , xxmaj i 'll prove him , 
▁ xxmaj speed how it will . i shall ere long have knowledge 
▁ xxmaj of my success . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cominius . xxmaj he 'll never hear him . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj not ? 
▁ xxup cominius . i tell you he does sit in gold , his eye 
▁ xxmaj red as ' twould burn xxmaj rome , and his injury 
▁ xxmaj the gaoler to his pity . i kneel'd before him ; 
▁ ' twas very faintly he said ' rise ' ; dismiss'd me 
▁ xxmaj thus with his speechless hand . xxmaj what he would do , 
▁ xxmaj he sent in writing after me ; what he would not , 
▁ xxmaj bound with an oath to yield to his conditions ; 
▁ xxmaj so that all hope is vain , 
▁ xxmaj unless his noble mother and his wife , 
▁ xxmaj who , as i hear , mean to solicit him 
▁ xxmaj for mercy to his country . xxmaj therefore let 's hence , 
▁ xxmaj and with our fair entreaties haste them on . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj volscian camp before xxmaj rome 

 xxmaj enter xxup menenius to the xxup watch on guard 

▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj stay . xxmaj whence are you ? 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj stand , and go back . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj you guard like men , ' tis well ; but , by your leave , 
▁ i am an officer of state and come 
▁ xxmaj to speak with xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj from whence ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj from xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxup you may not pass ; you must return . xxmaj our general 
▁ xxmaj will no more hear from thence . 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj you 'll see your xxmaj rome embrac'd with fire before 
▁ xxmaj you 'll speak with xxmaj coriolanus . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj good my friends , 
▁ xxmaj if you have heard your general talk of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj and of his friends there , it is lots to blanks 
▁ xxmaj my name hath touch'd your ears : it is xxmaj menenius . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj be it so ; go back . xxmaj the virtue of your name 
▁ xxmaj is not here passable . 
▁ xxup menenius . i tell thee , fellow , 
▁ xxmaj thy general is my lover . i have been 
▁ xxmaj the book of his good acts whence men have read 
▁ xxmaj his fame unparallel'd haply amplified ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have ever verified my friends- 
▁ xxmaj of whom he 's chief- with all the size that verity 
▁ xxmaj would without lapsing suffer . xxmaj nay , sometimes , 
▁ xxmaj like to a bowl upon a subtle ground , 
▁ i have tumbled past the throw , and in his praise 
▁ xxmaj have almost stamp'd the leasing ; therefore , fellow , 
▁ i must have leave to pass . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj faith , sir , if you had told as many lies in his behalf 
▁ as you have uttered words in your own , you should not pass here ; 
▁ no , though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely . 
▁ xxmaj therefore go back . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj prithee , fellow , remember my name is xxmaj menenius , always 
▁ factionary on the party of your general . 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj howsoever you have been his liar , as you say you 
▁ have , i am one that , telling true under him , must say you can not 
▁ pass . xxmaj therefore go back . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj has he din'd , canst thou tell ? xxmaj for i would not speak with 
▁ him till after dinner . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj you are a xxmaj roman , are you ? 
▁ xxup menenius . i am as thy general is . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj then you should hate xxmaj rome , as he does . xxmaj can you , when 
▁ you have push'd out your gates the very defender of them , and in 
▁ a violent popular ignorance given your enemy your shield , think 
▁ to front his revenges with the easy groans of old women , the 
▁ virginal palms of your daughters , or with the palsied 
▁ intercession of such a decay'd dotant as you seem to be ? xxmaj can you 
▁ think to blow out the intended fire your city is ready to flame 
▁ in with such weak breath as this ? xxmaj no , you are deceiv'd ; therefore 
▁ back to xxmaj rome and prepare for your execution . xxmaj you are condemn'd ; 
▁ our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj sirrah , if thy captain knew i were here , he would use me 
▁ with estimation . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj come , my captain knows you not . 
▁ xxup menenius . i mean thy general . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj my general cares not for you . xxmaj back , i say ; go , lest i 
▁ let forth your half pint of blood . xxmaj back- that 's the utmost of 
▁ your having . xxmaj back . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj nay , but fellow , fellow- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus with xxup aufidius 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj now , you companion , xxmaj i 'll say an errand for you ; you shall 
▁ know now that i am in estimation ; you shall perceive that a xxmaj jack 
▁ guardant can not office me from my son xxmaj coriolanus . xxmaj guess but by my 
▁ entertainment with him if thou stand'st not i ' th ' state of 
▁ hanging , or of some death more long in spectatorship and crueller 
▁ in suffering ; behold now presently , and swoon for what 's to come 
▁ upon thee . xxmaj the glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy 
▁ particular prosperity , and love thee no worse than thy old father 
▁ xxmaj menenius does ! o my son ! my son ! thou art preparing fire for us ; 
▁ look thee , here 's water to quench it . i was hardly moved to come 
▁ to thee ; but being assured none but myself could move thee , i 
▁ have been blown out of your gates with sighs , and conjure thee to 
▁ pardon xxmaj rome and thy petitionary countrymen . xxmaj the good gods assuage 
▁ thy wrath , and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here ; this , 
▁ who , like a block , hath denied my access to thee . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj away ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj how ! away ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj wife , mother , child , i know not . xxmaj my affairs 
▁ xxmaj are servanted to others . xxmaj though i owe 
▁ xxmaj my revenge properly , my remission lies 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj volscian breasts . xxmaj that we have been familiar , 
▁ xxmaj ingrate forgetfulness shall poison rather 
▁ xxmaj than pity note how much . xxmaj therefore be gone . 
▁ xxmaj mine ears against your suits are stronger than 
▁ xxmaj your gates against my force . xxmaj yet , for i lov'd thee , 
▁ xxmaj take this along ; i writ it for thy sake [ gives a letter ] 
▁ xxmaj and would have sent it . xxmaj another word , xxmaj menenius , 
▁ i will not hear thee speak . xxmaj this man , xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj was my belov'd in xxmaj rome ; yet thou behold'st . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj you keep a constant temper . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup coriolanus and xxmaj aufidius 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj now , sir , is your name xxmaj menenius ? 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . ' tis a spell , you see , of much power ! xxmaj you know the 
▁ way home again . 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . xxmaj do you hear how we are shent for keeping your 
▁ greatness back ? 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj what cause , do you think , i have to swoon ? 
▁ xxup menenius . i neither care for th ' world nor your general ; for such 
▁ things as you , i can scarce think there 's any , y'are so slight . 
▁ xxmaj he that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another . 
▁ xxmaj let your general do his worst . xxmaj for you , be that you are , long ; 
▁ and your misery increase with your age ! i say to you , as i was 
▁ said to : xxmaj away ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup watch . a noble fellow , i warrant him . 
▁ xxup second xxup watch . xxmaj the worthy fellow is our general ; he 's the rock , the 
▁ oak not to be wind - shaken . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the tent of xxup coriolanus 

 xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , xxup aufidius , and others 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj we will before the walls of xxmaj rome to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj set down our host . xxmaj my partner in this action , 
▁ xxmaj you must report to th ' xxmaj volscian lords how plainly 
▁ i have borne this business . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj only their ends 
▁ xxmaj you have respected ; stopp'd your ears against 
▁ xxmaj the general suit of xxmaj rome ; never admitted 
▁ a private whisper- no , not with such friends 
▁ xxmaj that thought them sure of you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj this last old man , 
▁ xxmaj whom with crack'd heart i have sent to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj lov'd me above the measure of a father ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , godded me indeed . xxmaj their latest refuge 
▁ xxmaj was to send him ; for whose old love i have- 
▁ xxmaj though i show'd sourly to him- once more offer'd 
▁ xxmaj the first conditions , which they did refuse 
▁ xxmaj and can not now accept . xxmaj to grace him only , 
▁ xxmaj that thought he could do more , a very little 
▁ i have yielded to ; fresh embassies and suits , 
▁ xxmaj nor from the state nor private friends , hereafter 
▁ xxmaj will i lend ear to . [ shout within ] xxmaj ha ! what shout is this ? 
▁ xxmaj shall i be tempted to infringe my vow 
▁ xxmaj in the same time ' tis made ? i will not . 

▁ xxmaj enter , in mourning habits , xxup virgilia , xxup volumnia , xxup valeria , 
▁ xxup young xxup marcius , with attendants 

▁ xxmaj my wife comes foremost , then the honour'd mould 
▁ xxmaj wherein this trunk was fram'd , and in her hand 
▁ xxmaj the grandchild to her blood . xxmaj but out , affection ! 
▁ xxmaj all bond and privilege of nature , break ! 
▁ xxmaj let it be virtuous to be obstinate . 
▁ xxmaj what is that curtsy worth ? or those doves ' eyes , 
▁ xxmaj which can make gods forsworn ? i melt , and am not 
▁ xxmaj of stronger earth than others . xxmaj my mother bows , 
▁ xxmaj as if xxmaj olympus to a molehill should 
▁ xxmaj in supplication nod ; and my young boy 
▁ xxmaj hath an aspect of intercession which 
▁ xxmaj great nature cries ' deny not . ' xxmaj let the xxmaj volsces 
▁ xxmaj plough xxmaj rome and harrow xxmaj italy ; xxmaj i 'll never 
▁ xxmaj be such a gosling to obey instinct , but stand 
▁ xxmaj as if a man were author of himself 
▁ xxmaj and knew no other kin . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj my lord and husband ! 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj these eyes are not the same i wore in xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj the sorrow that delivers us thus chang'd 
▁ xxmaj makes you think so . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj like a dull actor now 
▁ i have forgot my part and i am out , 
▁ xxmaj even to a full disgrace . xxmaj best of my flesh , 
▁ xxmaj forgive my tyranny ; but do not say , 
▁ xxmaj for that , ' forgive our xxmaj romans . ' xxup o , a kiss 
▁ xxmaj long as my exile , sweet as my revenge ! 
▁ xxmaj now , by the jealous queen of heaven , that kiss 
▁ i carried from thee , dear , and my true lip 
▁ xxmaj hath virgin'd it e'er since . xxmaj you gods ! i prate , 
▁ xxmaj and the most noble mother of the world 
▁ xxmaj leave unsaluted . xxmaj sink , my knee , i ' th ' earth ; [ kneels ] 
▁ xxmaj of thy deep duty more impression show 
▁ xxmaj than that of common sons . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxup o , stand up blest ! 
▁ xxmaj whilst with no softer cushion than the flint 
▁ i kneel before thee , and unproperly 
▁ xxmaj show duty , as mistaken all this while 
▁ xxmaj between the child and parent . [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj what 's this ? 
▁ xxmaj your knees to me , to your corrected son ? 
▁ xxmaj then let the pebbles on the hungry beach 
▁ xxmaj fillip the stars ; then let the mutinous winds 
▁ xxmaj strike the proud cedars ' gainst the fiery sun , 
▁ xxmaj murd'ring impossibility , to make 
▁ xxmaj what can not be slight work . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj thou art my warrior ; 
▁ i holp to frame thee . xxmaj do you know this lady ? 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj the noble sister of xxmaj publicola , 
▁ xxmaj the moon of xxmaj rome , chaste as the icicle 
▁ xxmaj that 's curdied by the frost from purest snow , 
▁ xxmaj and hangs on xxmaj dian 's temple- dear xxmaj valeria ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj this is a poor epitome of yours , 
▁ xxmaj which by th ' interpretation of full time 
▁ xxmaj may show like all yourself . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj the god of soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj with the consent of supreme xxmaj jove , inform 
▁ xxmaj thy thoughts with nobleness , that thou mayst prove 
▁ xxmaj to shame unvulnerable , and stick i ' th ' wars 
▁ xxmaj like a great sea - mark , standing every flaw , 
▁ xxmaj and saving those that eye thee ! 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj your knee , sirrah . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj that 's my brave boy . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj even he , your wife , this lady , and myself , 
▁ xxmaj are suitors to you . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i beseech you , peace ! 
▁ xxmaj or , if you 'd ask , remember this before : 
▁ xxmaj the thing i have forsworn to grant may never 
▁ xxmaj be held by you denials . xxmaj do not bid me 
▁ xxmaj dismiss my soldiers , or capitulate 
▁ xxmaj again with xxmaj rome 's mechanics . xxmaj tell me not 
▁ xxmaj wherein i seem unnatural ; desire not 
▁ xxmaj t'allay my rages and revenges with 
▁ xxmaj your colder reasons . 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxup o , no more , no more ! 
▁ xxmaj you have said you will not grant us any thing- 
▁ xxmaj for we have nothing else to ask but that 
▁ xxmaj which you deny already ; yet we will ask , 
▁ xxmaj that , if you fail in our request , the blame 
▁ xxmaj may hang upon your hardness ; therefore hear us . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj aufidius , and you xxmaj volsces , mark ; for we 'll 
▁ xxmaj hear nought from xxmaj rome in private . xxmaj your request ? 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj should we be silent and not speak , our raiment 
▁ xxmaj and state of bodies would bewray what life 
▁ xxmaj we have led since thy exile . xxmaj think with thyself 
▁ xxmaj how more unfortunate than all living women 
▁ xxmaj are we come hither ; since that thy sight , which should 
▁ xxmaj make our eyes flow with joy , hearts dance with comforts , 
▁ xxmaj constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj making the mother , wife , and child , to see 
▁ xxmaj the son , the husband , and the father , tearing 
▁ xxmaj his country 's bowels out . xxmaj and to poor we 
▁ xxmaj thine enmity 's most capital : thou bar'st us 
▁ xxmaj our prayers to the gods , which is a comfort 
▁ xxmaj that all but we enjoy . xxmaj for how can we , 
▁ xxmaj alas , how can we for our country pray , 
▁ xxmaj whereto we are bound , together with thy victory , 
▁ xxmaj whereto we are bound ? xxmaj alack , or we must lose 
▁ xxmaj the country , our dear nurse , or else thy person , 
▁ xxmaj our comfort in the country . xxmaj we must find 
▁ xxmaj an evident calamity , though we had 
▁ xxmaj our wish , which side should win ; for either thou 
▁ xxmaj must as a foreign recreant be led 
▁ xxmaj with manacles through our streets , or else 
▁ xxmaj triumphantly tread on thy country 's ruin , 
▁ xxmaj and bear the palm for having bravely shed 
▁ xxmaj thy wife and children 's blood . xxmaj for myself , son , 
▁ i purpose not to wait on fortune till 
▁ xxmaj these wars determine ; if i can not persuade thee 
▁ xxmaj rather to show a noble grace to both parts 
▁ xxmaj than seek the end of one , thou shalt no sooner 
▁ xxmaj march to assault thy country than to tread- 
▁ xxmaj trust to't , thou shalt not- on thy mother 's womb 
▁ xxmaj that brought thee to this world . 
▁ xxup virgilia . xxmaj ay , and mine , 
▁ xxmaj that brought you forth this boy to keep your name 
▁ xxmaj living to time . 
▁ xxup boy . ' a shall not tread on me ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll run away till i am bigger , but then xxmaj i 'll fight . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj not of a woman 's tenderness to be 
▁ xxmaj requires nor child nor woman 's face to see . 
▁ i have sat too long . [ rising ] 
▁ xxup volumnia . xxmaj nay , go not from us thus . 
▁ xxmaj if it were so that our request did tend 
▁ xxmaj to save the xxmaj romans , thereby to destroy 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj volsces whom you serve , you might condemn us 
▁ xxmaj as poisonous of your honour . xxmaj no , our suit 
▁ xxmaj is that you reconcile them : while the xxmaj volsces 
▁ xxmaj may say ' this mercy we have show'd , ' the xxmaj romans 
▁ ' this we receiv'd , ' and each in either side 
▁ xxmaj give the all - hail to thee , and cry ' be blest 
▁ xxmaj for making up this peace ! ' xxmaj thou know'st , great son , 
▁ xxmaj the end of war 's uncertain ; but this certain , 
▁ xxmaj that , if thou conquer xxmaj rome , the benefit 
▁ xxmaj which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name 
▁ xxmaj whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses ; 
▁ xxmaj whose chronicle thus writ : ' the man was noble , 
▁ xxmaj but with his last attempt he wip'd it out , 
▁ xxmaj destroy'd his country , and his name remains 
▁ xxmaj to th ' ensuing age abhorr'd . ' xxmaj speak to me , son . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast affected the fine strains of honour , 
▁ xxmaj to imitate the graces of the gods , 
▁ xxmaj to tear with thunder the wide cheeks o ' th ' air , 
▁ xxmaj and yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt 
▁ xxmaj that should but rive an oak . xxmaj why dost not speak ? 
▁ xxmaj think'st thou it honourable for a noble man 
▁ xxmaj still to remember wrongs ? xxmaj daughter , speak you : 
▁ xxmaj he cares not for your weeping . xxmaj speak thou , boy ; 
▁ xxmaj perhaps thy childishness will move him more 
▁ xxmaj than can our reasons . xxmaj there 's no man in the world 
▁ xxmaj more bound to 's mother , yet here he lets me prate 
▁ xxmaj like one i ' th ' stocks . xxmaj thou hast never in thy life 
▁ xxmaj show'd thy dear mother any courtesy , 
▁ xxmaj when she , poor hen , fond of no second brood , 
▁ xxmaj has cluck'd thee to the wars , and safely home 
▁ xxmaj loaden with honour . xxmaj say my request 's unjust , 
▁ xxmaj and spurn me back ; but if it he not so , 
▁ xxmaj thou art not honest , and the gods will plague thee , 
▁ xxmaj that thou restrain'st from me the duty which 
▁ xxmaj to a mother 's part belongs . xxmaj he turns away . 
▁ xxmaj down , ladies ; let us shame him with our knees . 
▁ xxmaj to his surname xxmaj coriolanus ' longs more pride 
▁ xxmaj than pity to our prayers . xxmaj down . xxmaj an end ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the last . xxmaj so we will home to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and die among our neighbours . xxmaj nay , behold 's ! 
▁ xxmaj this boy , that can not tell what he would have 
▁ xxmaj but kneels and holds up hands for fellowship , 
▁ xxmaj does reason our petition with more strength 
▁ xxmaj than thou hast to deny't . xxmaj come , let us go . 
▁ xxmaj this fellow had a xxmaj volscian to his mother ; 
▁ xxmaj his wife is in xxmaj corioli , and his child 
▁ xxmaj like him by chance . xxmaj yet give us our dispatch . 
▁ i am hush'd until our city be afire , 
▁ xxmaj and then xxmaj i 'll speak a little . 
▁ [ he holds her by the hand , silent ] 
▁ xxup coriolanus . o mother , mother ! 
▁ xxmaj what have you done ? xxmaj behold , the heavens do ope , 
▁ xxmaj the gods look down , and this unnatural scene 
▁ xxmaj they laugh at . o my mother , mother ! xxup o ! 
▁ xxmaj you have won a happy victory to xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj but for your son- believe it , xxup o , believe it!- 
▁ xxmaj most dangerously you have with him prevail'd , 
▁ xxmaj if not most mortal to him . xxmaj but let it come . 
▁ xxmaj aufidius , though i can not make true wars , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll frame convenient peace . xxmaj now , good xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj were you in my stead , would you have heard 
▁ a mother less , or granted less , xxmaj aufidius ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . i was mov'd withal . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . i dare be sworn you were ! 
▁ xxmaj and , sir , it is no little thing to make 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes to sweat compassion . xxmaj but , good sir , 
▁ xxmaj what peace you'fl make , advise me . xxmaj for my part , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not to xxmaj rome , xxmaj i 'll back with you ; and pray you 
▁ xxmaj stand to me in this cause . o mother ! wife ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . [ aside ] i am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy 
▁ honour 
▁ xxmaj at difference in thee . xxmaj out of that xxmaj i 'll work 
▁ xxmaj myself a former fortune . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . [ to the ladies ] xxmaj ay , by and by ; 
▁ xxmaj but we will drink together ; and you shall bear 
▁ a better witness back than words , which we , 
▁ xxmaj on like conditions , will have counter - seal'd . 
▁ xxmaj come , enter with us . xxmaj ladies , you deserve 
▁ xxmaj to have a temple built you . xxmaj all the swords 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj italy , and her confederate arms , 
▁ xxmaj could not have made this peace . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rome . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup menenius and xxup sicinius 

▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj see you yond coign o ' th ' xxmaj capitol , yond cornerstone ? 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj why , what of that ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj if it be possible for you to displace it with your little 
▁ finger , there is some hope the ladies of xxmaj rome , especially his 
▁ mother , may prevail with him . xxmaj but i say there is no hope in't ; 
▁ our throats are sentenc'd , and stay upon execution . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj is't possible that so short a time can alter the 
▁ condition of a man ? 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj there is differency between a grub and a butterfly ; yet 
▁ your butterfly was a grub . xxmaj this xxmaj marcius is grown from man to 
▁ dragon ; he has wings , he 's more than a creeping thing . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj he lov'd his mother dearly . 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj so did he me ; and he no more remembers his mother now 
▁ than an eight - year - old horse . xxmaj the tartness of his face sours ripe 
▁ grapes ; when he walks , he moves like an engine and the ground 
▁ shrinks before his treading . xxmaj he is able to pierce a corslet with 
▁ his eye , talks like a knell , and his hum is a battery . xxmaj he sits in 
▁ his state as a thing made for xxmaj alexander . xxmaj what he bids be done is 
▁ finish'd with his bidding . xxmaj he wants nothing of a god but 
▁ eternity , and a heaven to throne in . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj yes- mercy , if you report him truly . 
▁ xxup menenius . i paint him in the character . xxmaj mark what mercy his mother 
▁ shall bring from him . xxmaj there is no more mercy in him than there is 
▁ milk in a male tiger ; that shall our poor city find . xxmaj and all this 
▁ is ' long of you . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj the gods be good unto us ! 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj no , in such a case the gods will not be good unto us . 
▁ xxmaj when we banish'd him we respected not them ; and , he returning to 
▁ break our necks , they respect not us . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj sir , if you 'd save your life , fly to your house . 
▁ xxmaj the plebeians have got your fellow tribune 
▁ xxmaj and hale him up and down ; all swearing if 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj roman ladies bring not comfort home 
▁ xxmaj they 'll give him death by inches . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup messenger 

▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj good news , good news ! xxmaj the ladies have prevail'd , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj volscians are dislodg'd , and xxmaj marcius gone . 
▁ a merrier day did never yet greet xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj no , not th ' expulsion of the xxmaj tarquins . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj friend , 
▁ xxmaj art thou certain this is true ? xxmaj is't most certain ? 
▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj as certain as i know the sun is fire . 
▁ xxmaj where have you lurk'd , that you make doubt of it ? 
▁ xxmaj ne'er through an arch so hurried the blown tide 
▁ xxmaj as the recomforted through th ' gates . xxmaj why , hark you ! 
▁ [ trumpets , hautboys , drums beat , all together ] 
▁ xxmaj the trumpets , sackbuts , psalteries , and fifes , 
▁ xxmaj tabors and cymbals , and the shouting xxmaj romans , 
▁ xxmaj make the sun dance . xxmaj hark you ! [ a shout within ] 
▁ xxup menenius . xxmaj this is good news . 
▁ i will go meet the ladies . xxmaj this xxmaj volumnia 
▁ xxmaj is worth of consuls , senators , patricians , 
▁ a city full ; of tribunes such as you , 
▁ a sea and land full . xxmaj you have pray'd well to - day : 
▁ xxmaj this morning for ten thousand of your throats 
▁ xxmaj i 'd not have given a doit . xxmaj hark , how they joy ! 
▁ [ sound still with the shouts ] 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj first , the gods bless you for your tidings ; next , 
▁ xxmaj accept my thankfulness . 
▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj sir , we have all 
▁ xxmaj great cause to give great thanks . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj they are near the city ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj almost at point to enter . 
▁ xxup sicinius . xxmaj we 'll meet them , 
▁ xxmaj and help the joy . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj rome . a street near the gate 

 xxmaj enter two xxup senators xxmaj with xxup volumnia , xxup virgilia , xxup valeria , passing over the stage , 
 ' with other xxup lords 

▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj behold our patroness , the life of xxmaj rome ! 
▁ xxmaj call all your tribes together , praise the gods , 
▁ xxmaj and make triumphant fires ; strew flowers before them . 
▁ xxmaj unshout the noise that banish'd xxmaj marcius , 
▁ xxmaj repeal him with the welcome of his mother ; 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj welcome , ladies , welcome ! 
▁ [ a flourish with drums and trumpets . xxmaj exeunt ] 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj corioli . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup tullus xxup aufidius with attendents 

▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj go tell the lords o ' th ' city i am here ; 
▁ xxmaj deliver them this paper ' having read it , 
▁ xxmaj bid them repair to th ' market - place , where xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj even in theirs and in the commons ' ears , 
▁ xxmaj will vouch the truth of it . xxmaj him i accuse 
▁ xxmaj the city ports by this hath enter'd and 
▁ xxmaj intends t ' appear before the people , hoping 
▁ xxmaj to purge himself with words . xxmaj dispatch . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt attendants 

▁ xxmaj enter three or four xxup conspirators of xxup aufidius ' faction 

▁ xxmaj most welcome ! 
▁ xxup first xxup conspirator . xxmaj how is it with our general ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj even so 
▁ xxmaj as with a man by his own alms empoison'd , 
▁ xxmaj and with his charity slain . 
▁ xxup second xxup conspirator . xxmaj most noble sir , 
▁ xxmaj if you do hold the same intent wherein 
▁ xxmaj you wish'd us parties , we 'll deliver you 
▁ xxmaj of your great danger . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj sir , i can not tell ; 
▁ xxmaj we must proceed as we do find the people . 
▁ xxup third xxup conspirator . xxmaj the people will remain uncertain whilst 
▁ ' twixt you there 's difference ; but the fall of either 
▁ xxmaj makes the survivor heir of all . 
▁ xxup aufidius . i know it ; 
▁ xxmaj and my pretext to strike at him admits 
▁ a good construction . i rais'd him , and i pawn'd 
▁ xxmaj mine honour for his truth ; who being so heighten'd , 
▁ xxmaj he watered his new plants with dews of flattery , 
▁ xxmaj seducing so my friends ; and to this end 
▁ xxmaj he bow'd his nature , never known before 
▁ xxmaj but to be rough , unswayable , and free . 
▁ xxup third xxup conspirator . xxmaj sir , his stoutness 
▁ xxmaj when he did stand for consul , which he lost 
▁ xxmaj by lack of stooping- 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj that i would have spoken of . 
▁ xxmaj being banish'd for't , he came unto my hearth , 
▁ xxmaj presented to my knife his throat . i took him ; 
▁ xxmaj made him joint - servant with me ; gave him way 
▁ xxmaj in all his own desires ; nay , let him choose 
▁ xxmaj out of my files , his projects to accomplish , 
▁ xxmaj my best and freshest men ; serv'd his designments 
▁ xxmaj in mine own person ; holp to reap the fame 
▁ xxmaj which he did end all his , and took some pride 
▁ xxmaj to do myself this wrong . xxmaj till , at the last , 
▁ i seem'd his follower , not partner ; and 
▁ xxmaj he wag'd me with his countenance as if 
▁ i had been mercenary . 
▁ xxup first xxup conspirator . xxmaj so he did , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj the army marvell'd at it ; and , in the last , 
▁ xxmaj when he had carried xxmaj rome and that we look'd 
▁ xxmaj for no less spoil than glory- 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj there was it ; 
▁ xxmaj for which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him . 
▁ xxmaj at a few drops of women 's rheum , which are 
▁ xxmaj as cheap as lies , he sold the blood and labour 
▁ xxmaj of our great action ; therefore shall he die , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll renew me in his fall . xxmaj but , hark ! 
▁ [ drums and 
▁ trumpets sound , with great shouts of the people ] 
▁ xxup first xxup conspirator . xxmaj your native town you enter'd like a post , 
▁ xxmaj and had no welcomes home ; but he returns 
▁ xxmaj splitting the air with noise . 
▁ xxup second xxup conspirator . xxmaj and patient fools , 
▁ xxmaj whose children he hath slain , their base throats tear 
▁ xxmaj with giving him glory . 
▁ xxup third xxup conspirator . xxmaj therefore , at your vantage , 
▁ xxmaj ere he express himself or move the people 
▁ xxmaj with what he would say , let him feel your sword , 
▁ xxmaj which we will second . xxmaj when he lies along , 
▁ xxmaj after your way his tale pronounc'd shall bury 
▁ xxmaj his reasons with his body . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj say no more : 
▁ xxmaj here come the lords . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lords of the city 

▁ xxup lords . xxmaj you are most welcome home . 
▁ xxup aufidius . i have not deserv'd it . 
▁ xxmaj but , worthy lords , have you with heed perused 
▁ xxmaj what i have written to you ? 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj we have . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj and grieve to hear't . 
▁ xxmaj what faults he made before the last , i think 
▁ xxmaj might have found easy fines ; but there to end 
▁ xxmaj where he was to begin , and give away 
▁ xxmaj the benefit of our levies , answering us 
▁ xxmaj with our own charge , making a treaty where 
▁ xxmaj there was a yielding- this admits no excuse . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj he approaches ; you shall hear him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup coriolanus , marching with drum and colours ; 
▁ the commoners being with him 

▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj hail , lords ! i am return'd your soldier ; 
▁ xxmaj no more infected with my country 's love 
▁ xxmaj than when i parted hence , but still subsisting 
▁ xxmaj under your great command . xxmaj you are to know 
▁ xxmaj that prosperously i have attempted , and 
▁ xxmaj with bloody passage led your wars even to 
▁ xxmaj the gates of xxmaj rome . xxmaj our spoils we have brought home 
▁ xxmaj doth more than counterpoise a full third part 
▁ xxmaj the charges of the action . xxmaj we have made peace 
▁ xxmaj with no less honour to the xxmaj antiates 
▁ xxmaj than shame to th ' xxmaj romans ; and we here deliver , 
▁ xxmaj subscrib'd by th ' consuls and patricians , 
▁ xxmaj together with the seal o ' th ' xxmaj senate , what 
▁ xxmaj we have compounded on . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj read it not , noble lords ; 
▁ xxmaj but tell the traitor in the highest degree 
▁ xxmaj he hath abus'd your powers . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj traitor ! xxmaj how now ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj ay , traitor , xxmaj marcius . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj marcius ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj ay , xxmaj marcius , xxmaj caius xxmaj marcius ! xxmaj dost thou think 
▁ xxmaj i 'll grace thee with that robbery , thy stol'n name 
▁ xxmaj coriolanus , in xxmaj corioli ? 
▁ xxmaj you lords and heads o ' th ' state , perfidiously 
▁ xxmaj he has betray'd your business and given up , 
▁ xxmaj for certain drops of salt , your city xxmaj rome- 
▁ i say your city- to his wife and mother ; 
▁ xxmaj breaking his oath and resolution like 
▁ a twist of rotten silk ; never admitting 
▁ xxmaj counsel o ' th ' war ; but at his nurse 's tears 
▁ xxmaj he whin'd and roar'd away your victory , 
▁ xxmaj that pages blush'd at him , and men of heart 
▁ xxmaj look'd wond'ring each at others . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj hear'st thou , xxmaj mars ? 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj name not the god , thou boy of tears- 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . -no more . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj measureless liar , thou hast made my heart 
▁ xxmaj too great for what contains it . ' boy ' ! o slave ! 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , lords , ' tis the first time that ever 
▁ i was forc'd to scold . xxmaj your judgments , my grave lords , 
▁ xxmaj must give this cur the lie ; and his own notion- 
▁ xxmaj who wears my stripes impress'd upon him , that 
▁ xxmaj must bear my beating to his grave- shall join 
▁ xxmaj to thrust the lie unto him . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj peace , both , and hear me speak . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . xxmaj cut me to pieces , xxmaj volsces ; men and lads , 
▁ xxmaj stain all your edges on me . ' boy ' ! xxmaj false hound ! 
▁ xxmaj if you have writ your annals true , ' tis there 
▁ xxmaj that , like an eagle in a dove - cote , i 
▁ xxmaj flutter'd your xxmaj volscians in xxmaj corioli . 
▁ xxmaj alone i did it . ' boy ' ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj why , noble lords , 
▁ xxmaj will you be put in mind of his blind fortune , 
▁ xxmaj which was your shame , by this unholy braggart , 
▁ xxmaj fore your own eyes and ears ? 
▁ xxup conspirators . xxmaj let him die for't . 
▁ xxup all xxup the xxup people . xxmaj tear him to pieces . xxmaj do it presently . xxmaj he kill'd my 
▁ son . xxmaj my daughter . xxmaj he kill'd my cousin xxmaj marcus . xxmaj he kill'd my 
▁ father . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj peace , ho ! xxmaj no outrage- peace ! 
▁ xxmaj the man is noble , and his fame folds in 
▁ xxmaj this orb o ' th ' earth . xxmaj his last offences to us 
▁ xxmaj shall have judicious hearing . xxmaj stand , xxmaj aufidius , 
▁ xxmaj and trouble not the peace . 
▁ xxup coriolanus . o that i had him , 
▁ xxmaj with six xxmaj aufidiuses , or more- his tribe , 
▁ xxmaj to use my lawful sword ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj insolent villain ! 
▁ xxup conspirators . xxmaj kill , kill , kill , kill , kill him ! 
▁ [ the xxup conspirators draw and kill coriolanus , who falls . 
▁ xxup aufidius stands on him ] 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj hold , hold , hold , hold ! 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj my noble masters , hear me speak . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . o xxmaj tullus ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj tread not upon him . xxmaj masters all , be quiet ; 
▁ xxmaj put up your swords . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj my lords , when you shall know- as in this rage , 
▁ xxmaj provok'd by him , you cannot- the great danger 
▁ xxmaj which this man 's life did owe you , you 'll rejoice 
▁ xxmaj that he is thus cut off . xxmaj please it your honours 
▁ xxmaj to call me to your xxmaj senate , xxmaj i 'll deliver 
▁ xxmaj myself your loyal servant , or endure 
▁ xxmaj your heaviest censure . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj bear from hence his body , 
▁ xxmaj and mourn you for him . xxmaj let him be regarded 
▁ xxmaj as the most noble corse that ever herald 
▁ xxmaj did follow to his um . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj his own impatience 
▁ xxmaj takes from xxmaj aufidius a great part of blame . 
▁ xxmaj let 's make the best of it . 
▁ xxup aufidius . xxmaj my rage is gone , 
▁ xxmaj and i am struck with sorrow . xxmaj take him up . 
▁ xxmaj help , three o ' th ' chiefest soldiers ; xxmaj i 'll be one . 
▁ xxmaj beat thou the drum , that it speak mournfully ; 
▁ xxmaj trail your steel pikes . xxmaj though in this city he 
▁ xxmaj hath widowed and unchilded many a one , 
▁ xxmaj which to this hour bewail the injury , 
▁ xxmaj yet he shall have a noble memory . 
▁ xxmaj assist . xxmaj exeunt , bearing the body of xxup coriolanus 
▁ [ a dead march sounded ] 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1609 

 xxup cymbeline 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup cymbeline , xxmaj king of xxmaj britain 
▁ xxup cloten , son to the xxmaj queen by a former husband 
▁ xxup posthumus xxup leonatus , a gentleman , husband to xxmaj imogen 
▁ xxup belarius , a banished lord , disguised under the name of xxmaj morgan 

▁ xxup guiderius and xxup arviragus , sons to xxmaj cymbeline , disguised under the 
▁ names of xxup polydore and xxup cadwal , supposed sons to xxmaj belarius 
▁ xxup philario , xxmaj italian , friend to xxmaj posthumus 
▁ xxup iachimo , xxmaj italian , friend to xxmaj philario 
▁ a xxup french xxup gentleman , friend to xxmaj philario 
▁ xxup caius xxup lucius , xxmaj general of the xxmaj roman xxmaj forces 
▁ a xxup roman xxup captain 
▁ xxup two xxup british xxup captains 
▁ xxup pisanio , servant to xxmaj posthumus 
▁ xxup cornelius , a physician 
▁ xxup two xxup lords of xxmaj cymbeline 's court 
▁ xxup two xxup gentlemen of the same 
▁ xxup two xxup gaolers 

▁ xxup queen , wife to xxmaj cymbeline 
▁ xxup imogen , daughter to xxmaj cymbeline by a former queen 
▁ xxup helen , a lady attending on xxmaj imogen 

▁ xxup apparitions 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj ladies , xxmaj roman xxmaj senators , xxmaj tribunes , a xxmaj soothsayer , a 
▁ xxmaj dutch xxmaj gentleman , a xxmaj spanish xxmaj gentleman , xxmaj musicians , xxmaj officers , 
▁ xxmaj captains , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj messengers , and xxmaj attendants 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 




 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj britain ; xxmaj italy 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj britain . xxmaj the garden of xxup cymbeline 's palace 

▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj you do not meet a man but frowns ; our bloods 
▁ xxmaj no more obey the heavens than our courtiers 
▁ xxmaj still seem as does the xxmaj king 's . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj but what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj his daughter , and the heir of 's kingdom , whom 
▁ xxmaj he purpos'd to his wife 's sole son- a widow 
▁ xxmaj that late he married- hath referr'd herself 
▁ xxmaj unto a poor but worthy gentleman . xxmaj she 's wedded ; 
▁ xxmaj her husband banish'd ; she imprison'd . xxmaj all 
▁ xxmaj is outward sorrow , though i think the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj be touch'd at very heart . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj none but the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj he that hath lost her too . xxmaj so is the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj that most desir'd the match . xxmaj but not a courtier , 
▁ xxmaj although they wear their faces to the bent 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj king 's looks , hath a heart that is not 
▁ xxmaj glad at the thing they scowl at . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj and why so ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj he that hath miss'd the xxmaj princess is a thing 
▁ xxmaj too bad for bad report ; and he that hath her- 
▁ i mean that married her , alack , good man ! 
▁ xxmaj and therefore banish'd- is a creature such 
▁ xxmaj as , to seek through the regions of the earth 
▁ xxmaj for one his like , there would be something failing 
▁ xxmaj in him that should compare . i do not think 
▁ xxmaj so fair an outward and such stuff within 
▁ xxmaj endows a man but he . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj you speak him far . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . i do extend him , sir , within himself ; 
▁ xxmaj crush him together rather than unfold 
▁ xxmaj his measure duly . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj what 's his name and birth ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . i can not delve him to the root ; his father 
▁ xxmaj was call'd xxmaj sicilius , who did join his honour 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj romans with xxmaj cassibelan , 
▁ xxmaj but had his titles by xxmaj tenantius , whom 
▁ xxmaj he serv'd with glory and admir'd success , 
▁ xxmaj so gain'd the sur - addition xxmaj leonatus ; 
▁ xxmaj and had , besides this gentleman in question , 
▁ xxmaj two other sons , who , in the wars o ' th ' time , 
▁ xxmaj died with their swords in hand ; for which their father , 
▁ xxmaj then old and fond of issue , took such sorrow 
▁ xxmaj that he quit being ; and his gentle lady , 
▁ xxmaj big of this gentleman , our theme , deceas'd 
▁ xxmaj as he was born . xxmaj the xxmaj king he takes the babe 
▁ xxmaj to his protection , calls him xxmaj posthumus xxmaj leonatus , 
▁ xxmaj breeds him and makes him of his bed - chamber , 
▁ xxmaj puts to him all the learnings that his time 
▁ xxmaj could make him the receiver of ; which he took , 
▁ xxmaj as we do air , fast as ' twas minist'red , 
▁ xxmaj and in 's spring became a harvest , liv'd in court- 
▁ xxmaj which rare it is to do- most prais'd , most lov'd , 
▁ a sample to the youngest ; to th ' more mature 
▁ a glass that feated them ; and to the graver 
▁ a child that guided dotards . xxmaj to his mistress , 
▁ xxmaj for whom he now is banish'd- her own price 
▁ xxmaj proclaims how she esteem'd him and his virtue ; 
▁ xxmaj by her election may be truly read 
▁ xxmaj what kind of man he is . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i honour him 
▁ xxmaj even out of your report . xxmaj but pray you tell me , 
▁ xxmaj is she sole child to th ' xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj his only child . 
▁ xxmaj he had two sons- if this be worth your hearing , 
▁ xxmaj mark it- the eldest of them at three years old , 
▁ xxup i ' th ' swathing clothes the other , from their nursery 
▁ xxmaj were stol'n ; and to this hour no guess in knowledge 
▁ xxmaj which way they went . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj how long is this ago ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj some twenty years . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj that a king 's children should be so convey'd , 
▁ xxmaj so slackly guarded , and the search so slow 
▁ xxmaj that could not trace them ! 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj howsoe'er ' tis strange , 
▁ xxmaj or that the negligence may well be laugh'd at , 
▁ xxmaj yet is it true , sir . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i do well believe you . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj we must forbear ; here comes the gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen , and xxmaj princess . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup queen , xxup posthumus , and xxup imogen 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj no , be assur'd you shall not find me , daughter , 
▁ xxmaj after the slander of most stepmothers , 
▁ xxmaj evil - ey'd unto you . xxmaj you 're my prisoner , but 
▁ xxmaj your gaoler shall deliver you the keys 
▁ xxmaj that lock up your restraint . xxmaj for you , xxmaj posthumus , 
▁ xxmaj so soon as i can win th ' offended xxmaj king , 
▁ i will be known your advocate . xxmaj marry , yet 
▁ xxmaj the fire of rage is in him , and ' twere good 
▁ xxmaj you lean'd unto his sentence with what patience 
▁ xxmaj your wisdom may inform you . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj please your xxmaj highness , 
▁ i will from hence to - day . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj you know the peril . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fetch a turn about the garden , pitying 
▁ xxmaj the pangs of barr'd affections , though the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj hath charg'd you should not speak together . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup imogen . o dissembling courtesy ! xxmaj how fine this tyrant 
▁ xxmaj can tickle where she wounds ! xxmaj my dearest husband , 
▁ i something fear my father 's wrath , but nothing- 
▁ xxmaj always reserv'd my holy duty- what 
▁ xxmaj his rage can do on me . xxmaj you must be gone ; 
▁ xxmaj and i shall here abide the hourly shot 
▁ xxmaj of angry eyes , not comforted to live 
▁ xxmaj but that there is this jewel in the world 
▁ xxmaj that i may see again . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj my queen ! my mistress ! 
▁ o lady , weep no more , lest i give cause 
▁ xxmaj to be suspected of more tenderness 
▁ xxmaj than doth become a man . i will remain 
▁ xxmaj the loyal'st husband that did e'er plight troth ; 
▁ xxmaj my residence in xxmaj rome at one xxmaj philario 's , 
▁ xxmaj who to my father was a friend , to me 
▁ xxmaj known but by letter ; thither write , my queen , 
▁ xxmaj and with mine eyes xxmaj i 'll drink the words you send , 
▁ xxmaj though ink be made of gall . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup queen 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj be brief , i pray you . 
▁ xxmaj if the xxmaj king come , i shall incur i know not 
▁ xxmaj how much of his displeasure . [ aside ] xxmaj yet xxmaj i 'll move him 
▁ xxmaj to walk this way . i never do him wrong 
▁ xxmaj but he does buy my injuries , to be friends ; 
▁ xxmaj pays dear for my offences . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj should we be taking leave 
▁ xxmaj as long a term as yet we have to live , 
▁ xxmaj the loathness to depart would grow . xxmaj adieu ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj nay , stay a little . 
▁ xxmaj were you but riding forth to air yourself , 
▁ xxmaj such parting were too petty . xxmaj look here , love : 
▁ xxmaj this diamond was my mother 's ; take it , heart ; 
▁ xxmaj but keep it till you woo another wife , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj imogen is dead . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj how , how ? xxmaj another ? 
▁ xxmaj you gentle gods , give me but this i have , 
▁ xxmaj and sear up my embracements from a next 
▁ xxmaj with bonds of death ! xxmaj remain , remain thou here 
▁ [ puts on the ring ] 
▁ xxmaj while sense can keep it on . xxmaj and , sweetest , fairest , 
▁ xxmaj as i my poor self did exchange for you , 
▁ xxmaj to your so infinite loss , so in our trifles 
▁ i still win of you . xxmaj for my sake wear this ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a manacle of love ; xxmaj i 'll place it 
▁ xxmaj upon this fairest prisoner . [ puts a bracelet on her arm ] 
▁ xxup imogen . o the gods ! 
▁ xxmaj when shall we see again ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cymbeline and xxup lords 

▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj alack , the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thou basest thing , avoid ; hence from my sight 
▁ xxmaj if after this command thou fraught the court 
▁ xxmaj with thy unworthiness , thou diest . xxmaj away ! 
▁ xxmaj thou'rt poison to my blood . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj the gods protect you , 
▁ xxmaj and bless the good remainders of the court ! 
▁ i am gone . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj there can not be a pinch in death 
▁ xxmaj more sharp than this is . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . o disloyal thing , 
▁ xxmaj that shouldst repair my youth , thou heap'st 
▁ a year 's age on me ! 
▁ xxup imogen . i beseech you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj harm not yourself with your vexation . 
▁ i am senseless of your wrath ; a touch more rare 
▁ xxmaj subdues all pangs , all fears . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj past grace ? obedience ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj past hope , and in despair ; that way past grace . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj that mightst have had the sole son of my queen ! 
▁ xxup imogen . o blessed that i might not ! i chose an eagle , 
▁ xxmaj and did avoid a puttock . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thou took'st a beggar , wouldst have made my throne 
▁ a seat for baseness . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj no ; i rather added 
▁ a lustre to it . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . o thou vile one ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj it is your fault that i have lov'd xxmaj posthumus . 
▁ xxmaj you bred him as my playfellow , and he is 
▁ a man worth any woman ; overbuys me 
▁ xxmaj almost the sum he pays . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj what , art thou mad ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj almost , sir . xxmaj heaven restore me ! xxmaj would i were 
▁ a neat - herd 's daughter , and my xxmaj leonatus 
▁ xxmaj our neighbour shepherd 's son ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup queen 

▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thou foolish thing ! 
▁ [ to the xxup queen ] xxmaj they were again together . xxmaj you have done 
▁ xxmaj not after our command . xxmaj away with her , 
▁ xxmaj and pen her up . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj beseech your patience.- xxmaj peace , 
▁ xxmaj dear lady daughter , peace!- xxmaj sweet sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj leave us to ourselves , and make yourself some comfort 
▁ xxmaj out of your best advice . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj nay , let her languish 
▁ a drop of blood a day and , being aged , 
▁ xxmaj die of this folly . xxmaj exit , with xxup lords 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pisanio 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj fie ! you must give way . 
▁ xxmaj here is your servant . xxmaj how now , sir ! xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj my lord your son drew on my master .