xxbos xxup queen . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj no harm , i trust , is done ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj there might have been , 
▁ xxmaj but that my master rather play'd than fought , 
▁ xxmaj and had no help of anger ; they were parted 
▁ xxmaj by gentlemen at hand . 
▁ xxup queen . i am very glad on't . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj your son 's my father 's friend ; he takes his part 
▁ xxmaj to draw upon an exile ! o brave sir ! 
▁ i would they were in xxmaj afric both together ; 
▁ xxmaj myself by with a needle , that i might prick 
▁ xxmaj the goer - back . xxmaj why came you from your master ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj on his command . xxmaj he would not suffer me 
▁ xxmaj to bring him to the haven ; left these notes 
▁ xxmaj of what commands i should be subject to , 
▁ xxmaj when't pleas'd you to employ me . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj this hath been 
▁ xxmaj your faithful servant . i dare lay mine honour 
▁ xxmaj he will remain so . 
▁ xxup pisanio . i humbly thank your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj pray walk awhile . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj about some half - hour hence , 
▁ xxmaj pray you speak with me . xxmaj you shall at least 
▁ xxmaj go see my lord aboard . xxmaj for this time leave me . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj britain . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup cloten and two xxup lords 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj sir , i would advise you to shift a shirt ; the violence 
▁ of action hath made you reek as a sacrifice . xxmaj where air comes out , 
▁ air comes in ; there 's none abroad so wholesome as that you vent . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj if my shirt were bloody , then to shift it . xxmaj have i hurt him ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj no , faith ; not so much as his patience . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj hurt him ! xxmaj his body 's a passable carcass if he be not 
▁ hurt . xxmaj it is a throughfare for steel if it be not hurt . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj his steel was in debt ; it went o ' th ' back 
▁ side the town . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj the villain would not stand me . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj no ; but he fled forward still , toward your 
▁ face . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj stand you ? xxmaj you have land enough of your own ; but he 
▁ added to your having , gave you some ground . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj as many inches as you have oceans . 
▁ xxmaj puppies ! 
▁ xxup cloten . i would they had not come between us . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj so would xxup i , till you had measur'd how long a 
▁ fool you were upon the ground . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj and that she should love this fellow , and refuse me ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj if it be a sin to make a true election , she is 
▁ damn'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj sir , as i told you always , her beauty and her brain go 
▁ not together ; she 's a good sign , but i have seen small reflection 
▁ of her wit . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj she shines not upon fools , lest the reflection 
▁ should hurt her . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll to my chamber . xxmaj would there had been some hurt 
▁ done ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] i wish not so ; unless it had been the fall of 
▁ an ass , which is no great hurt . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj you 'll go with us ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj i 'll attend your lordship . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj nay , come , let 's go together . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj well , my lord . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj britain . xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup imogen and xxup pisanio 

▁ xxup imogen . i would thou grew'st unto the shores o ' th ' haven , 
▁ xxmaj and questioned'st every sail ; if he should write , 
▁ xxmaj and i not have it , ' twere a paper lost , 
▁ xxmaj as offer'd mercy is . xxmaj what was the last 
▁ xxmaj that he spake to thee ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj it was : his queen , his queen ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj then wav'd his handkerchief ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj and kiss'd it , madam . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj senseless linen , happier therein than xxup i ! 
▁ xxmaj and that was all ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj no , madam ; for so long 
▁ xxmaj as he could make me with his eye , or care 
▁ xxmaj distinguish him from others , he did keep 
▁ xxmaj the deck , with glove , or hat , or handkerchief , 
▁ xxmaj still waving , as the fits and stirs of 's mind 
▁ xxmaj could best express how slow his soul sail'd on , 
▁ xxmaj how swift his ship . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj thou shouldst have made him 
▁ xxmaj as little as a crow , or less , ere left 
▁ xxmaj to after - eye him . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj madam , so i did . 
▁ xxup imogen . i would have broke mine eyestrings , crack'd them but 
▁ xxmaj to look upon him , till the diminution 
▁ xxmaj of space had pointed him sharp as my needle ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , followed him till he had melted from 
▁ xxmaj the smallness of a gnat to air , and then 
▁ xxmaj have turn'd mine eye and wept . xxmaj but , good xxmaj pisanio , 
▁ xxmaj when shall we hear from him ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj be assur'd , madam , 
▁ xxmaj with his next vantage . 
▁ xxup imogen . i did not take my leave of him , but had 
▁ xxmaj most pretty things to say . xxmaj ere i could tell him 
▁ xxmaj how i would think on him at certain hours 
▁ xxmaj such thoughts and such ; or i could make him swear 
▁ xxmaj the she s of xxmaj italy should not betray 
▁ xxmaj mine interest and his honour ; or have charg'd him , 
▁ xxmaj at the sixth hour of morn , at noon , at midnight , 
▁ xxup t ' encounter me with orisons , for then 
▁ i am in heaven for him ; or ere i could 
▁ xxmaj give him that parting kiss which i had set 
▁ xxmaj betwixt two charming words , comes in my father , 
▁ xxmaj and like the tyrannous breathing of the north 
▁ xxmaj shakes all our buds from growing . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup lady 

▁ xxup lady . xxmaj the xxmaj queen , madam , 
▁ xxmaj desires your xxmaj highness ' company . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj those things i bid you do , get them dispatch'd . 
▁ i will attend the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj madam , i shall . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rome . xxup philario 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup philario , xxup iachimo , a xxup frenchman , a xxup dutchman , and a xxup spaniard 

▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj believe it , sir , i have seen him in xxmaj britain . xxmaj he was then 
▁ of a crescent note , expected to prove so worthy as since he hath 
▁ been allowed the name of . xxmaj but i could then have look'd on him 
▁ without the help of admiration , though the catalogue of his 
▁ endowments had been tabled by his side , and i to peruse him by 
▁ items . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj you speak of him when he was less furnish'd than now he 
▁ is with that which makes him both without and within . 
▁ xxup frenchman . i have seen him in xxmaj france ; we had very many there could 
▁ behold the sun with as firm eyes as he . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj this matter of marrying his king 's daughter , wherein he 
▁ must be weighed rather by her value than his own , words him , i 
▁ doubt not , a great deal from the matter . 
▁ xxup frenchman . xxmaj and then his banishment . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj ay , and the approbation of those that weep this lamentable 
▁ divorce under her colours are wonderfully to extend him , be it 
▁ but to fortify her judgment , which else an easy battery might lay 
▁ flat , for taking a beggar , without less quality . xxmaj but how comes it 
▁ he is to sojourn with you ? xxmaj how creeps acquaintance ? 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj his father and i were soldiers together , to whom i have 
▁ been often bound for no less than my life . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup posthumus 

▁ xxmaj here comes the xxmaj briton . xxmaj let him be so entertained amongst you as 
▁ suits with gentlemen of your knowing to a stranger of his 
▁ quality . i beseech you all be better known to this gentleman , 
▁ whom i commend to you as a noble friend of mine . xxmaj how worthy he is 
▁ i will leave to appear hereafter , rather than story him in his 
▁ own hearing . 
▁ xxup frenchman . xxmaj sir , we have known together in xxmaj orleans . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj since when i have been debtor to you for courtesies , 
▁ which i will be ever to pay and yet pay still . 
▁ xxup frenchman . xxmaj sir , you o'errate my poor kindness . i was glad i did 
▁ atone my countryman and you ; it had been pity you should have 
▁ been put together with so mortal a purpose as then each bore , 
▁ upon importance of so slight and trivial a nature . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj by your pardon , sir . i was then a young traveller ; 
▁ rather shunn'd to go even with what i heard than in my every 
▁ action to be guided by others ' experiences ; but upon my mended 
▁ judgment- if i offend not to say it is mended- my quarrel was not 
▁ altogether slight . 
▁ xxup frenchman . xxmaj faith , yes , to be put to the arbitrement of swords , and 
▁ by such two that would by all likelihood have confounded one the 
▁ other or have fall'n both . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj can we , with manners , ask what was the difference ? 
▁ xxup frenchman . xxmaj safely , i think . ' twas a contention in public , which 
▁ may , without contradiction , suffer the report . xxmaj it was much like 
▁ an argument that fell out last night , where each of us fell in 
▁ praise of our country mistresses ; this gentleman at that time 
▁ vouching- and upon warrant of bloody affirmation- his to be more 
▁ fair , virtuous , wise , chaste , constant , qualified , and less 
▁ attemptable , than any the rarest of our ladies in xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj that lady is not now living , or this gentleman 's opinion , 
▁ by this , worn out . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj she holds her virtue still , and i my mind . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj you must not so far prefer her fore ours of xxmaj italy . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj being so far provok'd as i was in xxmaj france , i would abate 
▁ her nothing , though i profess myself her adorer , not her friend . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj as fair and as good- a kind of hand - in - hand comparison- 
▁ had been something too fair and too good for any lady in xxmaj britain . 
▁ xxmaj if she went before others i have seen as that diamond of yours 
▁ outlustres many i have beheld , i could not but believe she 
▁ excelled many ; but i have not seen the most precious diamond that 
▁ is , nor you the lady . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i prais'd her as i rated her . xxmaj so do i my stone . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj what do you esteem it at ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj more than the world enjoys . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj either your unparagon'd mistress is dead , or she 's 
▁ outpriz'd by a trifle . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj you are mistaken : the one may be sold or given , if there 
▁ were wealth enough for the purchase or merit for the gift ; the 
▁ other is not a thing for sale , and only the gift of the gods . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj which the gods have given you ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj which by their graces i will keep . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj you may wear her in title yours ; but you know strange fowl 
▁ light upon neighbouring ponds . xxmaj your ring may be stol'n too . xxmaj so 
▁ your brace of unprizable estimations , the one is but frail and 
▁ the other casual ; a cunning thief , or a that - way - accomplish'd 
▁ courtier , would hazard the winning both of first and last . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj your xxmaj italy contains none so accomplish'd a courtier to 
▁ convince the honour of my mistress , if in the holding or loss of 
▁ that you term her frail . i do nothing doubt you have store of 
▁ thieves ; notwithstanding , i fear not my ring . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj let us leave here , gentlemen . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj sir , with all my heart . xxmaj this worthy signior , i thank 
▁ him , makes no stranger of me ; we are familiar at first . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj with five times so much conversation i should get ground 
▁ of your fair mistress ; make her go back even to the yielding , had 
▁ i admittance and opportunity to friend . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj no , no . 
▁ xxup iachimo . i dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to your 
▁ ring , which , in my opinion , o'ervalues it something . xxmaj but i make 
▁ my wager rather against your confidence than her reputation ; and , 
▁ to bar your offence herein too , i durst attempt it against any 
▁ lady in the world . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj you are a great deal abus'd in too bold a persuasion , 
▁ and i doubt not you sustain what y'are worthy of by your attempt . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . a repulse ; though your attempt , as you call it , deserve 
▁ more- a punishment too . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj gentlemen , enough of this . xxmaj it came in too suddenly ; let 
▁ it die as it was born , and i pray you be better acquainted . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj would i had put my estate and my neighbour 's on th ' 
▁ approbation of what i have spoke ! 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj what lady would you choose to assail ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj yours , whom in constancy you think stands so safe . i will 
▁ lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring that , commend me to the 
▁ court where your lady is , with no more advantage than the 
▁ opportunity of a second conference , and i will bring from thence 
▁ that honour of hers which you imagine so reserv'd . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i will wage against your gold , gold to it . xxmaj my ring i 
▁ hold dear as my finger ; ' tis part of it . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj you are a friend , and therein the wiser . xxmaj if you buy 
▁ ladies ' flesh at a million a dram , you can not preserve it from 
▁ tainting . xxmaj but i see you have some religion in you , that you fear . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj this is but a custom in your tongue ; you bear a graver 
▁ purpose , i hope . 
▁ xxup iachimo . i am the master of my speeches , and would undergo what 's 
▁ spoken , i swear . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj will you ? i xxmaj shall but lend my diamond till your return . 
▁ xxmaj let there be covenants drawn between 's . xxmaj my mistress exceeds in 
▁ goodness the hugeness of your unworthy thinking . i dare you to 
▁ this match : here 's my ring . 
▁ xxup philario . i will have it no lay . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj by the gods , it is one . xxmaj if i bring you no sufficient 
▁ testimony that i have enjoy'd the dearest bodily part of your 
▁ mistress , my ten thousand ducats are yours ; so is your diamond 
▁ too . xxmaj if i come off , and leave her in such honour as you have 
▁ trust in , she your jewel , this your jewel , and my gold are yours- 
▁ provided i have your commendation for my more free entertainment . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i embrace these conditions ; let us have articles betwixt 
▁ us . xxmaj only , thus far you shall answer : if you make your voyage upon 
▁ her , and give me directly to understand you have prevail'd , i am 
▁ no further your enemy- she is not worth our debate ; if she remain 
▁ unseduc'd , you not making it appear otherwise , for your ill 
▁ opinion and th ' assault you have made to her chastity you shall 
▁ answer me with your sword . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj your hand- a covenant ! xxmaj we will have these things set down 
▁ by lawful counsel , and straight away for xxmaj britain , lest the 
▁ bargain should catch cold and starve . i will fetch my gold and 
▁ have our two wagers recorded . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj agreed . xxmaj exeunt xxup posthumus and xxup iachimo 
▁ xxup frenchman . xxmaj will this hold , think you ? 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj signior xxmaj iachimo will not from it . xxmaj pray let us follow 'em . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj britain . xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup queen , xxup ladies , and xxup cornelius 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj whiles yet the dew 's on ground , gather those flowers ; 
▁ xxmaj make haste ; who has the note of them ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxup i , madam . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj dispatch . xxmaj exeunt xxup ladies 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , have you brought those drugs ? 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj pleaseth your xxmaj highness , ay . xxmaj here they are , madam . 
▁ [ presenting a box ] 
▁ xxmaj but i beseech your xxmaj grace , without offence- 
▁ xxmaj my conscience bids me ask- wherefore you have 
▁ xxmaj commanded of me these most poisonous compounds 
▁ xxmaj which are the movers of a languishing death , 
▁ xxmaj but , though slow , deadly ? 
▁ xxup queen . i wonder , xxmaj doctor , 
▁ xxmaj thou ask'st me such a question . xxmaj have i not been 
▁ xxmaj thy pupil long ? xxmaj hast thou not learn'd me how 
▁ xxmaj to make perfumes ? distil ? preserve ? yea , so 
▁ xxmaj that our great king himself doth woo me oft 
▁ xxmaj for my confections ? xxmaj having thus far proceeded- 
▁ xxmaj unless thou think'st me devilish- is't not meet 
▁ xxmaj that i did amplify my judgment in 
▁ xxmaj other conclusions ? i will try the forces 
▁ xxmaj of these thy compounds on such creatures as 
▁ xxmaj we count not worth the hanging- but none human- 
▁ xxmaj to try the vigour of them , and apply 
▁ xxmaj allayments to their act , and by them gather 
▁ xxmaj their several virtues and effects . 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj shall from this practice but make hard your heart ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , the seeing these effects will be 
▁ xxmaj both noisome and infectious . 
▁ xxup queen . xxup o , content thee . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pisanio 

▁ [ aside ] xxmaj here comes a flattering rascal ; upon him 
▁ xxmaj will i first work . xxmaj he 's for his master , 
▁ xxmaj an enemy to my son.- xxmaj how now , xxmaj pisanio ! 
▁ xxmaj doctor , your service for this time is ended ; 
▁ xxmaj take your own way . 
▁ xxup cornelius . [ aside ] i do suspect you , madam ; 
▁ xxmaj but you shall do no harm . 
▁ xxup queen . [ to xxup pisanio ] xxmaj hark thee , a word . 
▁ xxup cornelius . [ aside ] i do not like her . xxmaj she doth think she has 
▁ xxmaj strange ling'ring poisons . i do know her spirit , 
▁ xxmaj and will not trust one of her malice with 
▁ a drug of such damn'd nature . xxmaj those she has 
▁ xxmaj will stupefy and dull the sense awhile , 
▁ xxmaj which first perchance she 'll prove on cats and dogs , 
▁ xxmaj then afterward up higher ; but there is 
▁ xxmaj no danger in what show of death it makes , 
▁ xxmaj more than the locking up the spirits a time , 
▁ xxmaj to be more fresh , reviving . xxmaj she is fool'd 
▁ xxmaj with a most false effect ; and i the truer 
▁ xxmaj so to be false with her . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj no further service , xxmaj doctor , 
▁ xxmaj until i send for thee . 
▁ xxup cornelius . i humbly take my leave . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj weeps she still , say'st thou ? xxmaj dost thou think in time 
▁ xxmaj she will not quench , and let instructions enter 
▁ xxmaj where folly now possesses ? xxmaj do thou work . 
▁ xxmaj when thou shalt bring me word she loves my son , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell thee on the instant thou art then 
▁ xxmaj as great as is thy master ; greater , for 
▁ xxmaj his fortunes all lie speechless , and his name 
▁ xxmaj is at last gasp . xxmaj return he can not , nor 
▁ xxmaj continue where he is . xxmaj to shift his being 
▁ xxmaj is to exchange one misery with another , 
▁ xxmaj and every day that xxwrep 3 comes to 
▁ a day 's work in him . xxmaj what shalt thou expect 
▁ xxmaj to be depender on a thing that leans , 
▁ xxmaj who can not be new built , nor has no friends 
▁ xxmaj so much as but to prop him ? 
▁ [ the xxup queen drops the box . xxup pisanio takes it up ] 
▁ xxmaj thou tak'st up 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st not what ; but take it for thy labour . 
▁ xxmaj it is a thing i made , which hath the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj five times redeem'd from death . i do not know 
▁ xxmaj what is more cordial . xxmaj nay , i prithee take it ; 
▁ xxmaj it is an earnest of a further good 
▁ xxmaj that i mean to thee . xxmaj tell thy mistress how 
▁ xxmaj the case stands with her ; do't as from thyself . 
▁ xxmaj think what a chance thou changest on ; but think 
▁ xxmaj thou hast thy mistress still ; to boot , my son , 
▁ xxmaj who shall take notice of thee . xxmaj i 'll move the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj to any shape of thy preferment , such 
▁ xxmaj as thou'lt desire ; and then myself , i chiefly , 
▁ xxmaj that set thee on to this desert , am bound 
▁ xxmaj to load thy merit richly . xxmaj call my women . 
▁ xxmaj think on my words . xxmaj exit xxup pisanio 
▁ a sly and constant knave , 
▁ xxmaj not to be shak'd ; the agent for his master , 
▁ xxmaj and the remembrancer of her to hold 
▁ xxmaj the hand - fast to her lord . i have given him that 
▁ xxmaj which , if he take , shall quite unpeople her 
▁ xxmaj of leigers for her sweet ; and which she after , 
▁ xxmaj except she bend her humour , shall be assur'd 
▁ xxmaj to taste of too . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pisanio and xxup ladies 

▁ xxmaj so , so . xxmaj well done , well done . 
▁ xxmaj the violets , cowslips , and the primroses , 
▁ xxmaj bear to my closet . xxmaj fare thee well , xxmaj pisanio ; 
▁ xxmaj think on my words . xxmaj exeunt xxup queen and xxup ladies 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj and shall do . 
▁ xxmaj but when to my good lord i prove untrue 
▁ xxmaj i 'll choke myself- there 's all xxmaj i 'll do for you . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj britain . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup imogen alone 

▁ xxup imogen . a father cruel and a step - dame false ; 
▁ a foolish suitor to a wedded lady 
▁ xxmaj that hath her husband banish'd . xxup o , that husband ! 
▁ xxmaj my supreme crown of grief ! and those repeated 
▁ xxmaj vexations of it ! xxmaj had i been thief - stol'n , 
▁ xxmaj as my two brothers , happy ! but most miserable 
▁ xxmaj is the desire that 's glorious . xxmaj blessed be those , 
▁ xxmaj how mean soe'er , that have their honest wills , 
▁ xxmaj which seasons comfort . xxmaj who may this be ? xxmaj fie ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pisanio and xxup iachimo 

▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj madam , a noble gentleman of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj comes from my lord with letters . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj change you , madam ? 
▁ xxmaj the worthy xxmaj leonatus is in safety , 
▁ xxmaj and greets your xxmaj highness dearly . [ presents a letter ] 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj thanks , good sir . 
▁ xxmaj you 're kindly welcome . 
▁ xxup iachimo . [ aside ] xxmaj all of her that is out of door most rich ! 
▁ xxmaj if she be furnish'd with a mind so rare , 
▁ xxmaj she is alone th ' xxmaj arabian bird , and i 
▁ xxmaj have lost the wager . xxmaj boldness be my friend ! 
▁ xxmaj arm me , audacity , from head to foot ! 
▁ xxmaj or , like the xxmaj parthian , i shall flying fight ; 
▁ xxmaj rather , directly fly . 
▁ xxup imogen . [ reads ] ' he is one of the noblest note , to whose 
▁ kindnesses i am most infinitely tied . xxmaj reflect upon him 
▁ accordingly , as you value your trust . xxup leonatus . ' 

▁ xxmaj so far i read aloud ; 
▁ xxmaj but even the very middle of my heart 
▁ xxmaj is warm'd by th ' rest and takes it thankfully . 
▁ xxmaj you are as welcome , worthy sir , as i 
▁ xxmaj have words to bid you ; and shall find it so 
▁ xxmaj in all that i can do . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj thanks , fairest lady . 
▁ xxmaj what , are men mad ? xxmaj hath nature given them eyes 
▁ xxmaj to see this vaulted arch and the rich crop 
▁ xxmaj of sea and land , which can distinguish ' twixt 
▁ xxmaj the fiery orbs above and the twinn'd stones 
▁ xxmaj upon the number'd beach , and can we not 
▁ xxmaj partition make with spectacles so precious 
▁ ' twixt fair and foul ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj what makes your admiration ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj it can not be i ' th ' eye , for apes and monkeys , 
▁ ' twixt two such she s , would chatter this way and 
▁ xxmaj contemn with mows the other ; nor i ' th ' judgment , 
▁ xxmaj for idiots in this case of favour would 
▁ xxmaj be wisely definite ; nor i ' th ' appetite ; 
▁ xxmaj sluttery , to such neat excellence oppos'd , 
▁ xxmaj should make desire vomit emptiness , 
▁ xxmaj not so allur'd to feed . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj what is the matter , trow ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj the cloyed will- 
▁ xxmaj that satiate yet unsatisfied desire , that tub 
▁ xxmaj both fill'd and running- ravening first the lamb , 
▁ xxmaj longs after for the garbage . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj what , dear sir , 
▁ xxmaj thus raps you ? xxmaj are you well ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj thanks , madam ; well.- xxmaj beseech you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj desire my man 's abode where i did leave him . 
▁ xxmaj he 's strange and peevish . 
▁ xxup pisanio . i was going , sir , 
▁ xxmaj to give him welcome . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj continues well my lord ? xxmaj his health beseech you ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj well , madam . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj is he dispos'd to mirth ? i hope he is . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj exceeding pleasant ; none a stranger there 
▁ xxmaj so merry and so gamesome . xxmaj he is call'd 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj britain reveller . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj when he was here 
▁ xxmaj he did incline to sadness , and oft - times 
▁ xxmaj not knowing why . 
▁ xxup iachimo . i never saw him sad . 
▁ xxmaj there is a xxmaj frenchman his companion , one 
▁ xxmaj an eminent monsieur that , it seems , much loves 
▁ a xxmaj gallian girl at home . xxmaj he furnaces 
▁ xxmaj the thick sighs from him ; whiles the jolly xxmaj briton- 
▁ xxmaj your lord , i mean- laughs from 's free lungs , cries ' o , 
▁ xxmaj can my sides hold , to think that man- who knows 
▁ xxmaj by history , report , or his own proof , 
▁ xxmaj what woman is , yea , what she can not choose 
▁ xxmaj but must be- will 's free hours languish for 
▁ xxmaj assured bondage ? ' 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj will my lord say so ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj ay , madam , with his eyes in flood with laughter . 
▁ xxmaj it is a recreation to be by 
▁ xxmaj and hear him mock the xxmaj frenchman . xxmaj but heavens know 
▁ xxmaj some men are much to blame . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj not he , i hope . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj not he ; but yet heaven 's bounty towards him might 
▁ xxmaj be us'd more thankfully . xxmaj in himself , ' tis much ; 
▁ xxmaj in you , which i account his , beyond all talents . 
▁ xxmaj whilst i am bound to wonder , i am bound 
▁ xxmaj to pity too . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj what do you pity , sir ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj two creatures heartily . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj am i one , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj you look on me : what wreck discern you in me 
▁ xxmaj deserves your pity ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj lamentable ! xxmaj what , 
▁ xxmaj to hide me from the radiant sun and solace 
▁ xxup i ' th ' dungeon by a snuff ? 
▁ xxup imogen . i pray you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj deliver with more openness your answers 
▁ xxmaj to my demands . xxmaj why do you pity me ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj that others do , 
▁ i was about to say , enjoy your- xxmaj but 
▁ xxmaj it is an office of the gods to venge it , 
▁ xxmaj not mine to speak on't . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj you do seem to know 
▁ xxmaj something of me , or what concerns me ; pray you- 
▁ xxmaj since doubting things go ill often hurts more 
▁ xxmaj than to be sure they do ; for certainties 
▁ xxmaj either are past remedies , or , timely knowing , 
▁ xxmaj the remedy then born- discover to me 
▁ xxmaj what both you spur and stop . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj had i this cheek 
▁ xxmaj to bathe my lips upon ; this hand , whose touch , 
▁ xxmaj whose every touch , would force the feeler 's soul 
▁ xxmaj to th ' oath of loyalty ; this object , which 
▁ xxmaj takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj fixing it only here ; should xxup i , damn'd then , 
▁ xxmaj slaver with lips as common as the stairs 
▁ xxmaj that mount the xxmaj capitol ; join gripes with hands 
▁ xxmaj made hard with hourly falsehood- falsehood as 
▁ xxmaj with labour ; then by - peeping in an eye 
▁ xxmaj base and illustrious as the smoky light 
▁ xxmaj that 's fed with stinking tallow- it were fit 
▁ xxmaj that all the plagues of hell should at one time 
▁ xxmaj encounter such revolt . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj my lord , i fear , 
▁ xxmaj has forgot xxmaj britain . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj and himself . xxmaj not i 
▁ xxmaj inclin'd to this intelligence pronounce 
▁ xxmaj the beggary of his change ; but ' tis your graces 
▁ xxmaj that from my mutest conscience to my tongue 
▁ xxmaj charms this report out . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj let me hear no more . 
▁ xxup iachimo . o dearest soul , your cause doth strike my heart 
▁ xxmaj with pity that doth make me sick ! a lady 
▁ xxmaj so fair , and fasten'd to an empery , 
▁ xxmaj would make the great'st king double , to be partner'd 
▁ xxmaj with tomboys hir'd with that self exhibition 
▁ xxmaj which your own coffers yield ! with diseas'd ventures 
▁ xxmaj that play with all infirmities for gold 
▁ xxmaj which rottenness can lend nature ! such boil'd stuff 
▁ xxmaj as well might poison poison ! xxmaj be reveng'd ; 
▁ xxmaj or she that bore you was no queen , and you 
▁ xxmaj recoil from your great stock . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj reveng'd ? 
▁ xxmaj how should i be reveng'd ? xxmaj if this be true- 
▁ xxmaj as i have such a heart that both mine ears 
▁ xxmaj must not in haste abuse- if it be true , 
▁ xxmaj how should i be reveng'd ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj should he make me 
▁ xxmaj live like xxmaj diana 's priest betwixt cold sheets , 
▁ xxmaj whiles he is vaulting variable ramps , 
▁ xxmaj in your despite , upon your purse ? xxmaj revenge it . 
▁ i dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj more noble than that runagate to your bed , 
▁ xxmaj and will continue fast to your affection , 
▁ xxmaj still close as sure . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj what ho , xxmaj pisanio ! 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj let me my service tender on your lips . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj away ! i do condemn mine ears that have 
▁ xxmaj so long attended thee . xxmaj if thou wert honourable , 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue , not 
▁ xxmaj for such an end thou seek'st , as base as strange . 
▁ xxmaj thou wrong'st a gentleman who is as far 
▁ xxmaj from thy report as thou from honour ; and 
▁ xxmaj solicits here a lady that disdains 
▁ xxmaj thee and the devil alike.- xxmaj what ho , xxmaj pisanio!- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king my father shall be made acquainted 
▁ xxmaj of thy assault . xxmaj if he shall think it fit 
▁ a saucy stranger in his court to mart 
▁ xxmaj as in a xxmaj romish stew , and to expound 
▁ xxmaj his beastly mind to us , he hath a court 
▁ xxmaj he little cares for , and a daughter who 
▁ xxmaj he not respects at all.- xxmaj what ho , xxmaj pisanio ! 
▁ xxup iachimo . o happy xxmaj leonatus ! i may say 
▁ xxmaj the credit that thy lady hath of thee 
▁ xxmaj deserves thy trust , and thy most perfect goodness 
▁ xxmaj her assur'd credit . xxmaj blessed live you long , 
▁ a lady to the worthiest sir that ever 
▁ xxmaj country call'd his ! and you his mistress , only 
▁ xxmaj for the most worthiest fit ! xxmaj give me your pardon . 
▁ i have spoke this to know if your affiance 
▁ xxmaj were deeply rooted , and shall make your lord 
▁ xxmaj that which he is new o'er ; and he is one 
▁ xxmaj the truest manner'd , such a holy witch 
▁ xxmaj that he enchants societies into him , 
▁ xxmaj half all men 's hearts are his . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj you make amends . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj he sits ' mongst men like a descended god : 
▁ xxmaj he hath a kind of honour sets him of 
▁ xxmaj more than a mortal seeming . xxmaj be not angry , 
▁ xxmaj most mighty xxmaj princess , that i have adventur'd 
▁ xxmaj to try your taking of a false report , which hath 
▁ xxmaj honour'd with confirmation your great judgment 
▁ xxmaj in the election of a sir so rare , 
▁ xxmaj which you know can not err . xxmaj the love i bear him 
▁ xxmaj made me to fan you thus ; but the gods made you , 
▁ xxmaj unlike all others , chaffless . xxmaj pray your pardon . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj all 's well , sir ; take my pow'r i ' th ' court for yours . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj my humble thanks . i had almost forgot 
▁ xxup t ' entreat your xxmaj grace but in a small request , 
▁ xxmaj and yet of moment too , for it concerns 
▁ xxmaj your lord ; myself and other noble friends 
▁ xxmaj are partners in the business . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj pray what is't ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj some dozen xxmaj romans of us , and your lord- 
▁ xxmaj the best feather of our wing- have mingled sums 
▁ xxmaj to buy a present for the xxmaj emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj which xxup i , the factor for the rest , have done 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj france . ' tis plate of rare device , and jewels 
▁ xxmaj of rich and exquisite form , their values great ; 
▁ xxmaj and i am something curious , being strange , 
▁ xxmaj to have them in safe stowage . xxmaj may it please you 
▁ xxmaj to take them in protection ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj willingly ; 
▁ xxmaj and pawn mine honour for their safety . xxmaj since 
▁ xxmaj my lord hath interest in them , i will keep them 
▁ xxmaj in my bedchamber . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj they are in a trunk , 
▁ xxmaj attended by my men . i will make bold 
▁ xxmaj to send them to you only for this night ; 
▁ i must aboard to - morrow . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxup o , no , no . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj yes , i beseech ; or i shall short my word 
▁ xxmaj by length'ning my return . xxmaj from xxmaj gallia 
▁ i cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise 
▁ xxmaj to see your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup imogen . i thank you for your pains . 
▁ xxmaj but not away to - morrow ! 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxup o , i must , madam . 
▁ xxmaj therefore i shall beseech you , if you please 
▁ xxmaj to greet your lord with writing , do't to - night . 
▁ i have outstood my time , which is material 
▁ ' to th ' tender of our present . 
▁ xxup imogen . i will write . 
▁ xxmaj send your trunk to me ; it shall safe be kept 
▁ xxmaj and truly yielded you . xxmaj you 're very welcome . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj britain . xxmaj before xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup cloten and the two xxup lords 

▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj was there ever man had such luck ! xxmaj when i kiss'd the jack , 
▁ upon an up - cast to be hit away ! i had a hundred pound on't ; and 
▁ then a whoreson jackanapes must take me up for swearing , as if i 
▁ borrowed mine oaths of him , and might not spend them at my 
▁ pleasure . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj what got he by that ? xxmaj you have broke his pate with your 
▁ bowl . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj if his wit had been like him that broke it , it 
▁ would have run all out . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj when a gentleman is dispos'd to swear , it is not for any 
▁ standers - by to curtail his oaths . xxmaj ha ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj no , my lord ; [ aside ] nor crop the ears of them . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj whoreson dog ! i give him satisfaction ? xxmaj would he had been 
▁ one of my rank ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj to have smell'd like a fool . 
▁ xxup cloten . i am not vex'd more at anything in th ' earth . a pox on't ! i 
▁ had rather not be so noble as i am ; they dare not fight with me , 
▁ because of the xxmaj queen my mother . xxmaj every jackslave hath his bellyful 
▁ of fighting , and i must go up and down like a cock that nobody 
▁ can match . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj you are cock and capon too ; and you crow , 
▁ cock , with your comb on . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj sayest thou ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj it is not fit your lordship should undertake every 
▁ companion that you give offence to . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj no , i know that ; but it is fit i should commit offence to 
▁ my inferiors . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj ay , it is fit for your lordship only . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj why , so i say . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj did you hear of a stranger that 's come to court 
▁ to - night ? 
▁ xxup cloten . a stranger , and i not known on't ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj he 's a strange fellow himself , and knows it 
▁ not . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj there 's an xxmaj italian come , and , ' tis thought , one of 
▁ xxmaj leonatus ' friends . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj leonatus ? a banish'd rascal ; and he 's another , whatsoever 
▁ he be . xxmaj who told you of this stranger ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj one of your lordship 's pages . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj is it fit i went to look upon him ? xxmaj is there no derogation 
▁ in't ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj you can not derogate , my lord . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj not easily , i think . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . [ aside ] xxmaj you are a fool granted ; therefore your issues , 
▁ being foolish , do not derogate . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll go see this xxmaj italian . xxmaj what i have lost to - day at 
▁ bowls xxmaj i 'll win to - night of him . xxmaj come , go . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj i 'll attend your lordship . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cloten and xxup first xxup lord 
▁ xxmaj that such a crafty devil as is his mother 
▁ xxmaj should yield the world this ass ! a woman that 
▁ xxmaj bears all down with her brain ; and this her son 
▁ xxmaj can not take two from twenty , for his heart , 
▁ xxmaj and leave eighteen . xxmaj alas , poor princess , 
▁ xxmaj thou divine xxmaj imogen , what thou endur'st , 
▁ xxmaj betwixt a father by thy step - dame govern'd , 
▁ a mother hourly coining plots , a wooer 
▁ xxmaj more hateful than the foul expulsion is 
▁ xxmaj of thy dear husband , than that horrid act 
▁ xxmaj of the divorce he 'd make ! xxmaj the heavens hold firm 
▁ xxmaj the walls of thy dear honour , keep unshak'd 
▁ xxmaj that temple , thy fair mind , that thou mayst stand 
▁ xxup t ' enjoy thy banish'd lord and this great land ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj britain . xxup imogen 's bedchamber in xxup cymbeline 's palace ; a trunk in one corner 

 xxmaj enter xxup imogen in her bed , and a xxup lady attending 

▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj my woman ? xxmaj helen ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj please you , madam . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj what hour is it ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj almost midnight , madam . 
▁ xxup imogen . i have read three hours then . xxmaj mine eyes are weak ; 
▁ xxmaj fold down the leaf where i have left . xxmaj to bed . 
▁ xxmaj take not away the taper , leave it burning ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou canst awake by four o ' th ' clock , 
▁ i prithee call me . xxmaj sleep hath seiz'd me wholly . xxmaj exit xxup lady 
▁ xxmaj to your protection i commend me , gods . 
▁ xxmaj from fairies and the tempters of the night 
▁ xxmaj guard me , beseech ye ! 
▁ [ sleeps . xxup iachimo comes from the trunk ] 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj the crickets sing , and man 's o'er - labour'd sense 
▁ xxmaj repairs itself by rest . xxmaj our xxmaj tarquin thus 
▁ xxmaj did softly press the rushes ere he waken'd 
▁ xxmaj the chastity he wounded . xxmaj cytherea , 
▁ xxmaj how bravely thou becom'st thy bed ! fresh lily , 
▁ xxmaj and whiter than the sheets ! xxmaj that i might touch ! 
▁ xxmaj but kiss ; one kiss ! xxmaj rubies unparagon'd , 
▁ xxmaj how dearly they do't ! ' tis her breathing that 
▁ xxmaj perfumes the chamber thus . xxmaj the flame o ' th ' taper 
▁ xxmaj bows toward her and would under - peep her lids 
▁ xxmaj to see th ' enclosed lights , now canopied 
▁ xxmaj under these windows white and azure , lac'd 
▁ xxmaj with blue of heaven 's own tinct . xxmaj but my design 
▁ xxmaj to note the chamber . i will write all down : 
▁ xxmaj such and such pictures ; there the window ; such 
▁ xxmaj th ' adornment of her bed ; the arras , figures- 
▁ xxmaj why , such and such ; and the contents o ' th ' story . 
▁ xxmaj ah , but some natural notes about her body 
▁ xxmaj above ten thousand meaner movables 
▁ xxmaj would testify , t ' enrich mine inventory . 
▁ o sleep , thou ape of death , lie dull upon her ! 
▁ xxmaj and be her sense but as a monument , 
▁ xxmaj thus in a chapel lying ! xxmaj come off , come off ; 
▁ [ taking off her bracelet ] 
▁ xxmaj as slippery as the xxmaj gordian knot was hard ! 
▁ ' tis mine ; and this will witness outwardly , 
▁ xxmaj as strongly as the conscience does within , 
▁ xxmaj to th ' madding of her lord . xxmaj on her left breast 
▁ a mole cinque - spotted , like the crimson drops 
▁ xxup i ' th ' bottom of a cowslip . xxmaj here 's a voucher 
▁ xxmaj stronger than ever law could make ; this secret 
▁ xxmaj will force him think i have pick'd the lock and ta'en 
▁ xxmaj the treasure of her honour . xxmaj no more . xxmaj to what end ? 
▁ xxmaj why should i write this down that 's riveted , 
▁ xxmaj screw'd to my memory ? xxmaj she hath been reading late 
▁ xxmaj the tale of xxmaj tereus ; here the leaf 's turn'd down 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj philomel gave up . i have enough . 
▁ xxmaj to th ' trunk again , and shut the spring of it . 
▁ xxmaj swift , swift , you dragons of the night , that dawning 
▁ xxmaj may bare the raven 's eye ! i lodge in fear ; 
▁ xxmaj though this a heavenly angel , hell is here . [ clock strikes ] 
▁ xxmaj one , two , three . xxmaj time , time ! xxmaj exit into the trunk 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxup cymbeline 's palace . xxmaj an ante - chamber adjoining xxup imogen 's apartments 

 xxmaj enter xxup cloten and xxup lords 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj your lordship is the most patient man in loss , the most 
▁ coldest that ever turn'd up ace . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj it would make any man cold to lose . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj but not every man patient after the noble temper of 
▁ your lordship . xxmaj you are most hot and furious when you win . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj winning will put any man into courage . xxmaj if i could get this 
▁ foolish xxmaj imogen , i should have gold enough . xxmaj it 's almost morning , 
▁ is't not ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj day , my lord . 
▁ xxup cloten . i would this music would come . i am advised to give her 
▁ music a mornings ; they say it will penetrate . 

▁ xxmaj enter musicians 

▁ xxmaj come on , tune . xxmaj if you can penetrate her with your fingering , so . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll try with tongue too . xxmaj if none will do , let her remain ; but 
▁ xxmaj i 'll never give o'er . xxmaj first , a very excellent good - conceited 
▁ thing ; after , a wonderful sweet air , with admirable rich words to 
▁ it- and then let her consider . 

▁ xxup song 

▁ xxmaj hark , hark ! the lark at heaven 's gate sings , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj phoebus ' gins arise , 
▁ xxmaj his steeds to water at those springs 
▁ xxmaj on chalic'd flow'rs that lies ; 
▁ xxmaj and winking xxmaj mary - buds begin 
▁ xxmaj to ope their golden eyes . 
▁ xxmaj with everything that pretty bin , 
▁ xxmaj my lady sweet , arise ; 
▁ xxmaj arise , arise ! 

▁ xxmaj so , get you gone . xxmaj if this penetrate , i will consider your music 
▁ the better ; if it do not , it is a vice in her ears which 
▁ horsehairs and calves ' guts , nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to 
▁ boot , can never amend . xxmaj exeunt musicians 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cymbeline and xxup queen 

▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup cloten . i am glad i was up so late , for that 's the reason i was up 
▁ so early . xxmaj he can not choose but take this service i have done 
▁ fatherly.- xxmaj good morrow to your xxmaj majesty and to my gracious mother . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj attend you here the door of our stern daughter ? 
▁ xxmaj will she not forth ? 
▁ xxup cloten . i have assail'd her with musics , but she vouchsafes no 
▁ notice . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj the exile of her minion is too new ; 
▁ xxmaj she hath not yet forgot him ; some more time 
▁ xxmaj must wear the print of his remembrance out , 
▁ xxmaj and then she 's yours . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj you are most bound to th ' xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj who lets go by no vantages that may 
▁ xxmaj prefer you to his daughter . xxmaj frame yourself 
▁ xxmaj to orderly soliciting , and be friended 
▁ xxmaj with aptness of the season ; make denials 
▁ xxmaj increase your services ; so seem as if 
▁ xxmaj you were inspir'd to do those duties which 
▁ xxmaj you tender to her ; that you in all obey her , 
▁ xxmaj save when command to your dismission tends , 
▁ xxmaj and therein you are senseless . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj senseless ? xxmaj not so . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj so like you , sir , ambassadors from xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj the one is xxmaj caius xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . a worthy fellow , 
▁ xxmaj albeit he comes on angry purpose now ; 
▁ xxmaj but that 's no fault of his . xxmaj we must receive him 
▁ xxmaj according to the honour of his sender ; 
▁ xxmaj and towards himself , his goodness forespent on us , 
▁ xxmaj we must extend our notice . xxmaj our dear son , 
▁ xxmaj when you have given good morning to your mistress , 
▁ xxmaj attend the xxmaj queen and us ; we shall have need 
▁ xxup t ' employ you towards this xxmaj roman . xxmaj come , our queen . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup cloten 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj if she be up , xxmaj i 'll speak with her ; if not , 
▁ xxmaj let her lie still and dream . xxmaj by your leave , ho ! [ knocks ] 
▁ i know her women are about her ; what 
▁ xxmaj if i do line one of their hands ? ' tis gold 
▁ xxmaj which buys admittance ; oft it doth - yea , and makes 
▁ xxmaj diana 's rangers false themselves , yield up 
▁ xxmaj their deer to th ' stand o ' th ' stealer ; and ' tis gold 
▁ xxmaj which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , sometime hangs both thief and true man . xxmaj what 
▁ xxmaj can it not do and undo ? i will make 
▁ xxmaj one of her women lawyer to me , for 
▁ i yet not understand the case myself . 
▁ xxmaj by your leave . [ knocks ] 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup lady 

▁ xxup lady . xxmaj who 's there that knocks ? 
▁ xxup cloten . a gentleman . 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj no more ? 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj yes , and a gentlewoman 's son . 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj that 's more 
▁ xxmaj than some whose tailors are as dear as yours 
▁ xxmaj can justly boast of . xxmaj what 's your lordship 's pleasure ? 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj your lady 's person ; is she ready ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj ay , 
▁ xxmaj to keep her chamber . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj there is gold for you ; sell me your good report . 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj how ? xxmaj my good name ? or to report of you 
▁ xxmaj what i shall think is good ? xxmaj the xxmaj princess ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup imogen 

▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj good morrow , fairest sister . xxmaj your sweet hand . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup lady 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj good morrow , sir . xxmaj you lay out too much pains 
▁ xxmaj for purchasing but trouble . xxmaj the thanks i give 
▁ xxmaj is telling you that i am poor of thanks , 
▁ xxmaj and scarce can spare them . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj still i swear i love you . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj if you but said so , ' twere as deep with me . 
▁ xxmaj if you swear still , your recompense is still 
▁ xxmaj that i regard it not . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj this is no answer . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj but that you shall not say i yield , being silent , 
▁ i would not speak . i pray you spare me . xxmaj faith , 
▁ i shall unfold equal discourtesy 
▁ xxmaj to your best kindness ; one of your great knowing 
▁ xxmaj should learn , being taught , forbearance . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj to leave you in your madness ' twere my sin ; 
▁ i will not . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj fools are not mad folks . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj do you call me fool ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj as i am mad , i do ; 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll be patient , xxmaj i 'll no more be mad ; 
▁ xxmaj that cures us both . i am much sorry , sir , 
▁ xxmaj you put me to forget a lady 's manners 
▁ xxmaj by being so verbal ; and learn now , for all , 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , which know my heart , do here pronounce , 
▁ xxmaj by th ' very truth of it , i care not for you , 
▁ xxmaj and am so near the lack of charity 
▁ xxmaj to accuse myself i hate you ; which i had rather 
▁ xxmaj you felt than make't my boast . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj you sin against 
▁ xxmaj obedience , which you owe your father . xxmaj for 
▁ xxmaj the contract you pretend with that base wretch , 
▁ xxmaj one bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes , 
▁ xxmaj with scraps o ' th ' court- it is no contract , none . 
▁ xxmaj and though it be allowed in meaner parties- 
▁ xxmaj yet who than he more mean?- to knit their souls- 
▁ xxmaj on whom there is no more dependency 
▁ xxmaj but brats and beggary- in self - figur'd knot , 
▁ xxmaj yet you are curb'd from that enlargement by 
▁ xxmaj the consequence o ' th ' crown , and must not foil 
▁ xxmaj the precious note of it with a base slave , 
▁ a hilding for a livery , a squire 's cloth , 
▁ a pantler- not so eminent ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj profane fellow ! 
▁ xxmaj wert thou the son of xxmaj jupiter , and no more 
▁ xxmaj but what thou art besides , thou wert too base 
▁ xxmaj to be his groom . xxmaj thou wert dignified enough , 
▁ xxmaj even to the point of envy , if ' twere made 
▁ xxmaj comparative for your virtues to be styl'd 
▁ xxmaj the under - hangman of his kingdom , and hated 
▁ xxmaj for being preferr'd so well . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj the south fog rot him ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj he never can meet more mischance than come 
▁ xxmaj to be but nam'd of thee . xxmaj his mean'st garment 
▁ xxmaj that ever hath but clipp'd his body is dearer 
▁ xxmaj in my respect than all the hairs above thee , 
▁ xxmaj were they all made such men . xxmaj how now , xxmaj pisanio ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pisanio 

▁ xxup cloten . ' his garments ' ! xxmaj now the devil- 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj to xxmaj dorothy my woman hie thee presently . 
▁ xxup cloten . ' his garment ' ! 
▁ xxup imogen . i am sprited with a fool ; 
▁ xxmaj frighted , and ang'red worse . xxmaj go bid my woman 
▁ xxmaj search for a jewel that too casually 
▁ xxmaj hath left mine arm . xxmaj it was thy master 's ; shrew me , 
▁ xxmaj if i would lose it for a revenue 
▁ xxmaj of any king 's in xxmaj europe ! i do think 
▁ i saw't this morning ; confident i am 
▁ xxmaj last night ' twas on mine arm ; i kiss'd it . 
▁ i hope it be not gone to tell my lord 
▁ xxmaj that i kiss aught but he . 
▁ xxup pisanio . ' twill not be lost . 
▁ xxup imogen . i hope so . xxmaj go and search . xxmaj exit xxup pisanio 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj you have abus'd me . 
▁ ' his meanest garment ' ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj ay , i said so , sir . 
▁ xxmaj if you will make ' t an action , call witness to ' t. 
▁ xxup cloten . i will inform your father . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj your mother too . 
▁ xxmaj she 's my good lady and will conceive , i hope ,