xxbos xxmaj but the worst of me . xxmaj so i leave you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj to th ' worst of discontent . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj i 'll be reveng'd . 
▁ ' his mean'st garment ' ! xxmaj well . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rome . xxup philario 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup posthumus and xxup philario 

▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj fear it not , sir ; i would i were so sure 
▁ xxmaj to win the xxmaj king as i am bold her honour 
▁ xxmaj will remain hers . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj what means do you make to him ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj not any ; but abide the change of time , 
▁ xxmaj quake in the present winter 's state , and wish 
▁ xxmaj that warmer days would come . xxmaj in these fear'd hopes 
▁ i barely gratify your love ; they failing , 
▁ i must die much your debtor . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj your very goodness and your company 
▁ xxmaj o'erpays all i can do . xxmaj by this your king 
▁ xxmaj hath heard of great xxmaj augustus . xxmaj caius xxmaj lucius 
▁ xxmaj will do 's commission throughly ; and i think 
▁ xxmaj he 'll grant the tribute , send th ' arrearages , 
▁ xxmaj or look upon our xxmaj romans , whose remembrance 
▁ xxmaj is yet fresh in their grief . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i do believe 
▁ xxmaj statist though i am none , nor like to be , 
▁ xxmaj that this will prove a war ; and you shall hear 
▁ xxmaj the legions now in xxmaj gallia sooner landed 
▁ xxmaj in our not - fearing xxmaj britain than have tidings 
▁ xxmaj of any penny tribute paid . xxmaj our countrymen 
▁ xxmaj are men more order'd than when xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj smil'd at their lack of skill , but found their courage 
▁ xxmaj worthy his frowning at . xxmaj their discipline , 
▁ xxmaj now mingled with their courages , will make known 
▁ xxmaj to their approvers they are people such 
▁ xxmaj that mend upon the world . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup iachimo 

▁ xxup philario . xxmaj see ! xxmaj iachimo ! 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj the swiftest harts have posted you by land , 
▁ xxmaj and winds of all the comers kiss'd your sails , 
▁ xxmaj to make your vessel nimble . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj welcome , sir . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i hope the briefness of your answer made 
▁ xxmaj the speediness of your return . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj your lady 
▁ xxmaj is one of the fairest that i have look'd upon . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj and therewithal the best ; or let her beauty 
▁ xxmaj look through a casement to allure false hearts , 
▁ xxmaj and be false with them . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj here are letters for you . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj their tenour good , i trust . 
▁ xxup iachimo . ' tis very like . 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj was xxmaj caius xxmaj lucius in the xxmaj britain court 
▁ xxmaj when you were there ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj he was expected then , 
▁ xxmaj but not approach'd . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj all is well yet . 
▁ xxmaj sparkles this stone as it was wo nt , or is't not 
▁ xxmaj too dull for your good wearing ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj if i have lost it , 
▁ i should have lost the worth of it in gold . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make a journey twice as far t ' enjoy 
▁ a second night of such sweet shortness which 
▁ xxmaj was mine in xxmaj britain ; for the ring is won . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj the stone 's too hard to come by . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj not a whit , 
▁ xxmaj your lady being so easy . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj make not , sir , 
▁ xxmaj your loss your sport . i hope you know that we 
▁ xxmaj must not continue friends . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj good sir , we must , 
▁ xxmaj if you keep covenant . xxmaj had i not brought 
▁ xxmaj the knowledge of your mistress home , i grant 
▁ xxmaj we were to question farther ; but i now 
▁ xxmaj profess myself the winner of her honour , 
▁ xxmaj together with your ring ; and not the wronger 
▁ xxmaj of her or you , having proceeded but 
▁ xxmaj by both your wills . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj if you can make't apparent 
▁ xxmaj that you have tasted her in bed , my hand 
▁ xxmaj and ring is yours . xxmaj if not , the foul opinion 
▁ xxmaj you had of her pure honour gains or loses 
▁ xxmaj your sword or mine , or masterless leaves both 
▁ xxmaj to who shall find them . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj sir , my circumstances , 
▁ xxmaj being so near the truth as i will make them , 
▁ xxmaj must first induce you to believe- whose strength 
▁ i will confirm with oath ; which i doubt not 
▁ xxmaj you 'll give me leave to spare when you shall find 
▁ xxmaj you need it not . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj first , her bedchamber , 
▁ xxmaj where i confess i slept not , but profess 
▁ xxmaj had that was well worth watching - it was hang'd 
▁ xxmaj with tapestry of silk and silver ; the story , 
▁ xxmaj proud xxmaj cleopatra when she met her xxmaj roman 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cydnus swell'd above the banks , or for 
▁ xxmaj the press of boats or pride . a piece of work 
▁ xxmaj so bravely done , so rich , that it did strive 
▁ xxmaj in workmanship and value ; which i wonder'd 
▁ xxmaj could be so rarely and exactly wrought , 
▁ xxmaj since the true life on't was- 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj this is true ; 
▁ xxmaj and this you might have heard of here , by me 
▁ xxmaj or by some other . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj more particulars 
▁ xxmaj must justify my knowledge . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj so they must , 
▁ xxmaj or do your honour injury . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj the chimney 
▁ xxmaj is south the chamber , and the chimneypiece 
▁ xxmaj chaste xxmaj dian bathing . xxmaj never saw i figures 
▁ xxmaj so likely to report themselves . xxmaj the cutter 
▁ xxmaj was as another nature , dumb ; outwent her , 
▁ xxmaj motion and breath left out . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj this is a thing 
▁ xxmaj which you might from relation likewise reap , 
▁ xxmaj being , as it is , much spoke of . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj the roof o ' th ' chamber 
▁ xxmaj with golden cherubins is fretted ; her andirons- 
▁ i had forgot them- were two winking xxmaj cupids 
▁ xxmaj of silver , each on one foot standing , nicely 
▁ xxmaj depending on their brands . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj this is her honour ! 
▁ xxmaj let it be granted you have seen all this , and praise 
▁ xxmaj be given to your remembrance ; the description 
▁ xxmaj of what is in her chamber nothing saves 
▁ xxmaj the wager you have laid . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj then , if you can , [ shows the bracelet ] 
▁ xxmaj be pale . i beg but leave to air this jewel . xxmaj see ! 
▁ xxmaj and now ' tis up again . xxmaj it must be married 
▁ xxmaj to that your diamond ; xxmaj i 'll keep them . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj jove ! 
▁ xxmaj once more let me behold it . xxmaj is it that 
▁ xxmaj which i left with her ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj sir- i thank her- that . 
▁ xxmaj she stripp'd it from her arm ; i see her yet ; 
▁ xxmaj her pretty action did outsell her gift , 
▁ xxmaj and yet enrich'd it too . xxmaj she gave it me , and said 
▁ xxmaj she priz'd it once . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj may be she pluck'd it of 
▁ xxmaj to send it me . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj she writes so to you , doth she ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxup o , no , no , no ! ' tis true . xxmaj here , take this too ; 
▁ [ gives the ring ] 
▁ xxmaj it is a basilisk unto mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj kills me to look on't . xxmaj let there be no honour 
▁ xxmaj where there is beauty ; truth where semblance ; love 
▁ xxmaj where there 's another man . xxmaj the vows of women 
▁ xxmaj of no more bondage be to where they are made 
▁ xxmaj than they are to their virtues , which is nothing . 
▁ xxup o , above measure false ! 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj have patience , sir , 
▁ xxmaj and take your ring again ; ' tis not yet won . 
▁ xxmaj it may be probable she lost it , or 
▁ xxmaj who knows if one her women , being corrupted 
▁ xxmaj hath stol'n it from her ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj very true ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i hope he came by't . xxmaj back my ring . 
▁ xxmaj render to me some corporal sign about her , 
▁ xxmaj more evident than this ; for this was stol'n . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj by xxmaj jupiter , i had it from her arm ! 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj hark you , he swears ; by xxmaj jupiter he swears . 
▁ ' tis true- nay , keep the ring , ' tis true . i am sure 
▁ xxmaj she would not lose it . xxmaj her attendants are 
▁ xxmaj all sworn and honourable- they induc'd to steal it ! 
▁ xxmaj and by a stranger ! xxmaj no , he hath enjoy'd her . 
▁ xxmaj the cognizance of her incontinency 
▁ xxmaj is this : she hath bought the name of whore thus dearly . 
▁ xxmaj there , take thy hire ; and all the fiends of hell 
▁ xxmaj divide themselves between you ! 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj sir , be patient ; 
▁ xxmaj this is not strong enough to be believ'd 
▁ xxmaj of one persuaded well of . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj never talk on't ; 
▁ xxmaj she hath been colted by him . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj if you seek 
▁ xxmaj for further satisfying , under her breast- 
▁ xxmaj worthy the pressing- lies a mole , right proud 
▁ xxmaj of that most delicate lodging . xxmaj by my life , 
▁ i kiss'd it ; and it gave me present hunger 
▁ xxmaj to feed again , though full . xxmaj you do remember 
▁ xxmaj this stain upon her ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj ay , and it doth confirm 
▁ xxmaj another stain , as big as hell can hold , 
▁ xxmaj were there no more but it . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj will you hear more ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj spare your arithmetic ; never count the turns . 
▁ xxmaj once , and a million ! 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj i 'll be sworn- 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj no swearing . 
▁ xxmaj if you will swear you have not done't , you lie ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will kill thee if thou dost deny 
▁ xxmaj thou'st made me cuckold . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj i 'll deny nothing . 
▁ xxup posthumus . o that i had her here to tear her limb - meal ! 
▁ i will go there and do't , i ' th ' court , before 
▁ xxmaj her father . xxmaj i 'll do something- xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup philario . xxmaj quite besides 
▁ xxmaj the government of patience ! xxmaj you have won . 
▁ xxmaj let 's follow him and pervert the present wrath 
▁ xxmaj he hath against himself . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj with all my heart . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj another room in xxup philario 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup posthumus 

▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj is there no way for men to be , but women 
▁ xxmaj must be half - workers ? xxmaj we are all bastards , 
▁ xxmaj and that most venerable man which i 
▁ xxmaj did call my father was i know not where 
▁ xxmaj when i was stamp'd . xxmaj some coiner with his tools 
▁ xxmaj made me a counterfeit ; yet my mother seem'd 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dian of that time . xxmaj so doth my wife 
▁ xxmaj the nonpareil of this . xxup o , vengeance , vengeance ! 
▁ xxmaj me of my lawful pleasure she restrain'd , 
▁ xxmaj and pray'd me oft forbearance ; did it with 
▁ a pudency so rosy , the sweet view on't 
▁ xxmaj might well have warm'd old xxmaj saturn ; that i thought her 
▁ xxmaj as chaste as unsunn'd snow . xxup o , all the devils ! 
▁ xxmaj this yellow xxmaj iachimo in an hour- was't not ? 
▁ xxmaj or less!- at first ? xxmaj perchance he spoke not , but , 
▁ xxmaj like a full - acorn'd boar , a xxmaj german one , 
▁ xxmaj cried ' o ! ' and mounted ; found no opposition 
▁ xxmaj but what he look'd for should oppose and she 
▁ xxmaj should from encounter guard . xxmaj could i find out 
▁ xxmaj the woman 's part in me ! xxmaj for there 's no motion 
▁ xxmaj that tends to vice in man but i affirm 
▁ xxmaj it is the woman 's part . xxmaj be it lying , note it , 
▁ xxmaj the woman 's ; flattering , hers ; deceiving , hers ; 
▁ xxmaj lust and rank thoughts , hers , hers ; revenges , hers ; 
▁ xxmaj ambitions , covetings , change of prides , disdain , 
▁ xxmaj nice longing , slanders , mutability , 
▁ xxmaj all faults that man may name , nay , that hell knows , 
▁ xxmaj why , hers , in part or all ; but rather all ; 
▁ xxmaj for even to vice 
▁ xxmaj they are not constant , but are changing still 
▁ xxmaj one vice but of a minute old for one 
▁ xxmaj not half so old as that . xxmaj i 'll write against them , 
▁ xxmaj detest them , curse them . xxmaj yet ' tis greater skill 
▁ xxmaj in a true hate to pray they have their will : 
▁ xxmaj the very devils can not plague them better . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj britain . a hall in xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter in state , xxup cymbeline , xxup queen , xxup cloten , and xxup lords at one door , 
 and at another xxup caius xxup lucius and attendants 

▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj now say , what would xxmaj augustus xxmaj caesar with us ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj when xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar- whose remembrance yet 
▁ xxmaj lives in men 's eyes , and will to ears and tongues 
▁ xxmaj be theme and hearing ever- was in this xxmaj britain , 
▁ xxmaj and conquer'd it , xxmaj cassibelan , thine uncle , 
▁ xxmaj famous in xxmaj caesar 's praises no whit less 
▁ xxmaj than in his feats deserving it , for him 
▁ xxmaj and his succession granted xxmaj rome a tribute , 
▁ xxmaj yearly three thousand pounds , which by thee lately 
▁ xxmaj is left untender'd . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and , to kill the marvel , 
▁ xxmaj shall be so ever . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj there be many xxmaj caesars 
▁ xxmaj ere such another xxmaj julius . xxmaj britain is 
▁ a world by itself , and we will nothing pay 
▁ xxmaj for wearing our own noses . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj that opportunity , 
▁ xxmaj which then they had to take from 's , to resume 
▁ xxmaj we have again . xxmaj remember , sir , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj the kings your ancestors , together with 
▁ xxmaj the natural bravery of your isle , which stands 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj neptune 's park , ribb'd and pal'd in 
▁ xxmaj with rocks unscalable and roaring waters , 
▁ xxmaj with sands that will not bear your enemies ' boats 
▁ xxmaj but suck them up to th ' top - mast . a kind of conquest 
▁ xxmaj caesar made here ; but made not here his brag 
▁ xxmaj of ' came , and saw , and overcame . ' xxmaj with shame- 
▁ xxmaj the first that ever touch'd him- he was carried 
▁ xxmaj from off our coast , twice beaten ; and his shipping- 
▁ xxmaj poor ignorant baubles!- on our terrible seas , 
▁ xxmaj like egg - shells mov'd upon their surges , crack'd 
▁ xxmaj as easily ' gainst our rocks ; for joy whereof 
▁ xxmaj the fam'd xxmaj cassibelan , who was once at point- 
▁ xxup o , giglot fortune!- to master xxmaj caesar 's sword , 
▁ xxmaj made xxmaj lud 's xxmaj town with rejoicing fires bright 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj britons strut with courage . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj come , there 's no more tribute to be paid . xxmaj our kingdom is 
▁ stronger than it was at that time ; and , as i said , there is no 
▁ moe such xxmaj caesars . xxmaj other of them may have crook'd noses ; but to 
▁ owe such straight arms , none . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj son , let your mother end . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj we have yet many among us can gripe as hard as xxmaj cassibelan . 
▁ i do not say i am one ; but i have a hand . xxmaj why tribute ? xxmaj why should 
▁ we pay tribute ? xxmaj if xxmaj caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket , 
▁ or put the moon in his pocket , we will pay him tribute for light ; 
▁ else , sir , no more tribute , pray you now . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj you must know , 
▁ xxmaj till the injurious xxmaj romans did extort 
▁ xxmaj this tribute from us , we were free . xxmaj caesar 's ambition- 
▁ xxmaj which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch 
▁ xxmaj the sides o ' th ' world- against all colour here 
▁ xxmaj did put the yoke upon 's ; which to shake of 
▁ xxmaj becomes a warlike people , whom we reckon 
▁ xxmaj ourselves to be . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj we do . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj say then to xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj our ancestor was that xxmaj mulmutius which 
▁ xxmaj ordain'd our laws- whose use the sword of xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj hath too much mangled ; whose repair and franchise 
▁ xxmaj shall , by the power we hold , be our good deed , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj rome be therefore angry . xxmaj mulmutius made our laws , 
▁ xxmaj who was the first of xxmaj britain which did put 
▁ xxmaj his brows within a golden crown , and call'd 
▁ xxmaj himself a king . 
▁ xxup lucius . i am sorry , xxmaj cymbeline , 
▁ xxmaj that i am to pronounce xxmaj augustus xxmaj caesar- 
▁ xxmaj caesar , that hath moe kings his servants than 
▁ xxmaj thyself domestic officers- thine enemy . 
▁ xxmaj receive it from me , then : war and confusion 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj caesar 's name pronounce i ' gainst thee ; look 
▁ xxmaj for fury not to be resisted . xxmaj thus defied , 
▁ i thank thee for myself . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thou art welcome , xxmaj caius . 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj caesar knighted me ; my youth i spent 
▁ xxmaj much under him ; of him i gather'd honour , 
▁ xxmaj which he to seek of me again , perforce , 
▁ xxmaj behoves me keep at utterance . i am perfect 
▁ xxmaj that the xxmaj pannonians and xxmaj dalmatians for 
▁ xxmaj their liberties are now in arms , a precedent 
▁ xxmaj which not to read would show the xxmaj britons cold ; 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj caesar shall not find them . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj let proof speak . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj his majesty bids you welcome . xxmaj make pastime with us a day or 
▁ two , or longer . xxmaj if you seek us afterwards in other terms , you 
▁ shall find us in our salt - water girdle . xxmaj if you beat us out of it , 
▁ it is yours ; if you fall in the adventure , our crows shall fare 
▁ the better for you ; and there 's an end . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj so , sir . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . i know your master 's pleasure , and he mine ; 
▁ xxmaj all the remain is , welcome . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj britain . xxmaj another room in xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup pisanio reading of a letter 

▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj how ? of adultery ? xxmaj wherefore write you not 
▁ xxmaj what monsters her accuse ? xxmaj leonatus ! 
▁ o master , what a strange infection 
▁ xxmaj is fall'n into thy ear ! xxmaj what false xxmaj italian- 
▁ xxmaj as poisonous - tongu'd as handed- hath prevail'd 
▁ xxmaj on thy too ready hearing ? xxmaj disloyal ? xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj she 's punish'd for her truth , and undergoes , 
▁ xxmaj more goddess - like than wife - like , such assaults 
▁ xxmaj as would take in some virtue . o my master ! 
▁ xxmaj thy mind to her is now as low as were 
▁ xxmaj thy fortunes . xxmaj how ? that i should murder her ? 
▁ xxmaj upon the love , and truth , and vows , which i 
▁ xxmaj have made to thy command ? xxup i , her ? xxmaj her blood ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be so to do good service , never 
▁ xxmaj let me be counted serviceable . xxmaj how look i 
▁ xxmaj that i should seem to lack humanity 
▁ xxmaj so much as this fact comes to ? [ reads ] ' do't . xxmaj the letter 
▁ xxmaj that i have sent her , by her own command 
▁ xxmaj shall give thee opportunity . ' o damn'd paper , 
▁ xxmaj black as the ink that 's on thee ! xxmaj senseless bauble , 
▁ xxmaj art thou a fedary for this act , and look'st 
▁ xxmaj so virgin - like without ? xxmaj lo , here she comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup imogen 

▁ i am ignorant in what i am commanded . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj how now , xxmaj pisanio ! 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj madam , here is a letter from my lord . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj who ? thy lord ? xxmaj that is my lord- xxmaj leonatus ? 
▁ xxup o , learn'd indeed were that astronomer 
▁ xxmaj that knew the stars as i his characters- 
▁ xxmaj he 'd lay the future open . xxmaj you good gods , 
▁ xxmaj let what is here contain'd relish of love , 
▁ xxmaj of my lord 's health , of his content ; yet not 
▁ xxmaj that we two are asunder- let that grieve him ! 
▁ xxmaj some griefs are med'cinable ; that is one of them , 
▁ xxmaj for it doth physic love- of his content , 
▁ xxmaj all but in that . xxmaj good wax , thy leave . xxmaj blest be 
▁ xxmaj you bees that make these locks of counsel ! xxmaj lovers 
▁ xxmaj and men in dangerous bonds pray not alike ; 
▁ xxmaj though forfeiters you cast in prison , yet 
▁ xxmaj you clasp young xxmaj cupid 's tables . xxmaj good news , gods ! 
▁ [ reads ] 
▁ ' justice and your father 's wrath , should he take me in his 
▁ dominion , could not be so cruel to me as you , o the dearest of 
▁ creatures , would even renew me with your eyes . xxmaj take notice that i 
▁ am in xxmaj cambria , at xxmaj milford xxmaj haven . xxmaj what your own love will out of 
▁ this advise you , follow . xxmaj so he wishes you all happiness that 
▁ remains loyal to his vow , and your increasing in love 
▁ xxup leonatus xxup posthumus . ' 

▁ o for a horse with wings ! xxmaj hear'st thou , xxmaj pisanio ? 
▁ xxmaj he is at xxmaj milford xxmaj haven . xxmaj read , and tell me 
▁ xxmaj how far ' tis thither . xxmaj if one of mean affairs 
▁ xxmaj may plod it in a week , why may not i 
▁ xxmaj glide thither in a day ? xxmaj then , true xxmaj pisanio- 
▁ xxmaj who long'st like me to see thy lord , who long'st- 
▁ xxup o , let me ' bate!- but not like me , yet long'st , 
▁ xxmaj but in a fainter kind- xxup o , not like me , 
▁ xxmaj for mine 's beyond beyond!-say , and speak thick- 
▁ xxmaj love 's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing 
▁ xxmaj to th ' smothering of the sense- how far it is 
▁ xxmaj to this same blessed xxmaj milford . xxmaj and by th ' way 
▁ xxmaj tell me how xxmaj wales was made so happy as 
▁ xxup t ' inherit such a haven . xxmaj but first of all , 
▁ xxmaj how we may steal from hence ; and for the gap 
▁ xxmaj that we shall make in time from our hence - going 
▁ xxmaj and our return , to excuse . xxmaj but first , how get hence . 
▁ xxmaj why should excuse be born or ere begot ? 
▁ xxmaj we 'll talk of that hereafter . xxmaj prithee speak , 
▁ xxmaj how many score of miles may we well ride 
▁ ' twixt hour and hour ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj one score ' twixt sun and sun , 
▁ xxmaj madam , 's enough for you , and too much too . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj why , one that rode to 's execution , man , 
▁ xxmaj could never go so slow . i have heard of riding wagers 
▁ xxmaj where horses have been nimbler than the sands 
▁ xxmaj that run i ' th ' clock 's behalf . xxmaj but this is fool'ry . 
▁ xxmaj go bid my woman feign a sickness ; say 
▁ xxmaj she 'll home to her father ; and provide me presently 
▁ a riding suit , no costlier than would fit 
▁ a franklin 's huswife . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj madam , you 're best consider . 
▁ xxup imogen . i see before me , man . xxmaj nor here , nor here , 
▁ xxmaj nor what ensues , but have a fog in them 
▁ xxmaj that i can not look through . xxmaj away , i prithee ; 
▁ xxmaj do as i bid thee . xxmaj there 's no more to say ; 
▁ xxmaj accessible is none but xxmaj milford way . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj wales . a mountainous country with a cave 

 xxmaj enter from the cave xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , and xxup arviragus 

▁ xxup belarius . a goodly day not to keep house with such 
▁ xxmaj whose roof 's as low as ours ! xxmaj stoop , boys ; this gate 
▁ xxmaj instructs you how t ' adore the heavens , and bows you 
▁ xxmaj to a morning 's holy office . xxmaj the gates of monarchs 
▁ xxmaj are arch'd so high that giants may jet through 
▁ xxmaj and keep their impious turbans on without 
▁ xxmaj good morrow to the sun . xxmaj hail , thou fair heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj we house i ' th ' rock , yet use thee not so hardly 
▁ xxmaj as prouder livers do . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj hail , heaven ! 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj hail , heaven ! 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj now for our mountain sport . xxmaj up to yond hill , 
▁ xxmaj your legs are young ; xxmaj i 'll tread these flats . xxmaj consider , 
▁ xxmaj when you above perceive me like a crow , 
▁ xxmaj that it is place which lessens and sets off ; 
▁ xxmaj and you may then revolve what tales i have told you 
▁ xxmaj of courts , of princes , of the tricks in war . 
▁ xxmaj this service is not service so being done , 
▁ xxmaj but being so allow'd . xxmaj to apprehend thus 
▁ xxmaj draws us a profit from all things we see , 
▁ xxmaj and often to our comfort shall we find 
▁ xxmaj the sharded beetle in a safer hold 
▁ xxmaj than is the full - wing'd eagle . xxup o , this life 
▁ xxmaj is nobler than attending for a check , 
▁ xxmaj richer than doing nothing for a bribe , 
▁ xxmaj prouder than rustling in unpaid - for silk : 
▁ xxmaj such gain the cap of him that makes him fine , 
▁ xxmaj yet keeps his book uncross'd . xxmaj no life to ours ! 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj out of your proof you speak . xxmaj we , poor unfledg'd , 
▁ xxmaj have never wing'd from view o ' th ' nest , nor know not 
▁ xxmaj what air 's from home . xxmaj haply this life is best , 
▁ xxmaj if quiet life be best ; sweeter to you 
▁ xxmaj that have a sharper known ; well corresponding 
▁ xxmaj with your stiff age . xxmaj but unto us it is 
▁ a cell of ignorance , travelling abed , 
▁ a prison for a debtor that not dares 
▁ xxmaj to stride a limit . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj what should we speak of 
▁ xxmaj when we are old as you ? xxmaj when we shall hear 
▁ xxmaj the rain and wind beat dark xxmaj december , how , 
▁ xxmaj in this our pinching cave , shall we discourse . 
▁ xxmaj the freezing hours away ? xxmaj we have seen nothing ; 
▁ xxmaj we are beastly : subtle as the fox for prey , 
▁ xxmaj like warlike as the wolf for what we eat . 
▁ xxmaj our valour is to chase what flies ; our cage 
▁ xxmaj we make a choir , as doth the prison'd bird , 
▁ xxmaj and sing our bondage freely . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj how you speak ! 
▁ xxmaj did you but know the city 's usuries , 
▁ xxmaj and felt them knowingly- the art o ' th ' court , 
▁ xxmaj as hard to leave as keep , whose top to climb 
▁ xxmaj is certain falling , or so slipp'ry that 
▁ xxmaj the fear 's as bad as falling ; the toil o ' th ' war , 
▁ a pain that only seems to seek out danger 
▁ xxup i ' th'name of fame and honour , which dies i ' th'search , 
▁ xxmaj and hath as oft a sland'rous epitaph 
▁ xxmaj as record of fair act ; nay , many times , 
▁ xxmaj doth ill deserve by doing well ; what 's worse- 
▁ xxmaj must curtsy at the censure . xxup o , boys , this story 
▁ xxmaj the world may read in me ; my body 's mark'd 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj roman swords , and my report was once 
▁ first with the best of note . xxmaj cymbeline lov'd me ; 
▁ xxmaj and when a soldier was the theme , my name 
▁ xxmaj was not far off . xxmaj then was i as a tree 
▁ xxmaj whose boughs did bend with fruit ; but in one night 
▁ a storm , or robbery , call it what you will , 
▁ xxmaj shook down my mellow hangings , nay , my leaves , 
▁ xxmaj and left me bare to weather . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj uncertain favour ! 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj my fault being nothing- as i have told you oft- 
▁ xxmaj but that two villains , whose false oaths prevail'd 
▁ xxmaj before my perfect honour , swore to xxmaj cymbeline 
▁ i was confederate with the xxmaj romans . xxmaj so 
▁ xxmaj follow'd my banishment , and this twenty years 
▁ xxmaj this rock and these demesnes have been my world , 
▁ xxmaj where i have liv'd at honest freedom , paid 
▁ xxmaj more pious debts to heaven than in all 
▁ xxmaj the fore - end of my time . xxmaj but up to th ' mountains ! 
▁ xxmaj this is not hunters ' language . xxmaj he that strikes 
▁ xxmaj the venison first shall be the lord o ' th ' feast ; 
▁ xxmaj to him the other two shall minister ; 
▁ xxmaj and we will fear no poison , which attends 
▁ xxmaj in place of greater state . xxmaj i 'll meet you in the valleys . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup guiderius and xxup arviragus 
▁ xxmaj how hard it is to hide the sparks of nature ! 
▁ xxmaj these boys know little they are sons to th ' xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj nor xxmaj cymbeline dreams that they are alive . 
▁ xxmaj they think they are mine ; and though train'd up thus meanly 
▁ xxup i ' th ' cave wherein they bow , their thoughts do hit 
▁ xxmaj the roofs of palaces , and nature prompts them 
▁ xxmaj in simple and low things to prince it much 
▁ xxmaj beyond the trick of others . xxmaj this xxmaj polydore , 
▁ xxmaj the heir of xxmaj cymbeline and xxmaj britain , who 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king his father call'd xxmaj guiderius- xxmaj jove ! 
▁ xxmaj when on my three - foot stool i sit and tell 
▁ xxmaj the warlike feats i have done , his spirits fly out 
▁ xxmaj into my story ; say ' thus mine enemy fell , 
▁ xxmaj and thus i set my foot on 's neck ' ; even then 
▁ xxmaj the princely blood flows in his cheek , he sweats , 
▁ xxmaj strains his young nerves , and puts himself in posture 
▁ xxmaj that acts my words . xxmaj the younger brother , xxmaj cadwal , 
▁ xxmaj once xxmaj arviragus , in as like a figure 
▁ xxmaj strikes life into my speech , and shows much more 
▁ xxmaj his own conceiving . xxmaj hark , the game is rous'd ! 
▁ o xxmaj cymbeline , heaven and my conscience knows 
▁ xxmaj thou didst unjustly banish me ! xxmaj whereon , 
▁ xxmaj at three and two years old , i stole these babes , 
▁ xxmaj thinking to bar thee of succession as 
▁ xxmaj thou refts me of my lands . xxmaj euriphile , 
▁ xxmaj thou wast their nurse ; they took thee for their mother , 
▁ xxmaj and every day do honour to her grave . 
▁ xxmaj myself , xxmaj belarius , that am xxmaj morgan call'd , 
▁ xxmaj they take for natural father . xxmaj the game is up . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj wales , near xxmaj milford xxmaj haven 

 xxmaj enter xxup pisanio and xxup imogen 

▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj thou told'st me , when we came from horse , the place 
▁ xxmaj was near at hand . xxmaj ne'er long'd my mother so 
▁ xxmaj to see me first as i have now . xxmaj pisanio ! xxmaj man ! 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj posthumus ? xxmaj what is in thy mind 
▁ xxmaj that makes thee stare thus ? xxmaj wherefore breaks that sigh 
▁ xxmaj from th ' inward of thee ? xxmaj one but painted thus 
▁ xxmaj would be interpreted a thing perplex'd 
▁ xxmaj beyond self - explication . xxmaj put thyself 
▁ xxmaj into a haviour of less fear , ere wildness 
▁ xxmaj vanquish my staider senses . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj why tender'st thou that paper to me with 
▁ a look untender ! xxmaj if't be summer news , 
▁ xxmaj smile to't before ; if winterly , thou need'st 
▁ xxmaj but keep that count'nance still . xxmaj my husband 's hand ? 
▁ xxmaj that drug - damn'd xxmaj italy hath out - craftied him , 
▁ xxmaj and he 's at some hard point . xxmaj speak , man ; thy tongue 
▁ xxmaj may take off some extremity , which to read 
▁ xxmaj would be even mortal to me . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj please you read , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall find me , wretched man , a thing 
▁ xxmaj the most disdain'd of fortune . 
▁ xxup imogen . [ reads ] ' thy mistress , xxmaj pisanio , hath play'd the strumpet in 
▁ my bed , the testimonies whereof lie bleeding in me . i speak not 
▁ out of weak surmises , but from proof as strong as my grief and as 
▁ certain as i expect my revenge . xxmaj that part thou , xxmaj pisanio , must act 
▁ for me , if thy faith be not tainted with the breach of hers . xxmaj let 
▁ thine own hands take away her life ; i shall give thee opportunity 
▁ at xxmaj milford xxmaj haven ; she hath my letter for the purpose ; where , if 
▁ thou fear to strike , and to make me certain it is done , thou art 
▁ the pander to her dishonour , and equally to me disloyal . ' 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj what shall i need to draw my sword ? xxmaj the paper 
▁ xxmaj hath cut her throat already . xxmaj no , ' tis slander , 
▁ xxmaj whose edge is sharper than the sword , whose tongue 
▁ xxmaj outvenoms all the worms of xxmaj nile , whose breath 
▁ xxmaj rides on the posting winds and doth belie 
▁ xxmaj all corners of the world . xxmaj kings , queens , and states , 
▁ xxmaj maids , matrons , nay , the secrets of the grave , 
▁ xxmaj this viperous slander enters . xxmaj what cheer , madam ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj false to his bed ? xxmaj what is it to be false ? 
▁ xxmaj to lie in watch there , and to think on him ? 
▁ xxmaj to weep twixt clock and clock ? xxmaj if sleep charge nature , 
▁ xxmaj to break it with a fearful dream of him , 
▁ xxmaj and cry myself awake ? xxmaj that 's false to 's bed , 
▁ xxmaj is it ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj alas , good lady ! 
▁ xxup imogen . i false ! xxmaj thy conscience witness ! xxmaj iachimo , 
▁ xxmaj thou didst accuse him of incontinency ; 
▁ xxmaj thou then look'dst like a villain ; now , methinks , 
▁ xxmaj thy favour 's good enough . xxmaj some jay of xxmaj italy , 
▁ xxmaj whose mother was her painting , hath betray'd him . 
▁ xxmaj poor i am stale , a garment out of fashion , 
▁ xxmaj and for i am richer than to hang by th ' walls 
▁ i must be ripp'd . xxmaj to pieces with me ! xxup o , 
▁ xxmaj men 's vows are women 's traitors ! xxmaj all good seeming , 
▁ xxmaj by thy revolt , o husband , shall be thought 
▁ xxmaj put on for villainy ; not born where't grows , 
▁ xxmaj but worn a bait for ladies . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj good madam , hear me . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj true honest men being heard , like false xxmaj aeneas , 
▁ xxmaj were , in his time , thought false ; and xxmaj sinon 's weeping 
▁ xxmaj did scandal many a holy tear , took pity 
▁ xxmaj from most true wretchedness . xxmaj so thou , xxmaj posthumus , 
▁ xxmaj wilt lay the leaven on all proper men : 
▁ xxmaj goodly and gallant shall be false and perjur'd 
▁ xxmaj from thy great fail . xxmaj come , fellow , be thou honest ; 
▁ xxmaj do thou thy master 's bidding ; when thou seest him , 
▁ a little witness my obedience . xxmaj look ! 
▁ i draw the sword myself ; take it , and hit 
▁ xxmaj the innocent mansion of my love , my heart . 
▁ xxmaj fear not ; ' tis empty of all things but grief ; 
▁ xxmaj thy master is not there , who was indeed 
▁ xxmaj the riches of it . xxmaj do his bidding ; strike . 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst be valiant in a better cause , 
▁ xxmaj but now thou seem'st a coward . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj hence , vile instrument ! 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt not damn my hand . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj why , i must die ; 
▁ xxmaj and if i do not by thy hand , thou art 
▁ xxmaj no servant of thy master 's . xxmaj against self - slaughter 
▁ xxmaj there is a prohibition so divine 
▁ xxmaj that cravens my weak hand . xxmaj come , here 's my heart- 
▁ xxmaj something 's afore't . xxmaj soft , soft ! we 'll no defence!- 
▁ xxmaj obedient as the scabbard . xxmaj what is here ? 
▁ xxmaj the scriptures of the loyal xxmaj leonatus 
▁ xxmaj all turn'd to heresy ? xxmaj away , away , 
▁ xxmaj corrupters of my faith ! you shall no more 
▁ xxmaj be stomachers to my heart . xxmaj thus may poor fools 
▁ xxmaj believe false teachers ; though those that are betray'd 
▁ xxmaj do feel the treason sharply , yet the traitor 
▁ xxmaj stands in worse case of woe . xxmaj and thou , xxmaj posthumus , 
▁ xxmaj that didst set up my disobedience ' gainst the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj my father , and make me put into contempt the suits 
▁ xxmaj of princely fellows , shalt hereafter find 
▁ xxmaj it is no act of common passage but 
▁ a strain of rareness ; and i grieve myself 
▁ xxmaj to think , when thou shalt be disedg'd by her 
▁ xxmaj that now thou tirest on , how thy memory 
▁ xxmaj will then be pang'd by me . xxmaj prithee dispatch . 
▁ xxmaj the lamp entreats the butcher . xxmaj where 's thy knife ? 
▁ xxmaj thou art too slow to do thy master 's bidding , 
▁ xxmaj when i desire it too . 
▁ xxup pisanio . o gracious lady , 
▁ xxmaj since i receiv'd command to do this busines 
▁ i have not slept one wink . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj do't , and to bed then . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj i 'll wake mine eyeballs first . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj wherefore then 
▁ xxmaj didst undertake it ? xxmaj why hast thou abus'd 
▁ xxmaj so many miles with a pretence ? xxmaj this place ? 
▁ xxmaj mine action and thine own ? our horses ' labour ? 
▁ xxmaj the time inviting thee ? the perturb'd court , 
▁ xxmaj for my being absent?- whereunto i never 
▁ xxmaj purpose return . xxmaj why hast thou gone so far 
▁ xxmaj to be unbent when thou hast ta'en thy stand , 
▁ xxmaj th ' elected deer before thee ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj but to win time 
▁ xxmaj to lose so bad employment , in the which 
▁ i have consider'd of a course . xxmaj good lady , 
▁ xxmaj hear me with patience . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj talk thy tongue weary- speak . 
▁ i have heard i am a strumpet , and mine ear , 
▁ xxmaj therein false struck , can take no greater wound , 
▁ xxmaj nor tent to bottom that . xxmaj but speak . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj then , madam , 
▁ i thought you would not back again . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj most like- 
▁ xxmaj bringing me here to kill me . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj not so , neither ; 
▁ xxmaj but if i were as wise as honest , then 
▁ xxmaj my purpose would prove well . xxmaj it can not be 
▁ xxmaj but that my master is abus'd . xxmaj some villain , 
▁ xxmaj ay , and singular in his art , hath done you both 
▁ xxmaj this cursed injury . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj some xxmaj roman courtezan ! 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj no , on my life ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give but notice you are dead , and send him 
▁ xxmaj some bloody sign of it , for ' tis commanded 
▁ i should do so . xxmaj you shall be miss'd at court , 
▁ xxmaj and that will well confirm it . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj why , good fellow , 
▁ xxmaj what shall i do the while ? where bide ? how live ? 
▁ xxmaj or in my life what comfort , when i am 
▁ xxmaj dead to my husband ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj if you 'll back to th ' court- 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj no court , no father , nor no more ado 
▁ xxmaj with that harsh , noble , simple nothing- 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj cloten , whose love - suit hath been to me 
▁ xxmaj as fearful as a siege . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj if not at court , 
▁ xxmaj then not in xxmaj britain must you bide . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj where then ? 
▁ xxmaj hath xxmaj britain all the sun that shines ? xxmaj day , night , 
▁ xxmaj are they not but in xxmaj britain ? xxup i ' th ' world 's volume 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj britain seems as of it , but not in't ; 
▁ xxmaj in a great pool a swan 's nest . xxmaj prithee think 
▁ xxmaj there 's livers out of xxmaj britain . 
▁ xxup pisanio . i am most glad 
▁ xxmaj you think of other place . xxmaj th ' ambassador , 
▁ xxup lucius the xxmaj roman , comes to xxmaj milford xxmaj haven 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow . xxmaj now , if you could wear a mind 
▁ xxmaj dark as your fortune is , and but disguise 
▁ xxmaj that which t ' appear itself must not yet be 
▁ xxmaj but by self - danger , you should tread a course 
▁ xxmaj pretty and full of view ; yea , happily , near 
▁ xxmaj the residence of xxmaj posthumus ; so nigh , at least , 
▁ xxmaj that though his actions were not visible , yet 
▁ xxmaj report should render him hourly to your ear 
▁ xxmaj as truly as he moves . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxup o ! for such means , 
▁ xxmaj though peril to my modesty , not death on't , 
▁ i would adventure . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj well then , here 's the point : 
▁ xxmaj you must forget to be a woman ; change 
▁ xxmaj command into obedience ; fear and niceness- 
▁ xxmaj the handmaids of all women , or , more truly , 
▁ xxmaj woman it pretty self- into a waggish courage ; 
▁ xxmaj ready in gibes , quick - answer'd , saucy , and 
▁ xxmaj as quarrelous as the weasel . xxmaj nay , you must 
▁ xxmaj forget that rarest treasure of your cheek , 
▁ xxmaj exposing it- but , xxup o , the harder heart ! 
▁ xxmaj alack , no remedy!- to the greedy touch 
▁ xxmaj of common - kissing xxmaj titan , and forget 
▁ xxmaj your laboursome and dainty trims wherein 
▁ xxmaj you made great xxmaj juno angry . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj nay , be brief ; 
▁ i see into thy end , and am almost 
▁ a man already . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj first , make yourself but like one . 
▁ xxmaj fore - thinking this , i have already fit- 
▁ ' tis in my cloak - bag- doublet , hat , hose , all 
▁ xxmaj that answer to them . xxmaj would you , in their serving , 
▁ xxmaj and with what imitation you can borrow 
▁ xxmaj from youth of such a season , fore noble xxmaj lucius 
▁ xxmaj present yourself , desire his service , tell him 
▁ xxmaj wherein you 're happy- which will make him know 
▁ xxmaj if that his head have ear in music ; doubtless 
▁ xxmaj with joy he will embrace you ; for he 's honourable , 
▁ xxmaj and , doubling that , most holy . xxmaj your means abroad- 
▁ xxmaj you have me , rich ; and i will never fail 
▁ xxmaj beginning nor supplyment . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj thou art all the comfort 
▁ xxmaj the gods will diet me with . xxmaj prithee away ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's more to be consider'd ; but we 'll even 
▁ xxmaj all that good time will give us . xxmaj this attempt 
▁ i am soldier to , and will abide it with 
▁ a prince 's courage . xxmaj away , i prithee . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj well , madam , we must take a short farewell , 
▁ xxmaj lest , being miss'd , i be suspected of 
▁ xxmaj your carriage from the court . xxmaj my noble mistress , 
▁ xxmaj here is a box ; i had it from the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj what 's in't is precious . xxmaj if you are sick at sea 
▁ xxmaj or stomach - qualm'd at land , a dram of this 
▁ xxmaj will drive away distemper . xxmaj to some shade , 
▁ xxmaj and fit you to your manhood . xxmaj may the gods 
▁ xxmaj direct you to the best ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj amen . i thank thee . xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj britain . xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup cymbeline , xxup queen , xxup cloten , xxup lucius , and xxup lords 

▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thus far ; and so farewell . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj thanks , royal sir . 
▁ xxmaj my emperor hath wrote ; i must from hence , 
▁ xxmaj and am right sorry that i must report ye 
▁ xxmaj my master 's enemy . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj our subjects , sir , 
▁ xxmaj will not endure his yoke ; and for ourself 
▁ xxmaj to show less sovereignty than they , must needs 
▁ xxmaj appear unkinglike . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj so , sir . i desire of you 
▁ a conduct overland to xxmaj milford xxmaj haven . 
▁ xxmaj madam , all joy befall your xxmaj grace , and you ! 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj my lords , you are appointed for that office ; 
▁ xxmaj the due of honour in no point omit . 
▁ xxmaj so farewell , noble xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj your hand , my lord . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj receive it friendly ; but from this time forth 
▁ i wear it as your enemy . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sir , the event 
▁ xxmaj is yet to name the winner . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj leave not the worthy xxmaj lucius , good my lords , 
▁ xxmaj till he have cross'd the xxmaj severn . xxmaj happiness ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucius and xxup lords 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj he goes hence frowning ; but it honours us 
▁ xxmaj that we have given him cause . 
▁ xxup cloten . ' tis all the better ; 
▁ xxmaj your valiant xxmaj britons have their wishes in it . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj lucius hath wrote already to the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj how it goes here . xxmaj it fits us therefore ripely 
▁ xxmaj our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness . 
▁ xxmaj the pow'rs that he already hath in xxmaj gallia 
▁ xxmaj will soon be drawn to head , from whence he moves 
▁ xxmaj his war for xxmaj britain . 
▁ xxup queen . ' tis not sleepy business , 
▁ xxmaj but must be look'd to speedily and strongly . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj our expectation that it would be thus 
▁ xxmaj hath made us forward . xxmaj but , my gentle queen , 
▁ xxmaj where is our daughter ? xxmaj she hath not appear'd 
▁ xxmaj before the xxmaj roman , nor to us hath tender'd 
▁ xxmaj the duty of the day . xxmaj she looks us like 
▁ a thing more made of malice than of duty ; 
▁ xxmaj we have noted it . xxmaj call her before us , for 
▁ xxmaj we have been too slight in sufferance . xxmaj exit a xxup messenger 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj royal sir , 
▁ xxmaj since the exile of xxmaj posthumus , most retir'd 
▁ xxmaj hath her life been ; the cure whereof , my lord , 
▁ ' tis time must do . xxmaj beseech your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj forbear sharp speeches to her ; she 's a lady 
▁ xxmaj so tender of rebukes that words are strokes , 
▁ xxmaj and strokes death to her . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup messenger 

▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj where is she , sir ? xxmaj how 
▁ xxmaj can her contempt be answer'd ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj please you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj her chambers are all lock'd , and there 's no answer 
▁ xxmaj that will be given to th ' loud of noise we make . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj my lord , when last i went to visit her , 
▁ xxmaj she pray'd me to excuse her keeping close ; 
▁ xxmaj whereto constrain'd by her infirmity 
▁ xxmaj she should that duty leave unpaid to you 
▁ xxmaj which daily she was bound to proffer . xxmaj this 
▁ xxmaj she wish'd me to make known ; but our great court 
▁ xxmaj made me to blame in memory . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj her doors lock'd ? 
▁ xxmaj not seen of late ? xxmaj grant , heavens , that which i fear 
▁ xxmaj prove false ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj son , i say , follow the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj that man of hers , xxmaj pisanio , her old servant , 
▁ i have not seen these two days . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj go , look after . xxmaj exit xxup cloten 
▁ xxmaj pisanio , thou that stand'st so for xxmaj posthumus ! 
▁ xxmaj he hath a drug of mine . i pray his absence 
▁ xxmaj proceed by swallowing that ; for he believes 
▁ xxmaj it is a thing most precious . xxmaj but for her , 
▁ xxmaj where is she gone ? xxmaj haply despair hath seiz'd her ; 
▁ xxmaj or , wing'd with fervour of her love , she 's flown 
▁ xxmaj to her desir'd xxmaj posthumus . xxmaj gone she is 
▁ xxmaj to death or to dishonour , and my end 
▁ xxmaj can make good use of either . xxmaj she being down , 
▁ i have the placing of the xxmaj british crown . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup cloten 

▁ xxmaj how now , my son ? 
▁ xxup cloten . ' tis certain she is fled . 
▁ xxmaj go in and cheer the xxmaj king . xxmaj he rages ; none 
▁ xxmaj dare come about him . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj all the better . xxmaj may 
▁ xxmaj this night forestall him of the coming day ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cloten . i love and hate her ; for she 's fair and royal , 
▁ xxmaj and that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite 
▁ xxmaj than lady , ladies , woman . xxmaj from every one 
▁ xxmaj the best she hath , and she , of all compounded , 
▁ xxmaj outsells them all . i love her therefore ; but 
▁ xxmaj disdaining me and throwing favours on 
▁ xxmaj the low xxmaj posthumus slanders so her judgment 
▁ xxmaj that what 's else rare is chok'd ; and in that point 
▁ i will conclude to hate her , nay , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj to be reveng'd upon her . xxmaj for when fools 
▁ xxmaj shall- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pisanio 

▁ xxmaj who is here ? xxmaj what , are you packing , sirrah ? 
▁ xxmaj come hither . xxmaj ah , you precious pander ! xxmaj villain , 
▁ xxmaj where is thy lady ? xxmaj in a word , or else 
▁ xxmaj thou art straightway with the fiends . 
▁ xxup pisanio . o good my lord ! 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj where is thy lady ? or , by xxmaj jupiter- 
▁ i will not ask again . xxmaj close villain , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have this secret from thy heart , or rip 
▁ xxmaj thy heart to find it . xxmaj is she with xxmaj posthumus ? 
▁ xxmaj from whose so many weights of baseness can not 
▁ a dram of worth be drawn . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj alas , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj how can she be with him ? xxmaj when was she miss'd ? 
▁ xxmaj he is in xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj where is she , sir ? xxmaj come nearer . 
▁ xxmaj no farther halting ! xxmaj satisfy me home 
▁ xxmaj what is become of her . 
▁ xxup pisanio . o my all - worthy lord ! 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj all - worthy villain ! 
▁ xxmaj discover where thy mistress is at once , 
▁ xxmaj at the next word . xxmaj no more of ' worthy lord ' ! 
▁ xxmaj speak , or thy silence on the instant is 
▁ xxmaj thy condemnation and thy death . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj then , sir , 
▁ xxmaj this paper is the history of my knowledge 
▁ xxmaj touching her flight . [ presenting a letter ] 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj let 's see't . i will pursue her 
▁ xxmaj even to xxmaj augustus ' throne . 
▁ xxup pisanio . [ aside ] xxmaj or this or perish . 
▁ xxmaj she 's far enough ; and what he learns by this 
▁ xxmaj may prove his travel , not her danger . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj humh ! 
▁ xxup pisanio . [ aside ] xxmaj i 'll write to my lord she 's dead . o xxmaj imogen , 
▁ xxmaj safe mayst thou wander , safe return again ! 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj sirrah , is this letter true ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj sir , as i think . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj it is xxmaj posthumus ' hand ; i know't . xxmaj sirrah , if thou wouldst 
▁ not be a villain , but do me true service , undergo those 
▁ employments wherein i should have cause to use thee with a 
▁ serious industry- that is , what villainy soe'er i bid thee do , to 
▁ perform it directly and truly- i would think thee an honest man ; 
▁ thou shouldst neither want my means for thy relief nor my voice 
▁ for thy preferment . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj well , my good lord . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj wilt thou serve me ? xxmaj for since patiently and constantly thou 
▁ hast stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar xxmaj posthumus , thou 
▁ canst not , in the course of gratitude , but be a diligent follower 
▁ of mine . xxmaj wilt thou serve me ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj sir , i will . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj give me thy hand ; here 's my purse . xxmaj hast any of thy late 
▁ master 's garments in thy possession ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . i have , my lord , at my lodging , the same suit he wore when 
▁ he took leave of my lady and mistress . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj the first service thou dost me , fetch that suit hither . xxmaj let 
▁ it be thy first service ; go . 
▁ xxup pisanio . i shall , my lord . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj meet thee at xxmaj milford xxmaj haven ! i forgot to ask him one thing ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll remember't anon . xxmaj even there , thou villain xxmaj posthumus , will i 
▁ kill thee . i would these garments were come . xxmaj she said upon a 
▁ time- the bitterness of it i now belch from my heart- that she 
▁ held the very garment of xxmaj posthumus in more respect than my noble 
▁ and natural person , together with the adornment of my qualities . 
▁ xxmaj with that suit upon my back will i ravish her ; first kill him , 
▁ and in her eyes . xxmaj there shall she see my valour , which will then 
▁ be a torment to her contempt . xxmaj he on the ground , my speech of 
▁ insultment ended on his dead body , and when my lust hath dined- 
▁ which , as i say , to vex her i will execute in the clothes that 
▁ she so prais'd- to the court xxmaj i 'll knock her back , foot her home 
▁ again . xxmaj she hath despis'd me rejoicingly , and xxmaj i 'll be merry in my 
▁ revenge . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pisanio , with the clothes 

▁ xxmaj be those the garments ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj ay , my noble lord . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj how long is't since she went to xxmaj milford xxmaj haven ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj she can scarce be there yet .