xxbos xxup cloten . xxmaj bring this apparel to my chamber ; that is the second thing 
▁ that i have commanded thee . xxmaj the third is that thou wilt be a 
▁ voluntary mute to my design . xxmaj be but duteous and true , preferment 
▁ shall tender itself to thee . xxmaj my revenge is now at xxmaj milford , would 
▁ i had wings to follow it ! xxmaj come , and be true . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj thou bid'st me to my loss ; for true to thee 
▁ xxmaj were to prove false , which i will never be , 
▁ xxmaj to him that is most true . xxmaj to xxmaj milford go , 
▁ xxmaj and find not her whom thou pursuest . xxmaj flow , flow , 
▁ xxmaj you heavenly blessings , on her ! xxmaj this fool 's speed 
▁ xxmaj be cross'd with slowness ! xxmaj labour be his meed ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj wales . xxmaj before the cave of xxup belarius 

 xxmaj enter xxup imogen alone , in boy 's clothes 

▁ xxup imogen . i see a man 's life is a tedious one . 
▁ i have tir'd myself , and for two nights together 
▁ xxmaj have made the ground my bed . i should be sick 
▁ xxmaj but that my resolution helps me . xxmaj milford , 
▁ xxmaj when from the mountain - top xxmaj pisanio show'd thee , 
▁ xxmaj thou wast within a ken . o xxmaj jove ! i think 
▁ xxmaj foundations fly the wretched ; such , i mean , 
▁ xxmaj where they should be reliev'd . xxmaj two beggars told me 
▁ i could not miss my way . xxmaj will poor folks lie , 
▁ xxmaj that have afflictions on them , knowing ' tis 
▁ a punishment or trial ? xxmaj yes ; no wonder , 
▁ xxmaj when rich ones scarce tell true . xxmaj to lapse in fulness 
▁ xxmaj is sorer than to lie for need ; and falsehood 
▁ xxmaj is worse in kings than beggars . xxmaj my dear lord ! 
▁ xxmaj thou art one o ' th ' false ones . xxmaj now i think on thee 
▁ xxmaj my hunger 's gone ; but even before , i was 
▁ xxmaj at point to sink for food . xxmaj but what is this ? 
▁ xxmaj here is a path to't ; ' tis some savage hold . 
▁ i were best not call ; i dare not call . xxmaj yet famine , 
▁ xxmaj ere clean it o'erthrow nature , makes it valiant . 
▁ xxmaj plenty and peace breeds cowards ; hardness ever 
▁ xxmaj of hardiness is mother . xxmaj ho ! who 's here ? 
▁ xxmaj if anything that 's civil , speak ; if savage , 
▁ xxmaj take or lend . xxmaj ho ! xxmaj no answer ? xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll enter . 
▁ xxmaj best draw my sword ; and if mine enemy 
▁ xxmaj but fear the sword , like me , he 'll scarcely look on't . 
▁ xxmaj such a foe , good heavens ! xxmaj exit into the cave 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , and xxup arviragus 

▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj you , xxmaj polydore , have prov'd best woodman and 
▁ xxmaj are master of the feast . xxmaj cadwal and i 
▁ xxmaj will play the cook and servant ; ' tis our match . 
▁ xxmaj the sweat of industry would dry and die 
▁ xxmaj but for the end it works to . xxmaj come , our stomachs 
▁ xxmaj will make what 's homely savoury ; weariness 
▁ xxmaj can snore upon the flint , when resty sloth 
▁ xxmaj finds the down pillow hard . xxmaj now , peace be here , 
▁ xxmaj poor house , that keep'st thyself ! 
▁ xxup guiderius . i am thoroughly weary . 
▁ xxup arviragus . i am weak with toil , yet strong in appetite . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj there is cold meat i ' th ' cave ; we 'll browse on that 
▁ xxmaj whilst what we have kill'd be cook'd . 
▁ xxup belarius . [ looking into the cave ] xxmaj stay , come not in . 
▁ xxmaj but that it eats our victuals , i should think 
▁ xxmaj here were a fairy . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj what 's the matter , sir ? 
▁ xxup belarius .. xxmaj by xxmaj jupiter , an angel ! or , if not , 
▁ xxmaj an earthly paragon ! xxmaj behold divineness 
▁ xxmaj no elder than a boy ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup imogen 

▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj good masters , harm me not . 
▁ xxmaj before i enter'd here i call'd , and thought 
▁ xxmaj to have begg'd or bought what i have took . xxmaj good troth , 
▁ i have stol'n nought ; nor would not though i had found 
▁ xxmaj gold strew'd i ' th ' floor . xxmaj here 's money for my meat . 
▁ i would have left it on the board , so soon 
▁ xxmaj as i had made my meal , and parted 
▁ xxmaj with pray'rs for the provider . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj money , youth ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj all gold and silver rather turn to dirt , 
▁ xxmaj as ' tis no better reckon'd but of those 
▁ xxmaj who worship dirty gods . 
▁ xxup imogen . i see you 're angry . 
▁ xxmaj know , if you kill me for my fault , i should 
▁ xxmaj have died had i not made it . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj whither bound ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj to xxmaj milford xxmaj haven . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj what 's your name ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj fidele , sir . i have a kinsman who 
▁ xxmaj is bound for xxmaj italy ; he embark'd at xxmaj milford ; 
▁ xxmaj to whom being going , almost spent with hunger , 
▁ i am fall'n in this offence . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj prithee , fair youth , 
▁ xxmaj think us no churls , nor measure our good minds 
▁ xxmaj by this rude place we live in . xxmaj well encounter'd ! 
▁ ' tis almost night ; you shall have better cheer 
▁ xxmaj ere you depart , and thanks to stay and eat it . 
▁ xxmaj boys , bid him welcome . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj were you a woman , youth , 
▁ i should woo hard but be your groom . xxmaj in honesty 
▁ i bid for you as xxmaj i 'd buy . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj i 'll make't my comfort 
▁ xxmaj he is a man . xxmaj i 'll love him as my brother ; 
▁ xxmaj and such a welcome as xxmaj i 'd give to him 
▁ xxmaj after long absence , such is yours . xxmaj most welcome ! 
▁ xxmaj be sprightly , for you fall ' mongst friends . 
▁ xxup imogen . ' mongst friends , 
▁ xxmaj if brothers . [ aside ] xxmaj would it had been so that they 
▁ xxmaj had been my father 's sons ! xxmaj then had my prize 
▁ xxmaj been less , and so more equal ballasting 
▁ xxmaj to thee , xxmaj posthumus . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj he wrings at some distress . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj would i could free't ! 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj or xxup i , whate'er it be , 
▁ xxmaj what pain it cost , what danger ! xxmaj gods ! 
▁ xxup belarius . [ whispering ] xxmaj hark , boys . 
▁ xxup imogen . [ aside ] xxmaj great men , 
▁ xxmaj that had a court no bigger than this cave , 
▁ xxmaj that did attend themselves , and had the virtue 
▁ xxmaj which their own conscience seal'd them , laying by 
▁ xxmaj that nothing - gift of differing multitudes , 
▁ xxmaj could not out - peer these twain . xxmaj pardon me , gods ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'd change my sex to be companion with them , 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj leonatus ' false . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj it shall be so . 
▁ xxmaj boys , we 'll go dress our hunt . xxmaj fair youth , come in . 
▁ xxmaj discourse is heavy , fasting ; when we have supp'd , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll mannerly demand thee of thy story , 
▁ xxmaj so far as thou wilt speak it . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj pray draw near . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj the night to th ' owl and morn to th ' lark less welcome . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj thanks , sir . 
▁ xxup arviragus . i pray draw near . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj rome . a public place 

 xxmaj enter two xxup roman xxup senators and xxup tribunes 

▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj this is the tenour of the xxmaj emperor 's writ : 
▁ xxmaj that since the common men are now in action 
▁ ' gainst the xxmaj pannonians and xxmaj dalmatians , 
▁ xxmaj and that the legions now in xxmaj gallia are 
▁ xxmaj full weak to undertake our wars against 
▁ xxmaj the fall'n - off xxmaj britons , that we do incite 
▁ xxmaj the gentry to this business . xxmaj he creates 
▁ xxmaj lucius proconsul ; and to you , the tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj for this immediate levy , he commands 
▁ xxmaj his absolute commission . xxmaj long live xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup tribune . xxmaj is xxmaj lucius general of the forces ? 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup tribune . xxmaj remaining now in xxmaj gallia ? 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj with those legions 
▁ xxmaj which i have spoke of , whereunto your levy 
▁ xxmaj must be supplyant . xxmaj the words of your commission 
▁ xxmaj will tie you to the numbers and the time 
▁ xxmaj of their dispatch . 
▁ xxup tribune . xxmaj we will discharge our duty . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj wales . xxmaj near the cave of xxup belarius 

 xxmaj enter xxup cloten alone 

▁ xxup cloten . i am near to th ' place where they should meet , if xxmaj pisanio 
▁ have mapp'd it truly . xxmaj how fit his garments serve me ! xxmaj why should 
▁ his mistress , who was made by him that made the tailor , not be 
▁ fit too ? xxmaj the rather- saving reverence of the word- for ' tis said 
▁ a woman 's fitness comes by fits . xxmaj therein i must play the workman . 
▁ i dare speak it to myself , for it is not vain - glory for a man and 
▁ his glass to confer in his own chamber- i mean , the lines of my 
▁ body are as well drawn as his ; no less young , more strong , not 
▁ beneath him in fortunes , beyond him in the advantage of the time , 
▁ above him in birth , alike conversant in general services , and 
▁ more remarkable in single oppositions . xxmaj yet this imperceiverant 
▁ thing loves him in my despite . xxmaj what mortality is ! xxmaj posthumus , thy 
▁ head , which now is growing upon thy shoulders , shall within this 
▁ hour be off ; thy mistress enforced ; thy garments cut to pieces 
▁ before her face ; and all this done , spurn her home to her father , 
▁ who may , haply , be a little angry for my so rough usage ; but my 
▁ mother , having power of his testiness , shall turn all into my 
▁ commendations . xxmaj my horse is tied up safe . xxmaj out , sword , and to a 
▁ sore purpose ! xxmaj fortune , put them into my hand . xxmaj this is the very 
▁ description of their meeting - place ; and the fellow dares not 
▁ deceive me . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj wales . xxmaj before the cave of xxup belarius 

 xxmaj enter , from the cave , xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , xxup arviragus , and xxup imogen 

▁ xxup belarius . [ to xxup imogen ] xxmaj you are not well . xxmaj remain here in the cave ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll come to you after hunting . 
▁ xxup arviragus . [ to xxup imogen ] xxmaj brother , stay here . 
▁ xxmaj are we not brothers ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj so man and man should be ; 
▁ xxmaj but clay and clay differs in dignity , 
▁ xxmaj whose dust is both alike . i am very sick . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj go you to hunting ; xxmaj i 'll abide with him . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj so sick i am not , yet i am not well ; 
▁ xxmaj but not so citizen a wanton as 
▁ xxmaj to seem to die ere sick . xxmaj so please you , leave me ; 
▁ xxmaj stick to your journal course . xxmaj the breach of custom 
▁ xxmaj is breach of all . i am ill , but your being by me 
▁ xxmaj can not amend me ; society is no comfort 
▁ xxmaj to one not sociable . i am not very sick , 
▁ xxmaj since i can reason of it . xxmaj pray you trust me here . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll rob none but myself ; and let me die , 
▁ xxmaj stealing so poorly . 
▁ xxup guiderius . i love thee ; i have spoke it . 
▁ xxmaj how much the quantity , the weight as much 
▁ xxmaj as i do love my father . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj what ? how ? how ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj if it be sin to say so , sir , i yoke me 
▁ xxmaj in my good brother 's fault . i know not why 
▁ i love this youth , and i have heard you say 
▁ xxmaj love 's reason 's without reason . xxmaj the bier at door , 
▁ xxmaj and a demand who is't shall die , xxmaj i 'd say 
▁ ' my father , not this youth . ' 
▁ xxup belarius . [ aside ] o noble strain ! 
▁ o worthiness of nature ! breed of greatness ! 
▁ xxmaj cowards father cowards and base things sire base . 
▁ xxmaj nature hath meal and bran , contempt and grace . 
▁ xxmaj i 'm not their father ; yet who this should be 
▁ xxmaj doth miracle itself , lov'd before me.- 
▁ ' tis the ninth hour o ' th ' morn . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj brother , farewell . 
▁ xxup imogen . i wish ye sport . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj your health . [ to xxup belarius ] xxmaj so please you , sir . 
▁ xxup imogen . [ aside ] xxmaj these are kind creatures . xxmaj gods , what lies i have 
▁ heard ! 
▁ xxmaj our courtiers say all 's savage but at court . 
▁ xxmaj experience , xxup o , thou disprov'st report ! 
▁ xxmaj th ' imperious seas breed monsters ; for the dish , 
▁ xxmaj poor tributary rivers as sweet fish . 
▁ i am sick still ; heart - sick . xxmaj pisanio , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll now taste of thy drug . [ swallows some ] 
▁ xxup guiderius . i could not stir him . 
▁ xxmaj he said he was gentle , but unfortunate ; 
▁ xxmaj dishonestly afflicted , but yet honest . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj thus did he answer me ; yet said hereafter 
▁ i might know more . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj to th ' field , to th ' field ! 
▁ xxmaj we 'll leave you for this time . xxmaj go in and rest . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj we 'll not be long away . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj pray be not sick , 
▁ xxmaj for you must be our huswife . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj well , or ill , 
▁ i am bound to you . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj and shalt be ever . xxmaj exit xxup imogen into the cave 
▁ xxmaj this youth , howe'er distress'd , appears he hath had 
▁ xxmaj good ancestors . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj how angel - like he sings ! 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj but his neat cookery ! xxmaj he cut our roots in characters , 
▁ xxmaj and sauc'd our broths as xxmaj juno had been sick , 
▁ xxmaj and he her dieter . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj nobly he yokes 
▁ a smiling with a sigh , as if the sigh 
▁ xxmaj was that it was for not being such a smile ; 
▁ xxmaj the smile mocking the sigh that it would fly 
▁ xxmaj from so divine a temple to commix 
▁ xxmaj with winds that sailors rail at . 
▁ xxup guiderius . i do note 
▁ xxmaj that grief and patience , rooted in him both , 
▁ xxmaj mingle their spurs together . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj grow patience ! 
▁ xxmaj and let the stinking elder , grief , untwine 
▁ xxmaj his perishing root with the increasing vine ! 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj it is great morning . xxmaj come , away ! xxmaj who 's there ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cloten 

▁ xxup cloten . i can not find those runagates ; that villain 
▁ xxmaj hath mock'd me . i am faint . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj those runagates ? 
▁ xxmaj means he not us ? i partly know him ; ' tis 
▁ xxmaj cloten , the son o ' th ' xxmaj queen . i fear some ambush . 
▁ i saw him not these many years , and yet 
▁ i know ' tis he . xxmaj we are held as outlaws . xxmaj hence ! 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj he is but one ; you and my brother search 
▁ xxmaj what companies are near . xxmaj pray you away ; 
▁ xxmaj let me alone with him . xxmaj exeunt xxup belarius and xxup arviragus 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj soft ! xxmaj what are you 
▁ xxmaj that fly me thus ? xxmaj some villain mountaineers ? 
▁ i have heard of such . xxmaj what slave art thou ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . a thing 
▁ xxmaj more slavish did i ne'er than answering 
▁ ' a slave ' without a knock . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj thou art a robber , 
▁ a law - breaker , a villain . xxmaj yield thee , thief . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj to who ? xxmaj to thee ? xxmaj what art thou ? xxmaj have not i 
▁ xxmaj an arm as big as thine , a heart as big ? 
▁ xxmaj thy words , i grant , are bigger , for i wear not 
▁ xxmaj my dagger in my mouth . xxmaj say what thou art ; 
▁ xxmaj why i should yield to thee . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj thou villain base , 
▁ xxmaj know'st me not by my clothes ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj no , nor thy tailor , rascal , 
▁ xxmaj who is thy grandfather ; he made those clothes , 
▁ xxmaj which , as it seems , make thee . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj thou precious varlet , 
▁ xxmaj my tailor made them not . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj hence , then , and thank 
▁ xxmaj the man that gave them thee . xxmaj thou art some fool ; 
▁ i am loath to beat thee . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj thou injurious thief , 
▁ xxmaj hear but my name , and tremble . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj cloten , thou villain . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj cloten , thou double villain , be thy name , 
▁ i can not tremble at it . xxmaj were it toad , or adder , spider , 
▁ ' twould move me sooner . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj to thy further fear , 
▁ xxmaj nay , to thy mere confusion , thou shalt know 
▁ i am son to th ' xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj i 'm sorry for't ; not seeming 
▁ xxmaj so worthy as thy birth . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj art not afeard ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj those that i reverence , those i fear- the wise : 
▁ xxmaj at fools i laugh , not fear them . 
▁ xxup cloten . xxmaj die the death . 
▁ xxmaj when i have slain thee with my proper hand , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow those that even now fled hence , 
▁ xxmaj and on the gates of xxmaj lud 's xxmaj town set your heads . 
▁ xxmaj yield , rustic mountaineer . xxmaj exeunt , fighting 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup belarius and xxup arviragus 

▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj no company 's abroad . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj none in the world ; you did mistake him , sure . 
▁ xxup belarius . i can not tell ; long is it since i saw him , 
▁ xxmaj but time hath nothing blurr'd those lines of favour 
▁ xxmaj which then he wore ; the snatches in his voice , 
▁ xxmaj and burst of speaking , were as his . i am absolute 
▁ ' twas very xxmaj cloten . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj in this place we left them . 
▁ i wish my brother make good time with him , 
▁ xxmaj you say he is so fell . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj being scarce made up , 
▁ i mean to man , he had not apprehension 
▁ xxmaj or roaring terrors ; for defect of judgment 
▁ xxmaj is oft the cease of fear . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup guiderius with xxup cloten 's head 

▁ xxmaj but , see , thy brother . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj this xxmaj cloten was a fool , an empty purse ; 
▁ xxmaj there was no money in't . xxmaj not xxmaj hercules 
▁ xxmaj could have knock'd out his brains , for he had none ; 
▁ xxmaj yet i not doing this , the fool had borne 
▁ xxmaj my head as i do his . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj what hast thou done ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . i am perfect what : cut off one xxmaj cloten 's head , 
▁ xxmaj son to the xxmaj queen , after his own report ; 
▁ xxmaj who call'd me traitor , mountaineer , and swore 
▁ xxmaj with his own single hand he 'd take us in , 
▁ xxmaj displace our heads where- thank the gods!- they grow , 
▁ xxmaj and set them on xxmaj lud 's xxmaj town . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj we are all undone . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj why , worthy father , what have we to lose 
▁ xxmaj but that he swore to take , our lives ? xxmaj the law 
▁ xxmaj protects not us ; then why should we be tender 
▁ xxmaj to let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us , 
▁ xxmaj play judge and executioner all himself , 
▁ xxmaj for we do fear the law ? xxmaj what company 
▁ xxmaj discover you abroad ? 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj no single soul 
▁ xxmaj can we set eye on , but in an safe reason 
▁ xxmaj he must have some attendants . xxmaj though his humour 
▁ xxmaj was nothing but mutation- ay , and that 
▁ xxmaj from one bad thing to worse- not frenzy , not 
▁ xxmaj absolute madness could so far have rav'd , 
▁ xxmaj to bring him here alone . xxmaj although perhaps 
▁ xxmaj it may be heard at court that such as we 
▁ xxmaj cave here , hunt here , are outlaws , and in time 
▁ xxmaj may make some stronger head- the which he hearing , 
▁ xxmaj as it is like him , might break out and swear 
▁ xxmaj he 'd fetch us in ; yet is't not probable 
▁ xxmaj to come alone , either he so undertaking 
▁ xxmaj or they so suffering . xxmaj then on good ground we fear , 
▁ xxmaj if we do fear this body hath a tail 
▁ xxmaj more perilous than the head . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj let ordinance 
▁ xxmaj come as the gods foresay it . xxmaj howsoe'er , 
▁ xxmaj my brother hath done well . 
▁ xxup belarius . i had no mind 
▁ xxmaj to hunt this day ; the boy xxmaj fidele 's sickness 
▁ xxmaj did make my way long forth . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj with his own sword , 
▁ xxmaj which he did wave against my throat , i have ta'en 
▁ xxmaj his head from him . xxmaj i 'll throw't into the creek 
▁ xxmaj behind our rock , and let it to the sea 
▁ xxmaj and tell the fishes he 's the xxmaj queen 's son , xxmaj cloten . 
▁ xxmaj that 's all i reck . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup belarius . i fear'twill be reveng'd . 
▁ xxmaj would , xxmaj polydore , thou hadst not done't ! though valour 
▁ xxmaj becomes thee well enough . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj would i had done't , 
▁ xxmaj so the revenge alone pursu'd me ! xxmaj polydore , 
▁ i love thee brotherly , but envy much 
▁ xxmaj thou hast robb'd me of this deed . i would revenges , 
▁ xxmaj that possible strength might meet , would seek us through , 
▁ xxmaj and put us to our answer . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj well , ' tis done . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll hunt no more to - day , nor seek for danger 
▁ xxmaj where there 's no profit . i prithee to our rock . 
▁ xxmaj you and xxmaj fidele play the cooks ; xxmaj i 'll stay 
▁ xxmaj till hasty xxmaj polydore return , and bring him 
▁ xxmaj to dinner presently . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj poor sick xxmaj fidele ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll willingly to him ; to gain his colour 
▁ xxmaj i 'd let a parish of such xxmaj cloten 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj and praise myself for charity . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup belarius . o thou goddess , 
▁ xxmaj thou divine xxmaj nature , thou thyself thou blazon'st 
▁ xxmaj in these two princely boys ! xxmaj they are as gentle 
▁ xxmaj as zephyrs blowing below the violet , 
▁ xxmaj not wagging his sweet head ; and yet as rough , 
▁ xxmaj their royal blood enchaf'd , as the rud'st wind 
▁ xxmaj that by the top doth take the mountain pine 
▁ xxmaj and make him stoop to th ' vale . ' tis wonder 
▁ xxmaj that an invisible instinct should frame them 
▁ xxmaj to royalty unlearn'd , honour untaught , 
▁ xxmaj civility not seen from other , valour 
▁ xxmaj that wildly grows in them , but yields a crop 
▁ xxmaj as if it had been sow'd . xxmaj yet still it 's strange 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj cloten 's being here to us portends , 
▁ xxmaj or what his death will bring us . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup guiderius 

▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj where 's my brother ? 
▁ i have sent xxmaj cloten 's clotpoll down the stream , 
▁ xxmaj in embassy to his mother ; his body 's hostage 
▁ xxmaj for his return . [ solemn music ] 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj my ingenious instrument ! 
▁ xxmaj hark , xxmaj polydore , it sounds . xxmaj but what occasion 
▁ xxmaj hath xxmaj cadwal now to give it motion ? xxmaj hark ! 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj is he at home ? 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj he went hence even now . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj what does he mean ? xxmaj since death of my dear'st mother 
▁ xxmaj it did not speak before . xxmaj all solemn things 
▁ xxmaj should answer solemn accidents . xxmaj the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys 
▁ xxmaj is jollity for apes and grief for boys . 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj cadwal mad ? 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup arviragus , with xxup imogen as dead , bearing 
▁ her in his arms 

▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj look , here he comes , 
▁ xxmaj and brings the dire occasion in his arms 
▁ xxmaj of what we blame him for ! 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj the bird is dead 
▁ xxmaj that we have made so much on . i had rather 
▁ xxmaj have skipp'd from sixteen years of age to sixty , 
▁ xxmaj to have turn'd my leaping time into a crutch , 
▁ xxmaj than have seen this . 
▁ xxup guiderius . o sweetest , fairest lily ! 
▁ xxmaj my brother wears thee not the one half so well 
▁ xxmaj as when thou grew'st thyself . 
▁ xxup belarius . o melancholy ! 
▁ xxmaj who ever yet could sound thy bottom ? find 
▁ xxmaj the ooze to show what coast thy sluggish crare 
▁ xxmaj might'st easiliest harbour in ? xxmaj thou blessed thing ! 
▁ xxmaj jove knows what man thou mightst have made ; but xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj thou diedst , a most rare boy , of melancholy . 
▁ xxmaj how found you him ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj stark , as you see ; 
▁ xxmaj thus smiling , as some fly had tickled slumber , 
▁ xxmaj not as death 's dart , being laugh'd at ; his right cheek 
▁ xxmaj reposing on a cushion . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxup o ' th ' floor ; 
▁ xxmaj his arms thus leagu'd . i thought he slept , and put 
▁ xxmaj my clouted brogues from off my feet , whose rudeness 
▁ xxmaj answer'd my steps too loud . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj why , he but sleeps . 
▁ xxmaj if he be gone he 'll make his grave a bed ; 
▁ xxmaj with female fairies will his tomb be haunted , 
▁ xxmaj and worms will not come to thee . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj with fairest flowers , 
▁ xxmaj whilst summer lasts and i live here , xxmaj fidele , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll sweeten thy sad grave . xxmaj thou shalt not lack 
▁ xxmaj the flower that 's like thy face , pale primrose ; nor 
▁ xxmaj the azur'd hare - bell , like thy veins ; no , nor 
▁ xxmaj the leaf of eglantine , whom not to slander , 
▁ xxmaj out - sweet'ned not thy breath . xxmaj the ruddock would , 
▁ xxmaj with charitable bill- o bill , sore shaming 
▁ xxmaj those rich - left heirs that let their fathers lie 
▁ xxmaj without a monument!- bring thee all this ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , and furr'd moss besides , when flow'rs are none , 
▁ xxmaj to winter - ground thy corse- 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj prithee have done , 
▁ xxmaj and do not play in wench - like words with that 
▁ xxmaj which is so serious . xxmaj let us bury him , 
▁ xxmaj and not protract with admiration what 
▁ xxmaj is now due debt . xxmaj to th ' grave . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj say , where shall 's lay him ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj by good xxmaj euriphile , our mother . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj be't so ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us , xxmaj polydore , though now our voices 
▁ xxmaj have got the mannish crack , sing him to th ' ground , 
▁ xxmaj as once to our mother ; use like note and words , 
▁ xxmaj save that xxmaj euriphile must be xxmaj fidele . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj cadwal , 
▁ i can not sing . xxmaj i 'll weep , and word it with thee ; 
▁ xxmaj for notes of sorrow out of tune are worse 
▁ xxmaj than priests and fanes that lie . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj we 'll speak it , then . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj great griefs , i see , med'cine the less , for xxmaj cloten 
▁ xxmaj is quite forgot . xxmaj he was a queen 's son , boys ; 
▁ xxmaj and though he came our enemy , remember 
▁ xxmaj he was paid for that . xxmaj though mean and mighty rotting 
▁ xxmaj together have one dust , yet reverence- 
▁ xxmaj that angel of the world- doth make distinction 
▁ xxmaj of place ' tween high and low . xxmaj our foe was princely ; 
▁ xxmaj and though you took his life , as being our foe , 
▁ xxmaj yet bury him as a prince . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj pray you fetch him hither . 
▁ xxmaj thersites ' body is as good as xxmaj ajax ' , 
▁ xxmaj when neither are alive . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj if you 'll go fetch him , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll say our song the whilst . xxmaj brother , begin . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup belarius 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj nay , xxmaj cadwal , we must lay his head to th ' xxmaj east ; 
▁ xxmaj my father hath a reason for't . 
▁ xxup arviragus . ' tis true . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj come on , then , and remove him . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj so . xxmaj begin . 

▁ xxup song 

▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj fear no more the heat o ' th ' sun 
▁ xxmaj nor the furious winter 's rages ; 
▁ xxmaj thou thy worldly task hast done , 
▁ xxmaj home art gone , and ta'en thy wages . 
▁ xxmaj golden lads and girls all must , 
▁ xxmaj as chimney - sweepers , come to dust . 

▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj fear no more the frown o ' th ' great ; 
▁ xxmaj thou art past the tyrant 's stroke . 
▁ xxmaj care no more to clothe and eat ; 
▁ xxmaj to thee the reed is as the oak . 
▁ xxmaj the sceptre , learning , physic , must 
▁ xxmaj all follow this and come to dust . 
▁
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj fear no more the lightning flash , 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj nor th ' all - dreaded thunder - stone ; 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj fear not slander , censure rash ; 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj thou hast finish'd joy and moan . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj all lovers young , all lovers must 
▁ xxmaj consign to thee and come to dust . 

▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj no exorciser harm thee ! 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj nor no witchcraft charm thee ! 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj ghost unlaid forbear thee ! 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj nothing ill come near thee ! 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj quiet consummation have , 
▁ xxmaj and renowned be thy grave ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup belarius with the body of xxup cloten 

▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj we have done our obsequies . xxmaj come , lay him down . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj here 's a few flowers ; but 'bout midnight , more . 
▁ xxmaj the herbs that have on them cold dew o ' th ' night 
▁ xxmaj are strewings fit'st for graves . xxmaj upon their faces . 
▁ xxmaj you were as flow'rs , now wither'd . xxmaj even so 
▁ xxmaj these herblets shall which we upon you strew . 
▁ xxmaj come on , away . xxmaj apart upon our knees . 
▁ xxmaj the ground that gave them first has them again . 
▁ xxmaj their pleasures here are past , so is their pain . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup imogen 
▁ xxup imogen . [ awaking ] xxmaj yes , sir , to xxmaj milford xxmaj haven . xxmaj which is the way ? 
▁ i thank you . xxmaj by yond bush ? xxmaj pray , how far thither ? 
▁ ' ods pittikins ! can it be six mile yet ? 
▁ i have gone all night . xxmaj faith , xxmaj i 'll lie down and sleep . 
▁ xxmaj but , soft ! no bedfellow . o gods and goddesses ! 
▁ [ seeing the body ] 
▁ xxmaj these flow'rs are like the pleasures of the world ; 
▁ xxmaj this bloody man , the care on't . i hope i dream ; 
▁ xxmaj for so i thought i was a cave - keeper , 
▁ xxmaj and cook to honest creatures . xxmaj but ' tis not so ; 
▁ ' twas but a bolt of nothing , shot at nothing , 
▁ xxmaj which the brain makes of fumes . xxmaj our very eyes 
▁ xxmaj are sometimes , like our judgments , blind . xxmaj good faith , 
▁ i tremble still with fear ; but if there be 
▁ xxmaj yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity 
▁ xxmaj as a wren 's eye , fear'd gods , a part of it ! 
▁ xxmaj the dream 's here still . xxmaj even when i wake it is 
▁ xxmaj without me , as within me ; not imagin'd , felt . 
▁ a headless man ? xxmaj the garments of xxmaj posthumus ? 
▁ i know the shape of 's leg ; this is his hand , 
▁ xxmaj his foot xxmaj mercurial , his xxmaj martial thigh , 
▁ xxmaj the brawns of xxmaj hercules ; but his xxmaj jovial face- 
▁ xxmaj murder in heaven ! xxmaj how ! ' tis gone . xxmaj pisanio , 
▁ xxmaj all curses madded xxmaj hecuba gave the xxmaj greeks , 
▁ xxmaj and mine to boot , be darted on thee ! xxmaj thou , 
▁ xxmaj conspir'd with that irregulous devil , xxmaj cloten , 
▁ xxmaj hath here cut off my lord . xxmaj to write and read 
▁ xxmaj be henceforth treacherous ! xxmaj damn'd xxmaj pisanio 
▁ xxmaj hath with his forged letters- damn'd xxmaj pisanio- 
▁ xxmaj from this most bravest vessel of the world 
▁ xxmaj struck the main - top . o xxmaj posthumus ! alas , 
▁ xxmaj where is thy head ? xxmaj where 's that ? xxmaj ay me ! where 's that ? 
▁ xxmaj pisanio might have kill'd thee at the heart , 
▁ xxmaj and left this head on . xxmaj how should this be ? xxmaj pisanio ? 
▁ ' tis he and xxmaj cloten ; malice and lucre in them 
▁ xxmaj have laid this woe here . xxup o , ' tis pregnant , pregnant ! 
▁ xxmaj the drug he gave me , which he said was precious 
▁ xxmaj and cordial to me , have i not found it 
▁ xxmaj murd'rous to th ' senses ? xxmaj that confirms it home . 
▁ xxmaj this is xxmaj pisanio 's deed , and xxmaj cloten . xxup o ! 
▁ xxmaj give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood , 
▁ xxmaj that we the horrider may seem to those 
▁ xxmaj which chance to find us . xxup o , my lord , my lord ! 
▁ [ falls fainting on the body ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lucius , xxup captains , and a xxup soothsayer 

▁ xxup captain . xxmaj to them the legions garrison'd in xxmaj gallia , 
▁ xxmaj after your will , have cross'd the sea , attending 
▁ xxmaj you here at xxmaj milford xxmaj haven ; with your ships , 
▁ xxmaj they are in readiness . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj but what from xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj the xxmaj senate hath stirr'd up the confiners 
▁ xxmaj and gentlemen of xxmaj italy , most willing spirits , 
▁ xxmaj that promise noble service ; and they come 
▁ xxmaj under the conduct of bold xxmaj iachimo , 
▁ xxmaj sienna 's brother . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj when expect you them ? 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj with the next benefit o ' th ' wind . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj this forwardness 
▁ xxmaj makes our hopes fair . xxmaj command our present numbers 
▁ xxmaj be muster'd ; bid the captains look to't . xxmaj now , sir , 
▁ xxmaj what have you dream'd of late of this war 's purpose ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj last night the very gods show'd me a vision- 
▁ i fast and pray'd for their intelligence- thus : 
▁ i saw xxmaj jove 's bird , the xxmaj roman eagle , wing'd 
▁ xxmaj from the spongy south to this part of the west , 
▁ xxmaj there vanish'd in the sunbeams ; which portends , 
▁ xxmaj unless my sins abuse my divination , 
▁ xxmaj success to th ' xxmaj roman host . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj dream often so , 
▁ xxmaj and never false . xxmaj soft , ho ! what trunk is here 
▁ xxmaj without his top ? xxmaj the ruin speaks that sometime 
▁ xxmaj it was a worthy building . xxmaj how ? a page ? 
▁ xxmaj or dead or sleeping on him ? xxmaj but dead , rather ; 
▁ xxmaj for nature doth abhor to make his bed 
▁ xxmaj with the defunct , or sleep upon the dead . 
▁ xxmaj let 's see the boy 's face . 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj he 's alive , my lord . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj he 'll then instruct us of this body . xxmaj young one , 
▁ xxmaj inform us of thy fortunes ; for it seems 
▁ xxmaj they crave to be demanded . xxmaj who is this 
▁ xxmaj thou mak'st thy bloody pillow ? xxmaj or who was he 
▁ xxmaj that , otherwise than noble nature did , 
▁ xxmaj hath alter'd that good picture ? xxmaj what 's thy interest 
▁ xxmaj in this sad wreck ? xxmaj how came't ? xxmaj who is't ? xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxup imogen . i am nothing ; or if not , 
▁ xxmaj nothing to be were better . xxmaj this was my master , 
▁ a very valiant xxmaj briton and a good , 
▁ xxmaj that here by mountaineers lies slain . xxmaj alas ! 
▁ xxmaj there is no more such masters . i may wander 
▁ xxmaj from east to occident ; cry out for service ; 
▁ xxmaj try many , all good ; serve truly ; never 
▁ xxmaj find such another master . 
▁ xxup lucius . ' lack , good youth ! 
▁ xxmaj thou mov'st no less with thy complaining than 
▁ xxmaj thy master in bleeding . xxmaj say his name , good friend . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj richard du xxmaj champ . [ aside ] xxmaj if i do lie , and do 
▁ xxmaj no harm by it , though the gods hear , i hope 
▁ xxmaj they 'll pardon it.- xxmaj say you , sir ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj thy name ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj fidele , sir . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj thou dost approve thyself the very same ; 
▁ xxmaj thy name well fits thy faith , thy faith thy name . 
▁ xxmaj wilt take thy chance with me ? i will not say 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be so well master'd ; but , be sure , 
▁ xxmaj no less belov'd . xxmaj the xxmaj roman xxmaj emperor 's letters , 
▁ xxmaj sent by a consul to me , should not sooner 
▁ xxmaj than thine own worth prefer thee . xxmaj go with me . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj i 'll follow , sir . xxmaj but first , an't please the gods , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hide my master from the flies , as deep 
▁ xxmaj as these poor pickaxes can dig ; and when 
▁ xxmaj with wild wood - leaves and weeds i ha ' strew'd his grave , 
▁ xxmaj and on it said a century of prayers , 
▁ xxmaj such as i can , twice o'er , xxmaj i 'll weep and sigh ; 
▁ xxmaj and leaving so his service , follow you , 
▁ xxmaj so please you entertain me . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj ay , good youth ; 
▁ xxmaj and rather father thee than master thee . 
▁ xxmaj my friends , 
▁ xxmaj the boy hath taught us manly duties ; let us 
▁ xxmaj find out the prettiest daisied plot we can , 
▁ xxmaj and make him with our pikes and partisans 
▁ a grave . xxmaj come , arm him . xxmaj boy , he is preferr'd 
▁ xxmaj by thee to us ; and he shall be interr'd 
▁ xxmaj as soldiers can . xxmaj be cheerful ; wipe thine eyes . 
▁ xxmaj some falls are means the happier to arise . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj britain . xxup cymbeline 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup cymbeline , xxup lords , xxup pisanio , and attendants 

▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj again ! and bring me word how ' tis with her . 
▁ xxmaj exit an attendant 
▁ a fever with the absence of her son ; 
▁ a madness , of which her life 's in danger . xxmaj heavens , 
▁ xxmaj how deeply you at once do touch me ! xxmaj imogen , 
▁ xxmaj the great part of my comfort , gone ; my queen 
▁ xxmaj upon a desperate bed , and in a time 
▁ xxmaj when fearful wars point at me ; her son gone , 
▁ xxmaj so needful for this present . xxmaj it strikes me past 
▁ xxmaj the hope of comfort . xxmaj but for thee , fellow , 
▁ xxmaj who needs must know of her departure and 
▁ xxmaj dost seem so ignorant , we 'll enforce it from thee 
▁ xxmaj by a sharp torture . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj sir , my life is yours ; 
▁ i humbly set it at your will ; but for my mistress , 
▁ i nothing know where she remains , why gone , 
▁ xxmaj nor when she purposes return . xxmaj beseech your xxmaj highness , 
▁ xxmaj hold me your loyal servant . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj good my liege , 
▁ xxmaj the day that she was missing he was here . 
▁ i dare be bound he 's true and shall perform 
▁ xxmaj all parts of his subjection loyally . xxmaj for xxmaj cloten , 
▁ xxmaj there wants no diligence in seeking him , 
▁ xxmaj and will no doubt be found . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj the time is troublesome . 
▁ [ to xxup pisanio ] xxmaj we 'll slip you for a season ; but our jealousy 
▁ xxmaj does yet depend . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj so please your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj roman legions , all from xxmaj gallia drawn , 
▁ xxmaj are landed on your coast , with a supply 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj roman gentlemen by the xxmaj senate sent . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj now for the counsel of my son and queen ! 
▁ i am amaz'd with matter . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj good my liege , 
▁ xxmaj your preparation can affront no less 
▁ xxmaj than what you hear of . xxmaj come more , for more you 're ready . 
▁ xxmaj the want is but to put those pow'rs in motion 
▁ xxmaj that long to move . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . i thank you . xxmaj let 's withdraw , 
▁ xxmaj and meet the time as it seeks us . xxmaj we fear not 
▁ xxmaj what can from xxmaj italy annoy us ; but 
▁ xxmaj we grieve at chances here . xxmaj away ! xxmaj exeunt all but xxup pisanio 
▁ xxup pisanio . i heard no letter from my master since 
▁ i wrote him xxmaj imogen was slain . ' tis strange . 
▁ xxmaj nor hear i from my mistress , who did promise 
▁ xxmaj to yield me often tidings . xxmaj neither know 
▁ xxmaj what is betid to xxmaj cloten , but remain 
▁ xxmaj perplex'd in all . xxmaj the heavens still must work . 
▁ xxmaj wherein i am false i am honest ; not true , to be true . 
▁ xxmaj these present wars shall find i love my country , 
▁ xxmaj even to the note o ' th ' xxmaj king , or xxmaj i 'll fall in them . 
▁ xxmaj all other doubts , by time let them be clear'd : 
▁ xxmaj fortune brings in some boats that are not steer'd . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj wales . xxmaj before the cave of xxup belarius 

 xxmaj enter xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , and xxup arviragus 

▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj the noise is round about us . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj let us from it . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj what pleasure , sir , find we in life , to lock it 
▁ xxmaj from action and adventure ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj nay , what hope 
▁ xxmaj have we in hiding us ? xxmaj this way the xxmaj romans 
▁ xxmaj must or for xxmaj britons slay us , or receive us 
▁ xxmaj for barbarous and unnatural revolts 
▁ xxmaj during their use , and slay us after . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj sons , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll higher to the mountains ; there secure us . 
▁ xxmaj to the xxmaj king 's party there 's no going . xxmaj newness 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj cloten 's death- we being not known , not muster'd 
▁ xxmaj among the bands - may drive us to a render 
▁ xxmaj where we have liv'd , and so extort from 's that 
▁ xxmaj which we have done , whose answer would be death , 
▁ xxmaj drawn on with torture . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj this is , sir , a doubt 
▁ xxmaj in such a time nothing becoming you 
▁ xxmaj nor satisfying us . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj it is not likely 
▁ xxmaj that when they hear the xxmaj roman horses neigh , 
▁ xxmaj behold their quarter'd fires , have both their eyes 
▁ xxmaj and ears so cloy'd importantly as now , 
▁ xxmaj that they will waste their time upon our note , 
▁ xxmaj to know from whence we are . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxup o , i am known 
▁ xxmaj of many in the army . xxmaj many years , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj cloten then but young , you see , not wore him 
▁ xxmaj from my remembrance . xxmaj and , besides , the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj hath not deserv'd my service nor your loves , 
▁ xxmaj who find in my exile the want of breeding , 
▁ xxmaj the certainty of this hard life ; aye hopeless 
▁ xxmaj to have the courtesy your cradle promis'd , 
▁ xxmaj but to be still hot summer 's tanlings and 
▁ xxmaj the shrinking slaves of winter . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj than be so , 
▁ xxmaj better to cease to be . xxmaj pray , sir , to th ' army . 
▁ i and my brother are not known ; yourself 
▁ xxmaj so out of thought , and thereto so o'ergrown , 
▁ xxmaj can not be questioned . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj by this sun that shines , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll thither . xxmaj what thing is't that i never 
▁ xxmaj did see man die ! scarce ever look'd on blood 
▁ xxmaj but that of coward hares , hot goats , and venison ! 
▁ xxmaj never bestrid a horse , save one that had 
▁ a rider like myself , who ne'er wore rowel 
▁ xxmaj nor iron on his heel ! i am asham'd 
▁ xxmaj to look upon the holy sun , to have 
▁ xxmaj the benefit of his blest beams , remaining 
▁ xxmaj so long a poor unknown . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj by heavens , xxmaj i 'll go ! 
▁ xxmaj if you will bless me , sir , and give me leave , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll take the better care ; but if you will not , 
▁ xxmaj the hazard therefore due fall on me by 
▁ xxmaj the hands of xxmaj romans ! 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj so say xxup i. xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj no reason xxup i , since of your lives you set 
▁ xxmaj so slight a valuation , should reserve 
▁ xxmaj my crack'd one to more care . xxmaj have with you , boys ! 
▁ xxmaj if in your country wars you chance to die , 
▁ xxmaj that is my bed too , lads , and there xxmaj i 'll lie . 
▁ xxmaj lead , lead . [ aside ] xxmaj the time seems long ; their blood thinks scorn 
▁ xxmaj till it fly out and show them princes born . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj britain . xxmaj the xxmaj roman camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup posthumus alone , with a bloody handkerchief 

▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj yea , bloody cloth , xxmaj i 'll keep thee ; for i wish'd 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst be colour'd thus . xxmaj you married ones , 
▁ xxmaj if each of you should take this course , how many 
▁ xxmaj must murder wives much better than themselves 
▁ xxmaj for wrying but a little ! o xxmaj pisanio ! 
▁ xxmaj every good servant does not all commands ; 
▁ xxmaj no bond but to do just ones . xxmaj gods ! if you 
▁ xxmaj should have ta'en vengeance on my faults , i never 
▁ xxmaj had liv'd to put on this ; so had you saved 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj imogen to repent , and struck 
▁ xxmaj me , wretch more worth your vengeance . xxmaj but alack , 
▁ xxmaj you snatch some hence for little faults ; that 's love , 
▁ xxmaj to have them fall no more . xxmaj you some permit 
▁ xxmaj to second ills with ills , each elder worse , 
▁ xxmaj and make them dread it , to the doer 's thrift . 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj imogen is your own . xxmaj do your best wills , 
▁ xxmaj and make me blest to obey . i am brought hither 
▁ xxmaj among th ' xxmaj italian gentry , and to fight 
▁ xxmaj against my lady 's kingdom . ' tis enough 
▁ xxmaj that , xxmaj britain , i have kill'd thy mistress ; peace ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give no wound to thee . xxmaj therefore , good heavens , 
▁ xxmaj hear patiently my purpose . xxmaj i 'll disrobe me 
▁ xxmaj of these xxmaj italian weeds , and suit myself 
▁ xxmaj as does a xxmaj britain peasant . xxmaj so xxmaj i 'll fight 
▁ xxmaj against the part i come with ; so xxmaj i 'll die 
▁ xxmaj for thee , o xxmaj imogen , even for whom my life 
▁ xxmaj is every breath a death . xxmaj and thus unknown , 
▁ xxmaj pitied nor hated , to the face of peril 
▁ xxmaj myself xxmaj i 'll dedicate . xxmaj let me make men know 
▁ xxmaj more valour in me than my habits show . 
▁ xxmaj gods , put the strength o ' th ' xxmaj leonati in me ! 
▁ xxmaj to shame the guise o ' th ' world , i will begin 
▁ xxmaj the fashion- less without and more within . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj britain . a field of battle between the xxmaj british and xxmaj roman camps 

 xxmaj enter xxup lucius , xxup iachimo , and the xxmaj roman army at one door , and the xxmaj british army 
 at another , xxup leonatus xxup posthumus following like a poor soldier . 
 xxmaj they march over and go out . xxmaj alarums . xxmaj then enter again , in skirmish , 
 xxup iachimo and xxup posthumus . xxmaj he vanquisheth and disarmeth xxup iachimo , 
 and then leaves him 

▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj the heaviness and guilt within my bosom 
▁ xxmaj takes off my manhood . i have belied a lady , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj princess of this country , and the air on't 
▁ xxmaj revengingly enfeebles me ; or could this carl , 
▁ a very drudge of nature 's , have subdu'd me 
▁ xxmaj in my profession ? xxmaj knighthoods and honours borne 
▁ xxmaj as i wear mine are titles but of scorn . 
▁ xxmaj if that thy gentry , xxmaj britain , go before 
▁ xxmaj this lout as he exceeds our lords , the odds 
▁ xxmaj is that we scarce are men , and you are gods . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj the battle continues ; the xxup britons fly ; xxup cymbeline is taken . 
▁ xxmaj then enter to his rescue xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , and xxup arviragus 

▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj stand , stand ! xxmaj we have th ' advantage of the ground ; 
▁ xxmaj the lane is guarded ; nothing routs us but 
▁ xxmaj the villainy of our fears . 
▁ xxup guiderius and xxup arviragus . xxmaj stand , stand , and fight ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup posthumus , and seconds the xxmaj britons ; they rescue 
▁ xxup cymbeline , and exeunt . xxmaj then re - enter xxup lucius and xxup iachimo , 
▁ with xxup imogen 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj away , boy , from the troops , and save thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj for friends kill friends , and the disorder 's such 
▁ xxmaj as war were hoodwink'd . 
▁ xxup iachimo . ' tis their fresh supplies . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj it is a day turn'd strangely . xxmaj or betimes 
▁ xxmaj let 's reinforce or fly . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj enter xxup posthumus and a xxmaj britain xxup lord 

▁ xxup lord . xxmaj cam'st thou from where they made the stand ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . i did : 
▁ xxmaj though you , it seems , come from the fliers . 
▁ xxup lord . i did . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj no blame be to you , sir , for all was lost , 
▁ xxmaj but that the heavens fought . xxmaj the xxmaj king himself 
▁ xxmaj of his wings destitute , the army broken , 
▁ xxmaj and but the backs of xxmaj britons seen , an flying , 
▁ xxmaj through a strait lane- the enemy , full - hearted , 
▁ xxmaj lolling the tongue with slaught'ring , having work 
▁ xxmaj more plentiful than tools to do't , struck down 
▁ xxmaj some mortally , some slightly touch'd , some falling 
▁ xxmaj merely through fear , that the strait pass was damm'd 
▁ xxmaj with dead men hurt behind , and cowards living 
▁ xxmaj to die with length'ned shame . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj where was this lane ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj close by the battle , ditch'd , and wall'd with turf , 
▁ xxmaj which gave advantage to an ancient soldier- 
▁ xxmaj an honest one , i warrant , who deserv'd 
▁ xxmaj so long a breeding as his white beard came to , 
▁ xxmaj in doing this for 's country . xxmaj athwart the lane 
▁ xxmaj he , with two striplings- lads more like to run 
▁ xxmaj the country base than to commit such slaughter ; 
▁ xxmaj with faces fit for masks , or rather fairer 
▁ xxmaj than those for preservation cas'd or shame- 
▁ xxmaj made good the passage , cried to those that fled 
▁ ' our xxmaj britain 's harts die flying , not our men . 
▁ xxmaj to darkness fleet souls that fly backwards ! xxmaj stand ; 
▁ xxmaj or we are xxmaj romans and will give you that , 
▁ xxmaj like beasts , which you shun beastly , and may save 
▁ xxmaj but to look back in frown . xxmaj stand , stand ! ' xxmaj these three , 
▁ xxmaj three thousand confident , in act as many- 
▁ xxmaj for three performers are the file when all 
▁ xxmaj the rest do nothing- with this word ' stand , stand ! ' 
▁ xxmaj accommodated by the place , more charming 
▁ xxmaj with their own nobleness , which could have turn'd 
▁ a distaff to a lance , gilded pale looks , 
▁ xxmaj part shame , part spirit renew'd ; that some turn'd coward 
▁ xxmaj but by example- xxup o , a sin in war 
▁ xxmaj damn'd in the first beginners!- gan to look 
▁ xxmaj the way that they did and to grin like lions 
▁ xxmaj upon the pikes o ' th ' hunters . xxmaj then began 
▁ a stop i ' th ' chaser , a retire ; anon 
▁ a rout , confusion thick . xxmaj forthwith they fly , 
▁ xxmaj chickens , the way which they stoop'd eagles ; slaves , 
▁ xxmaj the strides they victors made ; and now our cowards , 
▁ xxmaj like fragments in hard voyages , became 
▁ xxmaj the life o ' th ' need . xxmaj having found the back - door open 
▁ xxmaj of the unguarded hearts , heavens , how they wound !