xxbos xxmaj some slain before , some dying , some their friends 
▁ xxmaj o'erborne i ' th ' former wave . xxmaj ten chas'd by one 
▁ xxmaj are now each one the slaughterman of twenty . 
▁ xxmaj those that would die or ere resist are grown 
▁ xxmaj the mortal bugs o ' th ' field . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj this was strange chance : 
▁ a narrow lane , an old man , and two boys . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj nay , do not wonder at it ; you are made 
▁ xxmaj rather to wonder at the things you hear 
▁ xxmaj than to work any . xxmaj will you rhyme upon't , 
▁ xxmaj and vent it for a mock'ry ? xxmaj here is one : 
▁ ' two boys , an old man ( twice a boy ) , a lane , 
▁ xxmaj preserv'd the xxmaj britons , was the xxmaj romans ' bane . ' 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj nay , be not angry , sir . 
▁ xxup posthumus . ' lack , to what end ? 
▁ xxmaj who dares not stand his foe xxmaj i 'll be his friend ; 
▁ xxmaj for if he 'll do as he is made to do , 
▁ i know he 'll quickly fly my friendship too . 
▁ xxmaj you have put me into rhyme . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj farewell ; you 're angry . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj still going ? xxmaj this is a lord ! o noble misery , 
▁ xxmaj to be i ' th ' field and ask ' what news ? ' of me ! 
▁ xxmaj to - day how many would have given their honours 
▁ xxmaj to have sav'd their carcasses ! took heel to do't , 
▁ xxmaj and yet died too ! xxup i , in mine own woe charm'd , 
▁ xxmaj could not find death where i did hear him groan , 
▁ xxmaj nor feel him where he struck . xxmaj being an ugly monster , 
▁ ' tis strange he hides him in fresh cups , soft beds , 
▁ xxmaj sweet words ; or hath moe ministers than we 
▁ xxmaj that draw his knives i ' th ' war . xxmaj well , i will find him ; 
▁ xxmaj for being now a favourer to the xxmaj briton , 
▁ xxmaj no more a xxmaj briton , i have resum'd again 
▁ xxmaj the part i came in . xxmaj fight i will no more , 
▁ xxmaj but yield me to the veriest hind that shall 
▁ xxmaj once touch my shoulder . xxmaj great the slaughter is 
▁ xxmaj here made by th ' xxmaj roman ; great the answer be 
▁ xxmaj britons must take . xxmaj for me , my ransom 's death ; 
▁ xxmaj on either side i come to spend my breath , 
▁ xxmaj which neither here xxmaj i 'll keep nor bear again , 
▁ xxmaj but end it by some means for xxmaj imogen . 

▁ xxmaj enter two xxup british xxup captains and soldiers 

▁ xxup first xxup captain . xxmaj great xxmaj jupiter be prais'd ! xxmaj lucius is taken . 
▁ ' tis thought the old man and his sons were angels . 
▁ xxup second xxup captain . xxmaj there was a fourth man , in a silly habit , 
▁ xxmaj that gave th ' affront with them . 
▁ xxup first xxup captain . xxmaj so ' tis reported ; 
▁ xxmaj but none of 'em can be found . xxmaj stand ! who 's there ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . a xxmaj roman , 
▁ xxmaj who had not now been drooping here if seconds 
▁ xxmaj had answer'd him . 
▁ xxup second xxup captain . xxmaj lay hands on him ; a dog ! 
▁ a leg of xxmaj rome shall not return to tell 
▁ xxmaj what crows have peck'd them here . xxmaj he brags his service , 
▁ xxmaj as if he were of note . xxmaj bring him to th ' xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cymbeline , xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , xxup arviragus , xxup pisanio , and xxmaj roman 
▁ captives . xxmaj the xxup captains present xxup posthumus to xxup cymbeline , who delivers 
▁ him over to a gaoler . xxmaj exeunt omnes 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj britain . a prison 

 xxmaj enter xxup posthumus and two xxup gaolers 

▁ xxup first xxup gaoler . xxmaj you shall not now be stol'n , you have locks upon you ; 
▁ xxmaj so graze as you find pasture . 
▁ xxup second xxup gaoler . xxmaj ay , or a stomach . xxmaj exeunt xxup gaolers 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj most welcome , bondage ! for thou art a way , 
▁ i think , to liberty . xxmaj yet am i better 
▁ xxmaj than one that 's sick o ' th ' gout , since he had rather 
▁ xxmaj groan so in perpetuity than be cur'd 
▁ xxmaj by th ' sure physician death , who is the key 
▁ xxup t ' unbar these locks . xxmaj my conscience , thou art fetter'd 
▁ xxmaj more than my shanks and wrists ; you good gods , give me 
▁ xxmaj the penitent instrument to pick that bolt , 
▁ xxmaj then , free for ever ! xxmaj is't enough i am sorry ? 
▁ xxmaj so children temporal fathers do appease ; 
▁ xxmaj gods are more full of mercy . xxmaj must i repent , 
▁ i can not do it better than in gyves , 
▁ xxmaj desir'd more than constrain'd . xxmaj to satisfy , 
▁ xxmaj if of my freedom ' tis the main part , take 
▁ xxmaj no stricter render of me than my all . 
▁ i know you are more clement than vile men , 
▁ xxmaj who of their broken debtors take a third , 
▁ a sixth , a tenth , letting them thrive again 
▁ xxmaj on their abatement ; that 's not my desire . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj imogen 's dear life take mine ; and though 
▁ ' tis not so dear , yet ' tis a life ; you coin'd it . 
▁ ' tween man and man they weigh not every st & 
▁ xxmaj though light , take pieces for the figure 's sake ; 
▁ xxmaj you rather mine , being yours . xxmaj and so , great pow'rs , 
▁ xxmaj if you will take this audit , take this life , 
▁ xxmaj and cancel these cold bonds . o xxmaj imogen ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll speak to thee in silence . [ sleeps ] 

▁ xxmaj solemn music . xxmaj enter , as in an apparition , xxup sicilius 
▁ xxup leonatus , father to xxup posthumus , an old man attired 
▁ like a warrior ; leading in his hand an ancient 
▁ matron , his xxup wife , and mother to xxup posthumus , with 
▁ music before them . xxmaj then , after other music , follows 
▁ the two young xxup leonati , brothers to xxup posthumus , 
▁ with wounds , as they died in the wars . 
▁ xxmaj they circle xxup posthumus round as he lies sleeping 

▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj no more , thou thunder - master , show 
▁ xxmaj thy spite on mortal flies . 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj mars fall out , with xxmaj juno chide , 
▁ xxmaj that thy adulteries 
▁ xxmaj rates and revenges . 
▁ xxmaj hath my poor boy done aught but well , 
▁ xxmaj whose face i never saw ? 
▁ i died whilst in the womb he stay'd 
▁ xxmaj attending nature 's law ; 
▁ xxmaj whose father then , as men report 
▁ xxmaj thou orphans ' father art , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst have been , and shielded him 
▁ xxmaj from this earth - vexing smart . 

▁ xxup mother . xxmaj lucina lent not me her aid , 
▁ xxmaj but took me in my throes , 
▁ xxmaj that from me was xxmaj posthumus ripp'd , 
▁ xxmaj came crying ' mongst his foes , 
▁ a thing of pity . 

▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj great xxmaj nature like his ancestry 
▁ xxmaj moulded the stuff so fair 
▁ xxmaj that he deserv'd the praise o ' th ' world 
▁ xxmaj as great xxmaj sicilius ' heir . 

▁ xxup first xxup brother . xxmaj when once he was mature for man , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj britain where was he 
▁ xxmaj that could stand up his parallel , 
▁ xxmaj or fruitful object be 
▁ xxmaj in eye of xxmaj imogen , that best 
▁ xxmaj could deem his dignity ? 

▁ xxup mother . xxmaj with marriage wherefore was he mock'd , 
▁ xxmaj to be exil'd and thrown 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj leonati seat and cast 
▁ xxmaj from her his dearest one , 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj imogen ? 

▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj why did you suffer xxmaj iachimo , 
▁ xxmaj slight thing of xxmaj italy , 
▁ xxmaj to taint his nobler heart and brain 
▁ xxmaj with needless jealousy , 
▁ xxmaj and to become the geck and scorn 
▁ xxup o ' th ' other 's villainy ? 

▁ xxup second xxup brother . xxmaj for this from stiller seats we came , 
▁ xxmaj our parents and us twain , 
▁ xxmaj that , striking in our country 's cause , 
▁ xxmaj fell bravely and were slain , 
▁ xxmaj our fealty and xxmaj tenantius ' right 
▁ xxmaj with honour to maintain . 

▁ xxup first xxup brother . xxmaj like hardiment xxmaj posthumus hath 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj cymbeline perform'd . 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj jupiter , thou king of gods , 
▁ xxmaj why hast thou thus adjourn'd 
▁ xxmaj the graces for his merits due , 
▁ xxmaj being all to dolours turn'd ? 

▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj thy crystal window ope ; look out ; 
▁ xxmaj no longer exercise 
▁ xxmaj upon a valiant race thy harsh 
▁ xxmaj and potent injuries . 

▁ xxup mother . xxmaj since , xxmaj jupiter , our son is good , 
▁ xxmaj take off his miseries . 

▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj peep through thy marble mansion . xxmaj help ! 
▁ xxmaj or we poor ghosts will cry 
▁ xxmaj to th ' shining synod of the rest 
▁ xxmaj against thy deity . 

▁ xxup brothers . xxmaj help , xxmaj jupiter ! or we appeal , 
▁ xxmaj and from thy justice fly . 

▁ xxup jupiter descends - in thunder and lightning , sitting 
▁ upon an eagle . xxmaj he throws a thunderbolt . xxmaj the xxup ghosts 
▁ fall on their knees 

▁ xxup jupiter . xxmaj no more , you petty spirits of region low , 
▁ xxmaj offend our hearing ; hush ! xxmaj how dare you ghosts 
▁ xxmaj accuse the xxmaj thunderer whose bolt , you know , 
▁ xxmaj sky - planted , batters all rebelling coasts ? 
▁ xxmaj poor shadows of xxmaj elysium , hence and rest 
▁ xxmaj upon your never - withering banks of flow'rs . 
▁ xxmaj be not with mortal accidents opprest : 
▁ xxmaj no care of yours it is ; you know ' tis ours . 
▁ xxmaj whom best i love i cross ; to make my gift , 
▁ xxmaj the more delay'd , delighted . xxmaj be content ; 
▁ xxmaj your low - laid son our godhead will uplift ; 
▁ xxmaj his comforts thrive , his trials well are spent . 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj jovial star reign'd at his birth , and in 
▁ xxmaj our temple was he married . xxmaj rise and fade ! 
▁ xxmaj he shall be lord of xxmaj lady xxmaj imogen , 
▁ xxmaj and happier much by his affliction made . 
▁ xxmaj this tablet lay upon his breast , wherein 
▁ xxmaj our pleasure his full fortune doth confine ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , away ; no farther with your din 
▁ xxmaj express impatience , lest you stir up mine . 
▁ xxmaj mount , eagle , to my palace crystalline . [ ascends ] 
▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj he came in thunder ; his celestial breath 
▁ xxmaj was sulpherous to smell ; the holy eagle 
▁ xxmaj stoop'd as to foot us . xxmaj his ascension is 
▁ xxmaj more sweet than our blest fields . xxmaj his royal bird 
▁ xxmaj prunes the immortal wing , and cloys his beak , 
▁ xxmaj as when his god is pleas'd . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj thanks , xxmaj jupiter ! 
▁ xxup sicilius . xxmaj the marble pavement closes , he is enter'd 
▁ xxmaj his radiant roof . xxmaj away ! and , to be blest , 
▁ xxmaj let us with care perform his great behest . [ ghosts vanish ] 

▁ xxup posthumus . [ waking ] xxmaj sleep , thou has been a grandsire and begot 
▁ a father to me ; and thou hast created 
▁ a mother and two brothers . xxmaj but , o scorn , 
▁ xxmaj gone ! xxmaj they went hence so soon as they were born . 
▁ xxmaj and so i am awake . xxmaj poor wretches , that depend 
▁ xxmaj on greatness ' favour , dream as i have done ; 
▁ xxmaj wake and find nothing . xxmaj but , alas , i swerve ; 
▁ xxmaj many dream not to find , neither deserve , 
▁ xxmaj and yet are steep'd in favours ; so am xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj that have this golden chance , and know not why . 
▁ xxmaj what fairies haunt this ground ? a book ? o rare one ! 
▁ xxmaj be not , as is our fangled world , a garment 
▁ xxmaj nobler than that it covers . xxmaj let thy effects 
▁ xxmaj so follow to be most unlike our courtiers , 
▁ xxmaj as good as promise . 

▁ [ reads ] ' when as a lion 's whelp shall , to himself unknown , 
▁ without seeking find , and be embrac'd by a piece of tender air ; 
▁ and when from a stately cedar shall be lopp'd branches which , 
▁ being dead many years , shall after revive , be jointed to the old 
▁ stock , and freshly grow ; then shall xxmaj posthumus end his miseries , 
▁ xxmaj britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty . ' 

▁ ' tis still a dream , or else such stuff as madmen 
▁ xxmaj tongue , and brain not ; either both or nothing , 
▁ xxmaj or senseless speaking , or a speaking such 
▁ xxmaj as sense can not untie . xxmaj be what it is , 
▁ xxmaj the action of my life is like it , which 
▁ xxmaj i 'll keep , if but for sympathy . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gaoler 

▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj come , sir , are you ready for death ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj over - roasted rather ; ready long ago . 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj hanging is the word , sir ; if you be ready for that , you are 
▁ well cook'd . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj so , if i prove a good repast to the spectators , the dish 
▁ pays the shot . 
▁ xxup gaoler . a heavy reckoning for you , sir . xxmaj but the comfort is , you 
▁ shall be called to no more payments , fear no more tavern bills , 
▁ which are often the sadness of parting , as the procuring of mirth . 
▁ xxmaj you come in faint for want of meat , depart reeling with too much 
▁ drink ; sorry that you have paid too much , and sorry that you are 
▁ paid too much ; purse and brain both empty ; the brain the heavier 
▁ for being too light , the purse too light , being drawn of 
▁ heaviness . xxup o , of this contradiction you shall now be quit . xxup o , the 
▁ charity of a penny cord ! xxmaj it sums up thousands in a trice . xxmaj you 
▁ have no true debitor and creditor but it ; of what 's past , is , and 
▁ to come , the discharge . xxmaj your neck , sir , is pen , book , and 
▁ counters ; so the acquittance follows . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i am merrier to die than thou art to live . 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj indeed , sir , he that sleeps feels not the toothache . xxmaj but a 
▁ man that were to sleep your sleep , and a hangman to help him to 
▁ bed , i think he would change places with his officer ; for look 
▁ you , sir , you know not which way you shall go . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj yes indeed do xxup i , fellow . 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj your death has eyes in 's head , then ; i have not seen him so 
▁ pictur'd . xxmaj you must either be directed by some that take upon them 
▁ to know , or to take upon yourself that which i am sure you do not 
▁ know , or jump the after - inquiry on your own peril . xxmaj and how you 
▁ shall speed in your journey 's end , i think you 'll never return to 
▁ tell one . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i tell thee , fellow , there are none want eyes to direct 
▁ them the way i am going , but such as wink and will not use them . 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj what an infinite mock is this , that a man should have the 
▁ best use of eyes to see the way of blindness ! i am sure hanging 's 
▁ the way of winking . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj knock off his manacles ; bring your prisoner to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj thou bring'st good news : i am call'd to be made free . 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj i 'll be hang'd then . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler ; no bolts for the 
▁ dead . xxmaj exeunt xxup posthumus and xxup messenger 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young gibbets , 
▁ i never saw one so prone . xxmaj yet , on my conscience , there are verier 
▁ knaves desire to live , for all he be a xxmaj roman ; and there be some 
▁ of them too that die against their wills ; so should xxup i , if i were 
▁ one . i would we were all of one mind , and one mind good . xxup o , there 
▁ were desolation of gaolers and gallowses ! i speak against my 
▁ present profit , but my wish hath a preferment in't . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj britain . xxup cymbeline 's tent 

 xxmaj enter xxup cymbeline , xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , xxup arviragus , xxup pisanio , xxup lords , 
 xxup officers , and attendants 

▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj stand by my side , you whom the gods have made 
▁ xxmaj preservers of my throne . xxmaj woe is my heart 
▁ xxmaj that the poor soldier that so richly fought , 
▁ xxmaj whose rags sham'd gilded arms , whose naked breast 
▁ xxmaj stepp'd before targes of proof , can not be found . 
▁ xxmaj he shall be happy that can find him , if 
▁ xxmaj our grace can make him so . 
▁ xxup belarius . i never saw 
▁ xxmaj such noble fury in so poor a thing ; 
▁ xxmaj such precious deeds in one that promis'd nought 
▁ xxmaj but beggary and poor looks . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj no tidings of him ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj he hath been search'd among the dead and living , 
▁ xxmaj but no trace of him . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj to my grief , i am 
▁ xxmaj the heir of his reward ; [ to xxup belarius , xxup guiderius , and xxup arviragus ] 
▁ which i will add 
▁ xxmaj to you , the liver , heart , and brain , of xxmaj britain , 
▁ xxmaj by whom i grant she lives . ' tis now the time 
▁ xxmaj to ask of whence you are . xxmaj report it . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj cambria are we born , and gentlemen ; 
▁ xxmaj further to boast were neither true nor modest , 
▁ xxmaj unless i add we are honest . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj bow your knees . 
▁ xxmaj arise my knights o ' th ' battle ; i create you 
▁ xxmaj companions to our person , and will fit you 
▁ xxmaj with dignities becoming your estates . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cornelius and xxup ladies 

▁ xxmaj there 's business in these faces . xxmaj why so sadly 
▁ xxmaj greet you our victory ? xxmaj you look like xxmaj romans , 
▁ xxmaj and not o ' th ' court of xxmaj britain . 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj hail , great xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxmaj to sour your happiness i must report 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen is dead . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj who worse than a physician 
▁ xxmaj would this report become ? xxmaj but i consider 
▁ xxmaj by med'cine'life may be prolong'd , yet death 
▁ xxmaj will seize the doctor too . xxmaj how ended she ? 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj with horror , madly dying , like her life ; 
▁ xxmaj which , being cruel to the world , concluded 
▁ xxmaj most cruel to herself . xxmaj what she confess'd 
▁ i will report , so please you ; these her women 
▁ xxmaj can trip me if i err , who with wet cheeks 
▁ xxmaj were present when she finish'd . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj prithee say . 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj first , she confess'd she never lov'd you ; only 
▁ xxmaj affected greatness got by you , not you ; 
▁ xxmaj married your royalty , was wife to your place ; 
▁ xxmaj abhorr'd your person . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj she alone knew this ; 
▁ xxmaj and but she spoke it dying , i would not 
▁ xxmaj believe her lips in opening it . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj your daughter , whom she bore in hand to love 
▁ xxmaj with such integrity , she did confess 
▁ xxmaj was as a scorpion to her sight ; whose life , 
▁ xxmaj but that her flight prevented it , she had 
▁ xxmaj ta'en off by poison . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . o most delicate fiend ! 
▁ xxmaj who is't can read a woman ? xxmaj is there more ? 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj more , sir , and worse . xxmaj she did confess she had 
▁ xxmaj for you a mortal mineral , which , being took , 
▁ xxmaj should by the minute feed on life , and ling'ring , 
▁ xxmaj by inches waste you . xxmaj in which time she purpos'd , 
▁ xxmaj by watching , weeping , tendance , kissing , to 
▁ xxmaj o'ercome you with her show ; and in time , 
▁ xxmaj when she had fitted you with her craft , to work 
▁ xxmaj her son into th ' adoption of the crown ; 
▁ xxmaj but failing of her end by his strange absence , 
▁ xxmaj grew shameless - desperate , open'd , in despite 
▁ xxmaj of heaven and men , her purposes , repented 
▁ xxmaj the evils she hatch'd were not effected ; so , 
▁ xxmaj despairing , died . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj heard you all this , her women ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj we did , so please your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj were not in fault , for she was beautiful ; 
▁ xxmaj mine ears , that heard her flattery ; nor my heart 
▁ xxmaj that thought her like her seeming . xxmaj it had been vicious 
▁ xxmaj to have mistrusted her ; yet , o my daughter ! 
▁ xxmaj that it was folly in me thou mayst say , 
▁ xxmaj and prove it in thy feeling . xxmaj heaven mend all ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lucius , xxup iachimo , the xxup soothsayer , and other 
▁ xxmaj roman prisoners , guarded ; xxup posthumus behind , and xxup imogen 

▁ xxmaj thou com'st not , xxmaj caius , now for tribute ; that 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj britons have raz'd out , though with the loss 
▁ xxmaj of many a bold one , whose kinsmen have made suit 
▁ xxmaj that their good souls may be appeas'd with slaughter 
▁ xxmaj of you their captives , which ourself have granted ; 
▁ xxmaj so think of your estate . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj consider , sir , the chance of war . xxmaj the day 
▁ xxmaj was yours by accident ; had it gone with us , 
▁ xxmaj we should not , when the blood was cool , have threaten'd 
▁ xxmaj our prisoners with the sword . xxmaj but since the gods 
▁ xxmaj will have it thus , that nothing but our lives 
▁ xxmaj may be call'd ransom , let it come . xxmaj sufficeth 
▁ a xxmaj roman with a xxmaj roman 's heart can suffer . 
▁ xxmaj augustus lives to think on't ; and so much 
▁ xxmaj for my peculiar care . xxmaj this one thing only 
▁ i will entreat : my boy , a xxmaj briton born , 
▁ xxmaj let him be ransom'd . xxmaj never master had 
▁ a page so kind , so duteous , diligent , 
▁ xxmaj so tender over his occasions , true , 
▁ xxmaj so feat , so nurse - like ; let his virtue join 
▁ xxmaj with my request , which xxmaj i 'll make bold your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj can not deny ; he hath done no xxmaj briton harm 
▁ xxmaj though he have serv'd a xxmaj roman . xxmaj save him , sir , 
▁ xxmaj and spare no blood beside . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . i have surely seen him ; 
▁ xxmaj his favour is familiar to me . xxmaj boy , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast look'd thyself into my grace , 
▁ xxmaj and art mine own . i know not why , wherefore 
▁ xxmaj to say ' live , boy . ' xxmaj ne'er thank thy master . xxmaj live ; 
▁ xxmaj and ask of xxmaj cymbeline what boon thou wilt , 
▁ xxmaj fitting my bounty and thy state , xxmaj i 'll give it ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , though thou do demand a prisoner , 
▁ xxmaj the noblest ta'en . 
▁ xxup imogen . i humbly thank your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup lucius . i do not bid thee beg my life , good lad , 
▁ xxmaj and yet i know thou wilt . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj no , no ! xxmaj alack , 
▁ xxmaj there 's other work in hand . i see a thing 
▁ xxmaj bitter to me as death ; your life , good master , 
▁ xxmaj must shuffle for itself . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj the boy disdains me , 
▁ xxmaj he leaves me , scorns me . xxmaj briefly die their joys 
▁ xxmaj that place them on the truth of girls and boys . 
▁ xxmaj why stands he so perplex'd ? 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj what wouldst thou , boy ? 
▁ i love thee more and more ; think more and more 
▁ xxmaj what 's best to ask . xxmaj know'st him thou look'st on ? xxmaj speak , 
▁ xxmaj wilt have him live ? xxmaj is he thy kin ? thy friend ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj he is a xxmaj roman , no more kin to me 
▁ xxmaj than i to your xxmaj highness ; who , being born your vassal , 
▁ xxmaj am something nearer . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj wherefore ey'st him so ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj i 'll tell you , sir , in private , if you please 
▁ xxmaj to give me hearing . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj ay , with all my heart , 
▁ xxmaj and lend my best attention . xxmaj what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj fidele , sir . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thou'rt my good youth , my page ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be thy master . xxmaj walk with me ; speak freely . 
▁ [ cymbeline and xxup imogen converse apart ] 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj is not this boy reviv'd from death ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj one sand another 
▁ xxmaj not more resembles- that sweet rosy lad 
▁ xxmaj who died and was xxmaj fidele . xxmaj what think you ? 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj the same dead thing alive . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj peace , peace ! see further . xxmaj he eyes us not ; forbear . 
▁ xxmaj creatures may be alike ; were't he , i am sure 
▁ xxmaj he would have spoke to us . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj but we saw him dead . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj be silent ; let 's see further . 
▁ xxup pisanio . [ aside ] xxmaj it is my mistress . 
▁ xxmaj since she is living , let the time run on 
▁ xxmaj to good or bad . [ cymbeline and xxup imogen advance ] 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj come , stand thou by our side ; 
▁ xxmaj make thy demand aloud . [ to xxup iachimo ] xxmaj sir , step you forth ; 
▁ xxmaj give answer to this boy , and do it freely , 
▁ xxmaj or , by our greatness and the grace of it , 
▁ xxmaj which is our honour , bitter torture shall 
▁ xxmaj winnow the truth from falsehood . xxmaj on , speak to him . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj my boon is that this gentleman may render 
▁ xxmaj of whom he had this ring . 
▁ xxup posthumus . [ aside ] xxmaj what 's that to him ? 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj that diamond upon your finger , say 
▁ xxmaj how came it yours ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj thou'lt torture me to leave unspoken that 
▁ xxmaj which to be spoke would torture thee . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj how ? me ? 
▁ xxup iachimo . i am glad to be constrain'd to utter that 
▁ xxmaj which torments me to conceal . xxmaj by villainy 
▁ i got this ring ; ' twas xxmaj leonatus ' jewel , 
▁ xxmaj whom thou didst banish ; and- which more may grieve thee , 
▁ xxmaj as it doth me- a nobler sir ne'er liv'd 
▁ ' twixt sky and ground . xxmaj wilt thou hear more , my lord ? 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj all that belongs to this . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj that paragon , thy daughter , 
▁ xxmaj for whom my heart drops blood and my false spirits 
▁ xxmaj quail to remember- xxmaj give me leave , i faint . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj my daughter ? xxmaj what of her ? xxmaj renew thy strength ; 
▁ i had rather thou shouldst live while nature will 
▁ xxmaj than die ere i hear more . xxmaj strive , man , and speak . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj upon a time- unhappy was the clock 
▁ xxmaj that struck the hour!- was in xxmaj rome- accurs'd 
▁ xxmaj the mansion where!- ' twas at a feast- xxup o , would 
▁ xxmaj our viands had been poison'd , or at least 
▁ xxmaj those which i heav'd to head!- the good xxmaj posthumus- 
▁ xxmaj what should i say ? he was too good to be 
▁ xxmaj where ill men were , and was the best of all 
▁ xxmaj amongst the rar'st of good ones- sitting sadly 
▁ xxmaj hearing us praise our loves of xxmaj italy 
▁ xxmaj for beauty that made barren the swell'd boast 
▁ xxmaj of him that best could speak ; for feature , laming 
▁ xxmaj the shrine of xxmaj venus or straight - pight xxmaj minerva , 
▁ xxmaj postures beyond brief nature ; for condition , 
▁ a shop of all the qualities that man 
▁ xxmaj loves woman for ; besides that hook of wiving , 
▁ xxmaj fairness which strikes the eye- 
▁ xxup cymbeline . i stand on fire . 
▁ xxmaj come to the matter . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj all too soon i shall , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou wouldst grieve quickly . xxmaj this xxmaj posthumus , 
▁ xxmaj most like a noble lord in love and one 
▁ xxmaj that had a royal lover , took his hint ; 
▁ xxmaj and not dispraising whom we prais'd- therein 
▁ xxmaj he was as calm as virtue- he began 
▁ xxmaj his mistress ' picture ; which by his tongue being made , 
▁ xxmaj and then a mind put in't , either our brags 
▁ xxmaj were crack'd of kitchen trulls , or his description 
▁ xxmaj prov'd us unspeaking sots . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj nay , nay , to th ' purpose . 
▁ xxup iachimo . xxmaj your daughter 's chastity- there it begins . 
▁ xxmaj he spake of her as xxmaj dian had hot dreams 
▁ xxmaj and she alone were cold ; whereat xxup i , wretch , 
▁ xxmaj made scruple of his praise , and wager'd with him 
▁ xxmaj pieces of gold ' gainst this which then he wore 
▁ xxmaj upon his honour'd finger , to attain 
▁ xxmaj in suit the place of 's bed , and win this ring 
▁ xxmaj by hers and mine adultery . xxmaj he , true knight , 
▁ xxmaj no lesser of her honour confident 
▁ xxmaj than i did truly find her , stakes this ring ; 
▁ xxmaj and would so , had it been a carbuncle 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj phoebus ' wheel ; and might so safely , had it 
▁ xxmaj been all the worth of 's car . xxmaj away to xxmaj britain 
▁ xxmaj post i in this design . xxmaj well may you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj remember me at court , where i was taught 
▁ xxmaj of your chaste daughter the wide difference 
▁ ' twixt amorous and villainous . xxmaj being thus quench'd 
▁ xxmaj of hope , not longing , mine xxmaj italian brain 
▁ xxmaj gan in your duller xxmaj britain operate 
▁ xxmaj most vilely ; for my vantage , excellent ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to be brief , my practice so prevail'd 
▁ xxmaj that i return'd with simular proof enough 
▁ xxmaj to make the noble xxmaj leonatus mad , 
▁ xxmaj by wounding his belief in her renown 
▁ xxmaj with tokens thus and thus ; averring notes 
▁ xxmaj of chamber - hanging , pictures , this her bracelet- 
▁ o cunning , how i got it!- nay , some marks 
▁ xxmaj of secret on her person , that he could not 
▁ xxmaj but think her bond of chastity quite crack'd , 
▁ i having ta'en the forfeit . xxmaj whereupon- 
▁ xxmaj methinks i see him now- 
▁ xxup posthumus . [ coming forward ] xxmaj ay , so thou dost , 
▁ xxmaj italian fiend ! xxmaj ay me , most credulous fool , 
▁ xxmaj egregious murderer , thief , anything 
▁ xxmaj that 's due to all the villains past , in being , 
▁ xxmaj to come ! xxup o , give me cord , or knife , or poison , 
▁ xxmaj some upright justicer ! xxmaj thou , xxmaj king , send out 
▁ xxmaj for torturers ingenious . xxmaj it is i 
▁ xxmaj that all th ' abhorred things o ' th ' earth amend 
▁ xxmaj by being worse than they . i am xxmaj posthumus , 
▁ xxmaj that kill'd thy daughter ; villain - like , i lie- 
▁ xxmaj that caus'd a lesser villain than myself , 
▁ a sacrilegious thief , to do't . xxmaj the temple 
▁ xxmaj of virtue was she ; yea , and she herself . 
▁ xxmaj spit , and throw stones , cast mire upon me , set 
▁ xxmaj the dogs o ' th ' street to bay me . xxmaj every villain 
▁ xxmaj be call'd xxmaj posthumus xxmaj leonatus , and 
▁ xxmaj be villainy less than ' twas ! o xxmaj imogen ! 
▁ xxmaj my queen , my life , my wife ! o xxmaj imogen , 
▁ xxmaj imogen , xxmaj imogen ! 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj peace , my lord . xxmaj hear , hear ! 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj shall 's have a play of this ? xxmaj thou scornful page , 
▁ xxmaj there lies thy part . [ strikes her . xxmaj she falls ] 
▁ xxup pisanio . o gentlemen , help ! 
▁ xxmaj mine and your mistress ! xxup o , my lord xxmaj posthumus ! 
▁ xxmaj you ne'er kill'd xxmaj imogen till now . xxmaj help , help ! 
▁ xxmaj mine honour'd lady ! 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj does the world go round ? 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj how comes these staggers on me ? 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj wake , my mistress ! 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj if this be so , the gods do mean to strike me 
▁ xxmaj to death with mortal joy . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj how fares my mistress ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxup o , get thee from my sight ; 
▁ xxmaj thou gav'st me poison . xxmaj dangerous fellow , hence ! 
▁ xxmaj breathe not where princes are . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj the tune of xxmaj imogen ! 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj lady , 
▁ xxmaj the gods throw stones of sulphur on me , if 
▁ xxmaj that box i gave you was not thought by me 
▁ a precious thing ! i had it from the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj new matter still ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj it poison'd me . 
▁ xxup cornelius . o gods ! 
▁ i left out one thing which the xxmaj queen confess'd , 
▁ xxmaj which must approve thee honest . ' if xxmaj pisanio 
▁ xxmaj have ' said she ' given his mistress that confection 
▁ xxmaj which i gave him for cordial , she is serv'd 
▁ xxmaj as i would serve a rat . ' 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj what 's this , xxmaj cornelius ? 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj the xxmaj queen , sir , very oft importun'd me 
▁ xxmaj to temper poisons for her ; still pretending 
▁ xxmaj the satisfaction of her knowledge only 
▁ xxmaj in killing creatures vile , as cats and dogs , 
▁ xxmaj of no esteem . xxup i , dreading that her purpose 
▁ xxmaj was of more danger , did compound for her 
▁ a certain stuff , which , being ta'en would cease 
▁ xxmaj the present pow'r of life , but in short time 
▁ xxmaj all offices of nature should again 
▁ xxmaj do their due functions . xxmaj have you ta'en of it ? 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj most like i did , for i was dead . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj my boys , 
▁ xxmaj there was our error . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj this is sure xxmaj fidele . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj why did you throw your wedded lady from you ? 
▁ xxmaj think that you are upon a rock , and now 
▁ xxmaj throw me again . [ embracing him ] 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj hang there like fruit , my soul , 
▁ xxmaj till the tree die ! 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj how now , my flesh ? my child ? 
▁ xxmaj what , mak'st thou me a dullard in this act ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou not speak to me ? 
▁ xxup imogen . [ kneeling ] xxmaj your blessing , sir . 
▁ xxup belarius . [ to xxup guiderius and xxup arviragus ] xxmaj though you did love this 
▁ youth , i blame ye not ; 
▁ xxmaj you had a motive for't . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj my tears that fall 
▁ xxmaj prove holy water on thee ! xxmaj imogen , 
▁ xxmaj thy mother 's dead . 
▁ xxup imogen . i am sorry for't , my lord . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxup o , she was naught , and long of her it was 
▁ xxmaj that we meet here so strangely ; but her son 
▁ xxmaj is gone , we know not how nor where . 
▁ xxup pisanio . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj now fear is from me , xxmaj i 'll speak troth . xxmaj lord xxmaj cloten , 
▁ xxmaj upon my lady 's missing , came to me 
▁ xxmaj with his sword drawn , foam'd at the mouth , and swore , 
▁ xxmaj if i discover'd not which way she was gone , 
▁ xxmaj it was my instant death . xxmaj by accident 
▁ i had a feigned letter of my master 's 
▁ xxmaj then in my pocket , which directed him 
▁ xxmaj to seek her on the mountains near to xxmaj milford ; 
▁ xxmaj where , in a frenzy , in my master 's garments , 
▁ xxmaj which he enforc'd from me , away he posts 
▁ xxmaj with unchaste purpose , and with oath to violate 
▁ xxmaj my lady 's honour . xxmaj what became of him 
▁ i further know not . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj let me end the story : 
▁ i slew him there . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj marry , the gods forfend ! 
▁ i would not thy good deeds should from my lips 
▁ xxmaj pluck a hard sentence . xxmaj prithee , valiant youth , 
▁ xxmaj deny't again . 
▁ xxup guiderius . i have spoke it , and i did it . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj he was a prince . 
▁ xxup guiderius . a most incivil one . xxmaj the wrongs he did me 
▁ xxmaj were nothing prince - like ; for he did provoke me 
▁ xxmaj with language that would make me spurn the sea , 
▁ xxmaj if it could so roar to me . i cut off 's head , 
▁ xxmaj and am right glad he is not standing here 
▁ xxmaj to tell this tale of mine . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . i am sorry for thee . 
▁ xxmaj by thine own tongue thou art condemn'd , and must 
▁ xxmaj endure our law . xxmaj thou'rt dead . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj that headless man 
▁ i thought had been my lord . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj bind the offender , 
▁ xxmaj and take him from our presence . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj stay , sir xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj this man is better than the man he slew , 
▁ xxmaj as well descended as thyself , and hath 
▁ xxmaj more of thee merited than a band of xxmaj clotens 
▁ xxmaj had ever scar for . [ to the guard ] xxmaj let his arms alone ; 
▁ xxmaj they were not born for bondage . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj why , old soldier , 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou undo the worth thou art unpaid for 
▁ xxmaj by tasting of our wrath ? xxmaj how of descent 
▁ xxmaj as good as we ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj in that he spake too far . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj and thou shalt die for't . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj we will die all three ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will prove that two on 's are as good 
▁ xxmaj as i have given out him . xxmaj my sons , i must 
▁ xxmaj for mine own part unfold a dangerous speech , 
▁ xxmaj though haply well for you . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj your danger 's ours . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj and our good his . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj have at it then by leave ! 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst , great xxmaj king , a subject who 
▁ xxmaj was call'd xxmaj belarius . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj what of him ? xxmaj he is 
▁ a banish'd traitor . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj he it is that hath 
▁ xxmaj assum'd this age ; indeed a banish'd man ; 
▁ i know not how a traitor . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj take him hence , 
▁ xxmaj the whole world shall not save him . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj not too hot . 
▁ xxmaj first pay me for the nursing of thy sons , 
▁ xxmaj and let it be confiscate all , so soon 
▁ xxmaj as i have receiv'd it . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj nursing of my sons ? 
▁ xxup belarius . i am too blunt and saucy : here 's my knee . 
▁ xxmaj ere i arise i will prefer my sons ; 
▁ xxmaj then spare not the old father . xxmaj mighty sir , 
▁ xxmaj these two young gentlemen that call me father , 
▁ xxmaj and think they are my sons , are none of mine ; 
▁ xxmaj they are the issue of your loins , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj and blood of your begetting . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj how ? my issue ? 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj so sure as you your father 's . xxup i , old xxmaj morgan , 
▁ xxmaj am that xxmaj belarius whom you sometime banish'd . 
▁ xxmaj your pleasure was my mere offence , my punishment 
▁ xxmaj itself , and all my treason ; that i suffer'd 
▁ xxmaj was all the harm i did . xxmaj these gentle princes- 
▁ xxmaj for such and so they are- these twenty years 
▁ xxmaj have i train'd up ; those arts they have as 
▁ xxmaj could put into them . xxmaj my breeding was , sir , as 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness knows . xxmaj their nurse , xxmaj euriphile , 
▁ xxmaj whom for the theft i wedded , stole these children 
▁ xxmaj upon my banishment ; i mov'd her to't , 
▁ xxmaj having receiv'd the punishment before 
▁ xxmaj for that which i did then . xxmaj beaten for loyalty 
▁ xxmaj excited me to treason . xxmaj their dear loss , 
▁ xxmaj the more of you ' twas felt , the more it shap'd 
▁ xxmaj unto my end of stealing them . xxmaj but , gracious sir , 
▁ xxmaj here are your sons again , and i must lose 
▁ xxmaj two of the sweet'st companions in the world . 
▁ xxmaj the benediction of these covering heavens 
▁ xxmaj fall on their heads like dew ! for they are worthy 
▁ xxmaj to inlay heaven with stars . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj thou weep'st and speak'st . 
▁ xxmaj the service that you three have done is more 
▁ xxmaj unlike than this thou tell'st . i lost my children . 
▁ xxmaj if these be they , i know not how to wish 
▁ a pair of worthier sons . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj be pleas'd awhile . 
▁ xxmaj this gentleman , whom i call xxmaj polydore , 
▁ xxmaj most worthy prince , as yours , is true xxmaj guiderius ; 
▁ xxmaj this gentleman , my xxmaj cadwal , xxmaj arviragus , 
▁ xxmaj your younger princely son ; he , sir , was lapp'd 
▁ xxmaj in a most curious mantle , wrought by th ' hand 
▁ xxmaj of his queen mother , which for more probation 
▁ i can with ease produce . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj guiderius had 
▁ xxmaj upon his neck a mole , a sanguine star ; 
▁ xxmaj it was a mark of wonder . 
▁ xxup belarius . xxmaj this is he , 
▁ xxmaj who hath upon him still that natural stamp . 
▁ xxmaj it was wise nature 's end in the donation , 
▁ xxmaj to be his evidence now . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxup o , what am xxup i ? 
▁ a mother to the birth of three ? xxmaj ne'er mother 
▁ xxmaj rejoic'd deliverance more . xxmaj blest pray you be , 
▁ xxmaj that , after this strange starting from your orbs , 
▁ xxmaj you may reign in them now ! o xxmaj imogen , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast lost by this a kingdom . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj no , my lord ; 
▁ i have got two worlds by't . o my gentle brothers , 
▁ xxmaj have we thus met ? xxup o , never say hereafter 
▁ xxmaj but i am truest speaker ! xxmaj you call'd me brother , 
▁ xxmaj when i was but your sister : i you brothers , 
▁ xxmaj when we were so indeed . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj did you e'er meet ? 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup guiderius . xxmaj and at first meeting lov'd , 
▁ xxmaj continu'd so until we thought he died . 
▁ xxup cornelius . xxmaj by the xxmaj queen 's dram she swallow'd . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . o rare instinct ! 
▁ xxmaj when shall i hear all through ? xxmaj this fierce abridgment 
▁ xxmaj hath to it circumstantial branches , which 
▁ xxmaj distinction should be rich in . xxmaj where ? how liv'd you ? 
▁ xxmaj and when came you to serve our xxmaj roman captive ? 
▁ xxmaj how parted with your brothers ? how first met them ? 
▁ xxmaj why fled you from the court ? and whither ? xxmaj these , 
▁ xxmaj and your three motives to the battle , with 
▁ i know not how much more , should be demanded , 
▁ xxmaj and all the other by - dependences , 
▁ xxmaj from chance to chance ; but nor the time nor place 
▁ xxmaj will serve our long interrogatories . xxmaj see , 
▁ xxmaj posthumus anchors upon xxmaj imogen ; 
▁ xxmaj and she , like harmless lightning , throws her eye 
▁ xxmaj on him , her brothers , me , her master , hitting 
▁ xxmaj each object with a joy ; the counterchange 
▁ xxmaj is severally in all . xxmaj let 's quit this ground , 
▁ xxmaj and smoke the temple with our sacrifices . 
▁ [ to xxup belarius ] xxmaj thou art my brother ; so we 'll hold thee ever . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj you are my father too , and did relieve me 
▁ xxmaj to see this gracious season . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj all o'erjoy'd 
▁ xxmaj save these in bonds . xxmaj let them be joyful too , 
▁ xxmaj for they shall taste our comfort . 
▁ xxup imogen . xxmaj my good master , 
▁ i will yet do you service . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj happy be you ! 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj the forlorn soldier , that so nobly fought , 
▁ xxmaj he would have well becom'd this place and grac'd 
▁ xxmaj the thankings of a king . 
▁ xxup posthumus . i am , sir , 
▁ xxmaj the soldier that did company these three 
▁ xxmaj in poor beseeming ; ' twas a fitment for 
▁ xxmaj the purpose i then follow'd . xxmaj that i was he , 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj iachimo . i had you down , and might 
▁ xxmaj have made you finish . 
▁ xxup iachimo . [ kneeling ] i am down again ; 
▁ xxmaj but now my heavy conscience sinks my knee , 
▁ xxmaj as then your force did . xxmaj take that life , beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj which i so often owe ; but your ring first , 
▁ xxmaj and here the bracelet of the truest princess 
▁ xxmaj that ever swore her faith . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj kneel not to me . 
▁ xxmaj the pow'r that i have on you is to spare you ; 
▁ xxmaj the malice towards you to forgive you . xxmaj live , 
▁ xxmaj and deal with others better . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj nobly doom'd ! 
▁ xxmaj we 'll learn our freeness of a son - in - law ; 
▁ xxmaj pardon 's the word to all . 
▁ xxup arviragus . xxmaj you holp us , sir , 
▁ xxmaj as you did mean indeed to be our brother ; 
▁ xxmaj joy'd are we that you are . 
▁ xxup posthumus . xxmaj your servant , xxmaj princes . xxmaj good my lord of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj call forth your soothsayer . xxmaj as i slept , methought 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj jupiter , upon his eagle back'd , 
▁ xxmaj appear'd to me , with other spritely shows 
▁ xxmaj of mine own kindred . xxmaj when i wak'd , i found 
▁ xxmaj this label on my bosom ; whose containing 
▁ xxmaj is so from sense in hardness that i can 
▁ xxmaj make no collection of it . xxmaj let him show 
▁ xxmaj his skill in the construction . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj philarmonus ! 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj here , my good lord . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj read , and declare the meaning . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . [ reads ] ' when as a lion 's whelp shall , to himself 
▁ unknown , without seeking find , and be embrac'd by 
▁ a piece of tender air ; and when from a stately cedar shall 
▁ be lopp'd branches which , being dead many years , shall 
▁ after revive , be jointed to the old stock , and freshly grow ; 
▁ then shall xxmaj posthumus end his miseries , xxmaj britain be fortunate 
▁ and flourish in peace and plenty . ' 
▁ xxmaj thou , xxmaj leonatus , art the lion 's whelp ; 
▁ xxmaj the fit and apt construction of thy name , 
▁ xxmaj being xxmaj leo - natus , doth import so much . 
▁ [ to xxup cymbeline ] xxmaj the piece of tender air , thy virtuous daughter , 
▁ xxmaj which we call ' mollis aer , ' and ' mollis aer ' 
▁ xxmaj we term it ' mulier ' ; which ' mulier ' i divine 
▁ xxmaj is this most constant wife , who even now 
▁ xxmaj answering the letter of the oracle , 
▁ xxmaj unknown to you , unsought , were clipp'd about 
▁ xxmaj with this most tender air . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj this hath some seeming . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj the lofty cedar , royal xxmaj cymbeline , 
▁ xxmaj personates thee ; and thy lopp'd branches point 
▁ xxmaj thy two sons forth , who , by xxmaj belarius stol'n , 
▁ xxmaj for many years thought dead , are now reviv'd , 
▁ xxmaj to the majestic cedar join'd , whose issue 
▁ xxmaj promises xxmaj britain peace and plenty . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj well , 
▁ xxmaj my peace we will begin . xxmaj and , xxmaj caius xxmaj lucius , 
▁ xxmaj although the victor , we submit to xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj and to the xxmaj roman empire , promising 
▁ xxmaj to pay our wonted tribute , from the which 
▁ xxmaj we were dissuaded by our wicked queen , 
▁ xxmaj whom heavens in justice , both on her and hers , 
▁ xxmaj have laid most heavy hand . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj the fingers of the pow'rs above do tune 
▁ xxmaj the harmony of this peace . xxmaj the vision 
▁ xxmaj which i made known to xxmaj lucius ere the stroke 
▁ xxmaj of yet this scarce - cold battle , at this instant 
▁ xxmaj is full accomplish'd ; for the xxmaj roman eagle , 
▁ xxmaj from south to west on wing soaring aloft , 
▁ xxmaj lessen'd herself and in the beams o ' th ' sun 
▁ xxmaj so vanish'd ; which foreshow'd our princely eagle , 
▁ xxmaj th'imperial xxmaj caesar , xxmaj caesar , should again unite 
▁ xxmaj his favour with the radiant xxmaj cymbeline , 
▁ xxmaj which shines here in the west . 
▁ xxup cymbeline . xxmaj laud we the gods ; 
▁ xxmaj and let our crooked smokes climb to their nostrils 
▁ xxmaj from our bless'd altars . xxmaj publish we this peace 
▁ xxmaj to all our subjects . xxmaj set we forward ; let 
▁ a xxmaj roman and a xxmaj british ensign wave 
▁ xxmaj friendly together . xxmaj so through xxmaj lud 's xxmaj town march ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the temple of great xxmaj jupiter 
▁ xxmaj our peace we 'll ratify ; seal it with feasts . 
▁ xxmaj set on there ! xxmaj never was a war did cease , 
▁ xxmaj ere bloody hands were wash'd , with such a peace . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1604 


 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup hamlet , xxup prince xxup of xxup denmark 


 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxmaj claudius , xxmaj king of xxmaj denmark . 
▁ xxmaj marcellus , xxmaj officer . 
▁ xxmaj hamlet , son to the former , and nephew to the present king . 
▁ xxmaj polonius , xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain . 
▁ xxmaj horatio , friend to xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj laertes , son to xxmaj polonius . 
▁ xxmaj voltemand , courtier . 
▁ xxmaj cornelius , courtier . 
▁ xxmaj rosencrantz , courtier . 
▁ xxmaj guildenstern , courtier . 
▁ xxmaj osric , courtier . 
▁ a xxmaj gentleman , courtier . 
▁ a xxmaj priest . 
▁ xxmaj marcellus , officer . 
▁ xxmaj bernardo , officer . 
▁ xxmaj francisco , a soldier 
▁ xxmaj reynaldo , servant to xxmaj polonius . 
▁ xxmaj players . 
▁ xxmaj two xxmaj clowns , gravediggers . 
▁ xxmaj fortinbras , xxmaj prince of xxmaj norway . 
▁ a xxmaj norwegian xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxmaj english xxmaj ambassadors . 

▁ xxmaj getrude , xxmaj queen of xxmaj denmark , mother to xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj ophelia , daughter to xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj ghost of xxmaj hamlet 's xxmaj father . 

▁ xxmaj lords , ladies , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj sailors , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj attendants . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene.- xxmaj elsinore . 


 xxup act xxup i. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj elsinore . a platform before the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter two xxmaj sentinels-[first , ] xxmaj francisco , [ who paces up and down 
 at his post ; then ] xxmaj bernardo , [ who approaches him ] . 

▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj who 's there . ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj nay , answer me . xxmaj stand and unfold yourself . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj long live the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj bernardo ? 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj he . 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj you come most carefully upon your hour . 
▁ xxmaj ber . ' tis now struck twelve . xxmaj get thee to bed , xxmaj francisco . 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj for this relief much thanks . ' tis bitter cold , 
▁ xxmaj and i am sick at heart . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj have you had quiet guard ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj not a mouse stirring . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj well , good night . 
▁ xxmaj if you do meet xxmaj horatio and xxmaj marcellus , 
▁ xxmaj the rivals of my watch , bid them make haste . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj horatio and xxmaj marcellus . 

▁ xxmaj fran . i think i hear them . xxmaj stand , ho ! xxmaj who is there ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj friends to this ground . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj and liegemen to the xxmaj dane . 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj give you good night . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxup o , farewell , honest soldier . 
▁ xxmaj who hath reliev'd you ?