xxbos xxmaj fran . xxmaj bernardo hath my place . 
▁ xxmaj give you good night . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj holla , xxmaj bernardo ! 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj say- 
▁ xxmaj what , is xxmaj horatio there ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . a piece of him . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj horatio . xxmaj welcome , good xxmaj marcellus . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj what , has this thing appear'd again to - night ? 
▁ xxmaj ber . i have seen nothing . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj horatio says ' tis but our fantasy , 
▁ xxmaj and will not let belief take hold of him 
▁ xxmaj touching this dreaded sight , twice seen of us . 
▁ xxmaj therefore i have entreated him along , 
▁ xxmaj with us to watch the minutes of this night , 
▁ xxmaj that , if again this apparition come , 
▁ xxmaj he may approve our eyes and speak to it . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj tush , tush , ' twill not appear . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj sit down awhile , 
▁ xxmaj and let us once again assail your ears , 
▁ xxmaj that are so fortified against our story , 
▁ xxmaj what we two nights have seen . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj well , sit we down , 
▁ xxmaj and let us hear xxmaj bernardo speak of this . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj last night of all , 
▁ xxmaj when yond same star that 's westward from the pole 
▁ xxmaj had made his course t ' illume that part of heaven 
▁ xxmaj where now it burns , xxmaj marcellus and myself , 
▁ xxmaj the bell then beating one- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ghost . 

▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj peace ! break thee off ! xxmaj look where it comes again ! 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj in the same figure , like the xxmaj king that 's dead . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj thou art a scholar ; speak to it , xxmaj horatio . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj looks it not like the xxmaj king ? xxmaj mark it , xxmaj horatio . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj most like . xxmaj it harrows me with fear and wonder . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj it would be spoke to . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj question it , xxmaj horatio . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what art thou that usurp'st this time of night 
▁ xxmaj together with that fair and warlike form 
▁ xxmaj in which the majesty of buried xxmaj denmark 
▁ xxmaj did sometimes march ? xxmaj by heaven i charge thee speak ! 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj it is offended . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj see , it stalks away ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj stay ! xxmaj speak , speak ! i charge thee speak ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj ghost . 
▁ xxmaj mar . ' tis gone and will not answer . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj how now , xxmaj horatio ? xxmaj you tremble and look pale . 
▁ xxmaj is not this something more than fantasy ? 
▁ xxmaj what think you on't ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj before my xxmaj god , i might not this believe 
▁ xxmaj without the sensible and true avouch 
▁ xxmaj of mine own eyes . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj is it not like the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj as thou art to thyself . 
▁ xxmaj such was the very armour he had on 
▁ xxmaj when he th ' ambitious xxmaj norway combated . 
▁ xxmaj so frown'd he once when , in an angry parle , 
▁ xxmaj he smote the sledded xxmaj polacks on the ice . 
▁ ' tis strange . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj thus twice before , and jump at this dead hour , 
▁ xxmaj with martial stalk hath he gone by our watch . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj in what particular thought to work i know not ; 
▁ xxmaj but , in the gross and scope of my opinion , 
▁ xxmaj this bodes some strange eruption to our state . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj good now , sit down , and tell me he that knows , 
▁ xxmaj why this same strict and most observant watch 
▁ xxmaj so nightly toils the subject of the land , 
▁ xxmaj and why such daily cast of brazen cannon 
▁ xxmaj and foreign mart for implements of war ; 
▁ xxmaj why such impress of shipwrights , whose sore task 
▁ xxmaj does not divide the xxmaj sunday from the week . 
▁ xxmaj what might be toward , that this sweaty haste 
▁ xxmaj doth make the night joint - labourer with the day ? 
▁ xxmaj who is't that can inform me ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj that can xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj at least , the whisper goes so . xxmaj our last king , 
▁ xxmaj whose image even but now appear'd to us , 
▁ xxmaj was , as you know , by xxmaj fortinbras of xxmaj norway , 
▁ xxmaj thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride , 
▁ xxmaj dar'd to the combat ; in which our valiant xxmaj hamlet 
▁ ( for so this side of our known world esteem'd him ) 
▁ xxmaj did slay this xxmaj fortinbras ; who , by a seal'd compact , 
▁ xxmaj well ratified by law and heraldry , 
▁ xxmaj did forfeit , with his life , all those his lands 
▁ xxmaj which he stood seiz'd of , to the conqueror ; 
▁ xxmaj against the which a moiety competent 
▁ xxmaj was gaged by our king ; which had return'd 
▁ xxmaj to the inheritance of xxmaj fortinbras , 
▁ xxmaj had he been vanquisher , as , by the same comart 
▁ xxmaj and carriage of the article design'd , 
▁ xxmaj his fell to xxmaj hamlet . xxmaj now , sir , young xxmaj fortinbras , 
▁ xxmaj of unimproved mettle hot and full , 
▁ xxmaj hath in the skirts of xxmaj norway , here and there , 
▁ xxmaj shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes , 
▁ xxmaj for food and diet , to some enterprise 
▁ xxmaj that hath a stomach in't ; which is no other , 
▁ xxmaj as it doth well appear unto our state , 
▁ xxmaj but to recover of us , by strong hand 
▁ xxmaj and terms compulsatory , those foresaid lands 
▁ xxmaj so by his father lost ; and this , i take it , 
▁ xxmaj is the main motive of our preparations , 
▁ xxmaj the source of this our watch , and the chief head 
▁ xxmaj of this post - haste and romage in the land . 
▁ xxmaj ber . i think it be no other but e'en so . 
▁ xxmaj well may it sort that this portentous figure 
▁ xxmaj comes armed through our watch , so like the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj that was and is the question of these wars . 
▁ xxmaj hor . a mote it is to trouble the mind 's eye . 
▁ xxmaj in the most high and palmy state of xxmaj rome , 
▁ a little ere the mightiest xxmaj julius fell , 
▁ xxmaj the graves stood tenantless , and the sheeted dead 
▁ xxmaj did squeak and gibber in the xxmaj roman streets ; 
▁ xxmaj as stars with trains of fire , and dews of blood , 
▁ xxmaj disasters in the sun ; and the moist star 
▁ xxmaj upon whose influence xxmaj neptune 's empire stands 
▁ xxmaj was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse . 
▁ xxmaj and even the like precurse of fierce events , 
▁ xxmaj as harbingers preceding still the fates 
▁ xxmaj and prologue to the omen coming on , 
▁ xxmaj have heaven and earth together demonstrated 
▁ xxmaj unto our climature and countrymen . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ghost again . 

▁ xxmaj but soft ! behold ! xxmaj lo , where it comes again ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll cross it , though it blast me.- xxmaj stay illusion ! 
▁ xxmaj spreads his arms . 
▁ xxmaj if thou hast any sound , or use of voice , 
▁ xxmaj speak to me . 
▁ xxmaj if there be any good thing to be done , 
▁ xxmaj that may to thee do ease , and , race to me , 
▁ xxmaj speak to me . 
▁ xxmaj if thou art privy to thy country 's fate , 
▁ xxmaj which happily foreknowing may avoid , 
▁ xxup o , speak ! 
▁ xxmaj or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life 
▁ xxmaj extorted treasure in the womb of earth 
▁ ( for which , they say , you spirits oft walk in death ) , 
▁ xxmaj the cock crows . 
▁ xxmaj speak of it ! xxmaj stay , and speak!- xxmaj stop it , xxmaj marcellus ! 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj shall i strike at it with my partisan ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj do , if it will not stand . 
▁ xxmaj ber . ' tis here ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . ' tis here ! 
▁ xxmaj mar . ' tis gone ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj ghost . 
▁ xxmaj we do it wrong , being so majestical , 
▁ xxmaj to offer it the show of violence ; 
▁ xxmaj for it is as the air , invulnerable , 
▁ xxmaj and our vain blows malicious mockery . 
▁ xxmaj ber . xxmaj it was about to speak , when the cock crew . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj and then it started , like a guilty thing 
▁ xxmaj upon a fearful summons . i have heard 
▁ xxmaj the cock , that is the trumpet to the morn , 
▁ xxmaj doth with his lofty and shrill - sounding throat 
▁ xxmaj awake the god of day ; and at his warning , 
▁ xxmaj whether in sea or fire , in earth or air , 
▁ xxmaj th ' extravagant and erring spirit hies 
▁ xxmaj to his confine ; and of the truth herein 
▁ xxmaj this present object made probation . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj it faded on the crowing of the cock . 
▁ xxmaj some say that ever , ' gainst that season comes 
▁ xxmaj wherein our xxmaj saviour 's birth is celebrated , 
▁ xxmaj the bird of dawning singeth all night long ; 
▁ xxmaj and then , they say , no spirit dare stir abroad , 
▁ xxmaj the nights are wholesome , then no planets strike , 
▁ xxmaj no fairy takes , nor witch hath power to charm , 
▁ xxmaj so hallow'd and so gracious is the time . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj so have i heard and do in part believe it . 
▁ xxmaj but look , the morn , in russet mantle clad , 
▁ xxmaj walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill . 
▁ xxmaj break we our watch up ; and by my advice 
▁ xxmaj let us impart what we have seen to - night 
▁ xxmaj unto young xxmaj hamlet ; for , upon my life , 
▁ xxmaj this spirit , dumb to us , will speak to him . 
▁ xxmaj do you consent we shall acquaint him with it , 
▁ xxmaj as needful in our loves , fitting our duty ? 
▁ xxmaj let 's do't , i pray ; and i this morning know 
▁ xxmaj where we shall find him most conveniently . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room of state in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj flourish . [ enter xxmaj claudius , xxmaj king of xxmaj denmark , xxmaj gertrude the xxmaj queen , xxmaj hamlet , 
 xxmaj polonius , xxmaj laertes and his sister xxmaj ophelia , [ voltemand , xxmaj cornelius , ] 
 xxmaj lords xxmaj attendant . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj though yet of xxmaj hamlet our dear brother 's death 
▁ xxmaj the memory be green , and that it us befitted 
▁ xxmaj to bear our hearts in grief , and our whole kingdom 
▁ xxmaj to be contracted in one brow of woe , 
▁ xxmaj yet so far hath discretion fought with nature 
▁ xxmaj that we with wisest sorrow think on him 
▁ xxmaj together with remembrance of ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj therefore our sometime sister , now our queen , 
▁ xxmaj th ' imperial jointress to this warlike state , 
▁ xxmaj have we , as ' twere with a defeated joy , 
▁ xxmaj with an auspicious , and a dropping eye , 
▁ xxmaj with mirth in funeral , and with dirge in marriage , 
▁ xxmaj in equal scale weighing delight and dole , 
▁ xxmaj taken to wife ; nor have we herein barr'd 
▁ xxmaj your better wisdoms , which have freely gone 
▁ xxmaj with this affair along . xxmaj for all , our thanks . 
▁ xxmaj now follows , that you know , young xxmaj fortinbras , 
▁ xxmaj holding a weak supposal of our worth , 
▁ xxmaj or thinking by our late dear brother 's death 
▁ xxmaj our state to be disjoint and out of frame , 
▁ xxmaj colleagued with this dream of his advantage , 
▁ xxmaj he hath not fail'd to pester us with message 
▁ xxmaj importing the surrender of those lands 
▁ xxmaj lost by his father , with all bands of law , 
▁ xxmaj to our most valiant brother . xxmaj so much for him . 
▁ xxmaj now for ourself and for this time of meeting . 
▁ xxmaj thus much the business is : we have here writ 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj norway , uncle of young xxmaj fortinbras , 
▁ xxmaj who , impotent and bedrid , scarcely hears 
▁ xxmaj of this his nephew 's purpose , to suppress 
▁ xxmaj his further gait herein , in that the levies , 
▁ xxmaj the lists , and full proportions are all made 
▁ xxmaj out of his subject ; and we here dispatch 
▁ xxmaj you , good xxmaj cornelius , and you , xxmaj voltemand , 
▁ xxmaj for bearers of this greeting to old xxmaj norway , 
▁ xxmaj giving to you no further personal power 
▁ xxmaj to business with the xxmaj king , more than the scope 
▁ xxmaj of these dilated articles allow . [ gives a paper . ] 
▁ xxmaj farewell , and let your haste commend your duty . 
▁ xxmaj cor . , xxmaj volt . xxmaj in that , and all things , will we show our duty . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj we doubt it nothing . xxmaj heartily farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj voltemand and xxmaj cornelius . 
▁ xxmaj and now , xxmaj laertes , what 's the news with you ? 
▁ xxmaj you told us of some suit . xxmaj what is't , xxmaj laertes ? 
▁ xxmaj you can not speak of reason to the xxmaj dane 
▁ xxmaj and lose your voice . xxmaj what wouldst thou beg , xxmaj laertes , 
▁ xxmaj that shall not be my offer , not thy asking ? 
▁ xxmaj the head is not more native to the heart , 
▁ xxmaj the hand more instrumental to the mouth , 
▁ xxmaj than is the throne of xxmaj denmark to thy father . 
▁ xxmaj what wouldst thou have , xxmaj laertes ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj my dread lord , 
▁ xxmaj your leave and favour to return to xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj from whence though willingly i came to xxmaj denmark 
▁ xxmaj to show my duty in your coronation , 
▁ xxmaj yet now i must confess , that duty done , 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts and wishes bend again toward xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj have you your father 's leave ? xxmaj what says xxmaj polonius ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj he hath , my lord , wrung from me my slow leave 
▁ xxmaj by laboursome petition , and at last 
▁ xxmaj upon his will i seal'd my hard consent . 
▁ i do beseech you give him leave to go . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj take thy fair hour , xxmaj laertes . xxmaj time be thine , 
▁ xxmaj and thy best graces spend it at thy will ! 
▁ xxmaj but now , my cousin xxmaj hamlet , and my son- 
▁ xxmaj ham . [ aside ] a little more than kin , and less than kind ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj how is it that the clouds still hang on you ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj not so , my lord . i am too much i ' th ' sun . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj good xxmaj hamlet , cast thy nighted colour off , 
▁ xxmaj and let thine eye look like a friend on xxmaj denmark . 
▁ xxmaj do not for ever with thy vailed lids 
▁ xxmaj seek for thy noble father in the dust . 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st ' tis common . xxmaj all that lives must die , 
▁ xxmaj passing through nature to eternity . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , madam , it is common . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj if it be , 
▁ xxmaj why seems it so particular with thee ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj seems , madam , xxmaj nay , it is . i know not ' seems . ' 
▁ ' tis not alone my inky cloak , good mother , 
▁ xxmaj nor customary suits of solemn black , 
▁ xxmaj nor windy suspiration of forc'd breath , 
▁ xxmaj no , nor the fruitful river in the eye , 
▁ xxmaj nor the dejected havior of the visage , 
▁ xxmaj together with all forms , moods , shapes of grief , 
▁ ' that can denote me truly . xxmaj these indeed seem , 
▁ xxmaj for they are actions that a man might play ; 
▁ xxmaj but i have that within which passeth show- 
▁ xxmaj these but the trappings and the suits of woe . 
▁ xxmaj king . ' tis sweet and commendable in your nature , xxmaj hamlet , 
▁ xxmaj to give these mourning duties to your father ; 
▁ xxmaj but you must know , your father lost a father ; 
▁ xxmaj that father lost , lost his , and the survivor bound 
▁ xxmaj in filial obligation for some term 
▁ xxmaj to do obsequious sorrow . xxmaj but to persever 
▁ xxmaj in obstinate condolement is a course 
▁ xxmaj of impious stubbornness . ' tis unmanly grief ; 
▁ xxmaj it shows a will most incorrect to heaven , 
▁ a heart unfortified , a mind impatient , 
▁ xxmaj an understanding simple and unschool'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for what we know must be , and is as common 
▁ xxmaj as any the most vulgar thing to sense , 
▁ xxmaj why should we in our peevish opposition 
▁ xxmaj take it to heart ? xxmaj fie ! ' tis a fault to heaven , 
▁ a fault against the dead , a fault to nature , 
▁ xxmaj to reason most absurd , whose common theme 
▁ xxmaj is death of fathers , and who still hath cried , 
▁ xxmaj from the first corse till he that died to - day , 
▁ ' this must be so . ' xxmaj we pray you throw to earth 
▁ xxmaj this unprevailing woe , and think of us 
▁ xxmaj as of a father ; for let the world take note 
▁ xxmaj you are the most immediate to our throne , 
▁ xxmaj and with no less nobility of love 
▁ xxmaj than that which dearest father bears his son 
▁ xxmaj do i impart toward you . xxmaj for your intent 
▁ xxmaj in going back to school in xxmaj wittenberg , 
▁ xxmaj it is most retrograde to our desire ; 
▁ xxmaj and we beseech you , bend you to remain 
▁ xxmaj here in the cheer and comfort of our eye , 
▁ xxmaj our chiefest courtier , cousin , and our son . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj let not thy mother lose her prayers , xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ i pray thee stay with us , go not to xxmaj wittenberg . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i shall in all my best obey you , madam . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj why , ' tis a loving and a fair reply . 
▁ xxmaj be as ourself in xxmaj denmark . xxmaj madam , come . 
▁ xxmaj this gentle and unforc'd accord of xxmaj hamlet 
▁ xxmaj sits smiling to my heart ; in grace whereof , 
▁ xxmaj no jocund health that xxmaj denmark drinks to - day 
▁ xxmaj but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell , 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj king 's rouse the heaven shall bruit again , 
▁ xxmaj respeaking earthly thunder . xxmaj come away . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o that this too too solid flesh would melt , 
▁ xxmaj thaw , and resolve itself into a dew ! 
▁ xxmaj or that the xxmaj everlasting had not fix'd 
▁ xxmaj his canon ' gainst self - slaughter ! o xxmaj god ! xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxmaj how weary , stale , flat , and unprofitable 
▁ xxmaj seem to me all the uses of this world ! 
▁ xxmaj fie on't ! ah , fie ! ' tis an unweeded garden 
▁ xxmaj that grows to seed ; things rank and gross in nature 
▁ xxmaj possess it merely . xxmaj that it should come to this ! 
▁ xxmaj but two months dead ! xxmaj nay , not so much , not two . 
▁ xxmaj so excellent a king , that was to this 
▁ xxmaj hyperion to a satyr ; so loving to my mother 
▁ xxmaj that he might not beteem the winds of heaven 
▁ xxmaj visit her face too roughly . xxmaj heaven and earth ! 
▁ xxmaj must i remember ? xxmaj why , she would hang on him 
▁ xxmaj as if increase of appetite had grown 
▁ xxmaj by what it fed on ; and yet , within a month- 
▁ xxmaj let me not think on't ! xxmaj frailty , thy name is woman!- 
▁ a little month , or ere those shoes were old 
▁ xxmaj with which she followed my poor father 's body 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj niobe , all tears- why she , even she 
▁ ( o xxmaj god ! a beast that wants discourse of reason 
▁ xxmaj would have mourn'd longer ) married with my uncle ; 
▁ xxmaj my father 's brother , but no more like my father 
▁ xxmaj than i to xxmaj hercules . xxmaj within a month , 
▁ xxmaj ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears 
▁ xxmaj had left the flushing in her galled eyes , 
▁ xxmaj she married . xxup o , most wicked speed , to post 
▁ xxmaj with such dexterity to incestuous sheets ! 
▁ xxmaj it is not , nor it can not come to good . 
▁ xxmaj but break my heart , for i must hold my tongue ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj horatio , xxmaj marcellus , and xxmaj bernardo . 

▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj hail to your lordship ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am glad to see you well . 
▁ xxmaj horatio!- or i do forget myself . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj the same , my lord , and your poor servant ever . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , my good friend- xxmaj i 'll change that name with you . 
▁ xxmaj and what make you from xxmaj wittenberg , xxmaj horatio ? 
▁ xxmaj marcellus ? 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj my good lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am very glad to see you.- [ to xxmaj bernardo ] xxmaj good even , sir.- 
▁ xxmaj but what , in faith , make you from xxmaj wittenberg ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . a truant disposition , good my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i would not hear your enemy say so , 
▁ xxmaj nor shall you do my ear that violence 
▁ xxmaj to make it truster of your own report 
▁ xxmaj against yourself . i know you are no truant . 
▁ xxmaj but what is your affair in xxmaj elsinore ? 
▁ xxmaj we 'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj my lord , i came to see your father 's funeral . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i prithee do not mock me , fellow student . 
▁ i think it was to see my mother 's wedding . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj indeed , my lord , it followed hard upon . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj thrift , thrift , xxmaj horatio ! xxmaj the funeral bak'd meats 
▁ xxmaj did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables . 
▁ xxmaj would i had met my dearest foe in heaven 
▁ xxmaj or ever i had seen that day , xxmaj horatio ! 
▁ xxmaj my father- methinks i see my father . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxup o , where , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj in my mind 's eye , xxmaj horatio . 
▁ xxmaj hor . i saw him once . xxmaj he was a goodly king . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj he was a man , take him for all in all . 
▁ i shall not look upon his like again . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj my lord , i think i saw him yesternight . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj saw ? who ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj my lord , the xxmaj king your father . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the xxmaj king my father ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj season your admiration for a while 
▁ xxmaj with an attent ear , till i may deliver 
▁ xxmaj upon the witness of these gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj this marvel to you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's love let me hear ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj two nights together had these gentlemen 
▁ ( marcellus and xxmaj bernardo ) on their watch 
▁ xxmaj in the dead vast and middle of the night 
▁ xxmaj been thus encount'red . a figure like your father , 
▁ xxmaj armed at point exactly , cap - a - pe , 
▁ xxmaj appears before them and with solemn march 
▁ xxmaj goes slow and stately by them . xxmaj thrice he walk'd 
▁ xxmaj by their oppress'd and fear - surprised eyes , 
▁ xxmaj within his truncheon 's length ; whilst they distill'd 
▁ xxmaj almost to jelly with the act of fear , 
▁ xxmaj stand dumb and speak not to him . xxmaj this to me 
▁ xxmaj in dreadful secrecy impart they did , 
▁ xxmaj and i with them the third night kept the watch ; 
▁ xxmaj where , as they had deliver'd , both in time , 
▁ xxmaj form of the thing , each word made true and good , 
▁ xxmaj the apparition comes . i knew your father . 
▁ xxmaj these hands are not more like . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj but where was this ? 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj my lord , upon the platform where we watch'd . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj did you not speak to it ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj my lord , i did ; 
▁ xxmaj but answer made it none . xxmaj yet once methought 
▁ xxmaj it lifted up it head and did address 
▁ xxmaj itself to motion , like as it would speak ; 
▁ xxmaj but even then the morning cock crew loud , 
▁ xxmaj and at the sound it shrunk in haste away 
▁ xxmaj and vanish'd from our sight . 
▁ xxmaj ham . ' tis very strange . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj as i do live , my honour'd lord , ' tis true ; 
▁ xxmaj and we did think it writ down in our duty 
▁ xxmaj to let you know of it . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj indeed , indeed , sirs . xxmaj but this troubles me . 
▁ xxmaj hold you the watch to - night ? 
▁ xxmaj both [ mar . and xxmaj ber . ] xxmaj we do , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj arm'd , say you ? 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj arm'd , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj from top to toe ? 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj my lord , from head to foot . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then saw you not his face ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxup o , yes , my lord ! xxmaj he wore his beaver up . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what , look'd he frowningly . 
▁ xxmaj hor . a countenance more in sorrow than in anger . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj pale or red ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj nay , very pale . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj and fix'd his eyes upon you ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj most constantly . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i would i had been there . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj it would have much amaz'd you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj very like , very like . xxmaj stay'd it long ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj while one with moderate haste might tell a hundred . 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj longer , longer . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj not when i saw't . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj his beard was grizzled- no ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj it was , as i have seen it in his life , 
▁ a sable silver'd . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i will watch to - night . 
▁ xxmaj perchance ' twill walk again . 
▁ xxmaj hor . i warr'nt it will . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj if it assume my noble father 's person , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll speak to it , though hell itself should gape 
▁ xxmaj and bid me hold my peace . i pray you all , 
▁ xxmaj if you have hitherto conceal'd this sight , 
▁ xxmaj let it be tenable in your silence still ; 
▁ xxmaj and whatsoever else shall hap to - night , 
▁ xxmaj give it an understanding but no tongue . 
▁ i will requite your loves . xxmaj so , fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj upon the platform , ' twixt eleven and twelve , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll visit you . 
▁ xxmaj all . xxmaj our duty to your honour . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj your loves , as mine to you . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but xxmaj hamlet ] . 
▁ xxmaj my father 's spirit- in arms ? xxmaj all is not well . 
▁ i doubt some foul play . xxmaj would the night were come ! 
▁ xxmaj till then sit still , my soul . xxmaj foul deeds will rise , 
▁ xxmaj though all the earth o'erwhelm them , to men 's eyes . 
 xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the house of xxmaj polonius . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj laertes and xxmaj ophelia . 

▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj my necessaries are embark'd . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj and , sister , as the winds give benefit 
▁ xxmaj and convoy is assistant , do not sleep , 
▁ xxmaj but let me hear from you . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj do you doubt that ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj for xxmaj hamlet , and the trifling of his favour , 
▁ xxmaj hold it a fashion , and a toy in blood ; 
▁ a violet in the youth of primy nature , 
▁ xxmaj forward , not permanent- sweet , not lasting ; 
▁ xxmaj the perfume and suppliance of a minute ; 
▁ xxmaj no more . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj no more but so ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj think it no more . 
▁ xxmaj for nature crescent does not grow alone 
▁ xxmaj in thews and bulk ; but as this temple waxes , 
▁ xxmaj the inward service of the mind and soul 
▁ xxmaj grows wide withal . xxmaj perhaps he loves you now , 
▁ xxmaj and now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch 
▁ xxmaj the virtue of his will ; but you must fear , 
▁ xxmaj his greatness weigh'd , his will is not his own ; 
▁ xxmaj for he himself is subject to his birth . 
▁ xxmaj he may not , as unvalued persons do , 
▁ xxmaj carve for himself , for on his choice depends 
▁ xxmaj the safety and health of this whole state , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd 
▁ xxmaj unto the voice and yielding of that body 
▁ xxmaj whereof he is the head . xxmaj then if he says he loves you , 
▁ xxmaj it fits your wisdom so far to believe it 
▁ xxmaj as he in his particular act and place 
▁ xxmaj may give his saying deed ; which is no further 
▁ xxmaj than the main voice of xxmaj denmark goes withal . 
▁ xxmaj then weigh what loss your honour may sustain 
▁ xxmaj if with too credent ear you list his songs , 
▁ xxmaj or lose your heart , or your chaste treasure open 
▁ xxmaj to his unmast'red importunity . 
▁ xxmaj fear it , xxmaj ophelia , fear it , my dear sister , 
▁ xxmaj and keep you in the rear of your affection , 
▁ xxmaj out of the shot and danger of desire . 
▁ xxmaj the chariest maid is prodigal enough 
▁ xxmaj if she unmask her beauty to the moon . 
▁ xxmaj virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes . 
▁ xxmaj the canker galls the infants of the spring 
▁ xxmaj too oft before their buttons be disclos'd , 
▁ xxmaj and in the morn and liquid dew of youth 
▁ xxmaj contagious blastments are most imminent . 
▁ xxmaj be wary then ; best safety lies in fear . 
▁ xxmaj youth to itself rebels , though none else near . 
▁ xxmaj oph . i shall th ' effect of this good lesson keep 
▁ xxmaj as watchman to my heart . xxmaj but , good my brother , 
▁ xxmaj do not as some ungracious pastors do , 
▁ xxmaj show me the steep and thorny way to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj whiles , like a puff'd and reckless libertine , 
▁ xxmaj himself the primrose path of dalliance treads 
▁ xxmaj and recks not his own rede . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxup o , fear me not ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius . 

▁ i stay too long . xxmaj but here my father comes . 
▁ a double blessing is a double grace ; 
▁ xxmaj occasion smiles upon a second leave . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj yet here , xxmaj laertes ? xxmaj aboard , aboard , for shame ! 
▁ xxmaj the wind sits in the shoulder of your sail , 
▁ xxmaj and you are stay'd for . xxmaj there- my blessing with thee ! 
▁ xxmaj and these few precepts in thy memory 
▁ xxmaj look thou character . xxmaj give thy thoughts no tongue , 
▁ xxmaj nor any unproportion'd thought his act . 
▁ xxmaj be thou familiar , but by no means vulgar : 
▁ xxmaj those friends thou hast , and their adoption tried , 
▁ xxmaj grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel ; 
▁ xxmaj but do not dull thy palm with entertainment 
▁ xxmaj of each new - hatch'd , unfledg'd comrade . xxmaj beware 
▁ xxmaj of entrance to a quarrel ; but being in , 
▁ xxmaj bear't that th ' opposed may beware of thee . 
▁ xxmaj give every man thine ear , but few thy voice ; 
▁ xxmaj take each man 's censure , but reserve thy judgment . 
▁ xxmaj costly thy habit as thy purse can buy , 
▁ xxmaj but not express'd in fancy ; rich , not gaudy ; 
▁ xxmaj for the apparel oft proclaims the man , 
▁ xxmaj and they in xxmaj france of the best rank and station 
▁ xxmaj are most select and generous , chief in that . 
▁ xxmaj neither a borrower nor a lender be ; 
▁ xxmaj for loan oft loses both itself and friend , 
▁ xxmaj and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry . 
▁ xxmaj this above all- to thine own self be true , 
▁ xxmaj and it must follow , as the night the day , 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not then be false to any man . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj my blessing season this in thee ! 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj most humbly do i take my leave , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj the time invites you . xxmaj go , your servants tend . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj ophelia , and remember well 
▁ xxmaj what i have said to you . 
▁ xxmaj oph . ' tis in my memory lock'd , 
▁ xxmaj and you yourself shall keep the key of it . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj what is't , xxmaj ophelia , he hath said to you ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj so please you , something touching the xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj marry , well bethought ! 
▁ ' tis told me he hath very oft of late 
▁ xxmaj given private time to you , and you yourself 
▁ xxmaj have of your audience been most free and bounteous . 
▁ xxmaj if it be so- as so ' tis put on me , 
▁ xxmaj and that in way of caution- i must tell you 
▁ xxmaj you do not understand yourself so clearly 
▁ xxmaj as it behooves my daughter and your honour . 
▁ xxmaj what is between you ? xxmaj give me up the truth . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj he hath , my lord , of late made many tenders 
▁ xxmaj of his affection to me . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj affection ? xxmaj pooh ! xxmaj you speak like a green girl , 
▁ xxmaj unsifted in such perilous circumstance . 
▁ xxmaj do you believe his tenders , as you call them ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . i do not know , my lord , what i should think , 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj marry , i will teach you ! xxmaj think yourself a baby 
▁ xxmaj that you have ta'en these tenders for true pay , 
▁ xxmaj which are not sterling . xxmaj tender yourself more dearly , 
▁ xxmaj or ( not to crack the wind of the poor phrase , 
▁ xxmaj running it thus ) you 'll tender me a fool . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj my lord , he hath importun'd me with love 
▁ xxmaj in honourable fashion . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj ay , fashion you may call it . xxmaj go to , go to ! 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj and hath given countenance to his speech , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj with almost all the holy vows of heaven . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj ay , springes to catch woodcocks ! i do know , 
▁ xxmaj when the blood burns , how prodigal the soul 
▁ xxmaj lends the tongue vows . xxmaj these blazes , daughter , 
▁ xxmaj giving more light than heat , extinct in both 
▁ xxmaj even in their promise , as it is a - making , 
▁ xxmaj you must not take for fire . xxmaj from this time 
▁ xxmaj be something scanter of your maiden presence . 
▁ xxmaj set your entreatments at a higher rate 
▁ xxmaj than a command to parley . xxmaj for xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet , 
▁ xxmaj believe so much in him , that he is young , 
▁ xxmaj and with a larger tether may he walk 
▁ xxmaj than may be given you . xxmaj in few , xxmaj ophelia , 
▁ xxmaj do not believe his vows ; for they are brokers , 
▁ xxmaj not of that dye which their investments show , 
▁ xxmaj but mere implorators of unholy suits , 
▁ xxmaj breathing like sanctified and pious bawds , 
▁ xxmaj the better to beguile . xxmaj this is for all : 
▁ i would not , in plain terms , from this time forth 
▁ xxmaj have you so slander any moment leisure 
▁ xxmaj as to give words or talk with the xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj look to't , i charge you . xxmaj come your ways . 
▁ xxmaj oph . i shall obey , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj elsinore . xxmaj the platform before the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet , xxmaj horatio , and xxmaj marcellus . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the air bites shrewdly ; it is very cold . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj it is a nipping and an eager air . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what hour now ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . i think it lacks of twelve . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj no , it is struck . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj indeed ? i heard it not . xxmaj it then draws near the season 
▁ xxmaj wherein the spirit held his wo nt to walk . 
▁ a flourish of trumpets , and two pieces go off . 
▁ xxmaj what does this mean , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the xxmaj king doth wake to - night and takes his rouse , 
▁ xxmaj keeps wassail , and the swagg'ring upspring reels , 
▁ xxmaj and , as he drains his draughts of xxmaj rhenish down , 
▁ xxmaj the kettledrum and trumpet thus bray out 
▁ xxmaj the triumph of his pledge . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj is it a custom ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , marry , is't ; 
▁ xxmaj but to my mind , though i am native here 
▁ xxmaj and to the manner born , it is a custom 
▁ xxmaj more honour'd in the breach than the observance . 
▁ xxmaj this heavy - headed revel east and west 
▁ xxmaj makes us traduc'd and tax'd of other nations ; 
▁ xxmaj they clip us drunkards and with swinish phrase 
▁ xxmaj soil our addition ; and indeed it takes 
▁ xxmaj from our achievements , though perform'd at height , 
▁ xxmaj the pith and marrow of our attribute . 
▁ xxmaj so oft it chances in particular men 
▁ xxmaj that , for some vicious mole of nature in them , 
▁ xxmaj as in their birth,- wherein they are not guilty , 
▁ xxmaj since nature can not choose his origin,- 
▁ xxmaj by the o'ergrowth of some complexion , 
▁ xxmaj oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason , 
▁ xxmaj or by some habit that too much o'erleavens 
▁ xxmaj the form of plausive manners , that these men 
▁ xxmaj carrying , i say , the stamp of one defect , 
▁ xxmaj being nature 's livery , or fortune 's star , 
▁ xxmaj their virtues else- be they as pure as grace , 
▁ xxmaj as infinite as man may undergo- 
▁ xxmaj shall in the general censure take corruption 
▁ xxmaj from that particular fault . xxmaj the dram of e'il 
▁ xxmaj doth all the noble substance often dout xxmaj to his own scandal . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ghost . 

▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj look , my lord , it comes ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj angels and ministers of grace defend us ! 
▁ xxmaj be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd , 
▁ xxmaj bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell , 
▁ xxmaj be thy intents wicked or charitable , 
▁ xxmaj thou com'st in such a questionable shape 
▁ xxmaj that i will speak to thee . xxmaj i 'll call thee xxmaj hamlet , 
▁ xxmaj king , father , royal xxmaj dane . xxup o , answer me ? 
▁ xxmaj let me not burst in ignorance , but tell 
▁ xxmaj why thy canoniz'd bones , hearsed in death , 
▁ xxmaj have burst their cerements ; why the sepulchre 
▁ xxmaj wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd , 
▁ xxmaj hath op'd his ponderous and marble jaws 
▁ xxmaj to cast thee up again . xxmaj what may this mean 
▁ xxmaj that thou , dead corse , again in complete steel , 
▁ xxmaj revisits thus the glimpses of the moon , 
▁ xxmaj making night hideous , and we fools of nature 
▁ xxmaj so horridly to shake our disposition 
▁ xxmaj with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls ? 
▁ xxmaj say , why is this ? wherefore ? xxmaj what should we do ? 
▁ xxmaj ghost beckons xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj it beckons you to go away with it , 
▁ xxmaj as if it some impartment did desire 
▁ xxmaj to you alone . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj look with what courteous action 
▁ xxmaj it waves you to a more removed ground . 
▁ xxmaj but do not go with it ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj no , by no means ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it will not speak . xxmaj then will i follow it . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj do not , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , what should be the fear ? 
▁ i do not set my life at a pin 's fee ; 
▁ xxmaj and for my soul , what can it do to that , 
▁ xxmaj being a thing immortal as itself ? 
▁ xxmaj it waves me forth again . xxmaj i 'll follow it . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what if it tempt you toward the flood , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj or to the dreadful summit of the cliff 
▁ xxmaj that beetles o'er his base into the sea , 
▁ xxmaj and there assume some other , horrible form 
▁ xxmaj which might deprive your sovereignty of reason 
▁ xxmaj and draw you into madness ? xxmaj think of it . 
▁ xxmaj the very place puts toys of desperation , 
▁ xxmaj without more motive , into every brain 
▁ xxmaj that looks so many fadoms to the sea 
▁ xxmaj and hears it roar beneath . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it waves me still . 
▁ xxmaj go on . xxmaj i 'll follow thee . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj you shall not go , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj hold off your hands ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj be rul'd . xxmaj you shall not go . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj my fate cries out 
▁ xxmaj and makes each petty artire in this body 
▁ xxmaj as hardy as the xxmaj nemean lion 's nerve . 
▁ [ ghost beckons . ] 
▁ xxmaj still am i call'd . xxmaj unhand me , gentlemen . 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj i 'll make a ghost of him that lets me!- 
▁ i say , away!- xxmaj go on . xxmaj i 'll follow thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj ghost and xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj he waxes desperate with imagination . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj let 's follow . ' tis not fit thus to obey him . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj have after . xxmaj to what issue wail this come ? 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj something is rotten in the state of xxmaj denmark . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj heaven will direct it . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj nay , let 's follow him . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj elsinore . xxmaj the xxmaj castle . xxmaj another part of the fortifications . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj ghost and xxmaj hamlet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj whither wilt thou lead me ? xxmaj speak ! xxmaj i 'll go no further . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj mark me . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i will . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj my hour is almost come , 
▁ xxmaj when i to sulph'rous and tormenting flames 
▁ xxmaj must render up myself . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj alas , poor ghost ! 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj pity me not , but lend thy serious hearing 
▁ xxmaj to what i shall unfold . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj speak . i am bound to hear . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj so art thou to revenge , when thou shalt hear . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxmaj ghost . i am thy father 's spirit , 
▁ xxmaj doom'd for a certain term to walk the night , 
▁ xxmaj and for the day confin'd to fast in fires , 
▁ xxmaj till the foul crimes done in my days of nature 
▁ xxmaj are burnt and purg'd away . xxmaj but that i am forbid 
▁ xxmaj to tell the secrets of my prison house , 
▁ i could a tale unfold whose lightest word 
▁ xxmaj would harrow up thy soul , freeze thy young blood , 
▁ xxmaj make thy two eyes , like stars , start from their spheres , 
▁ xxmaj thy knotted and combined locks to part , 
▁ xxmaj and each particular hair to stand an end 
▁ xxmaj like quills upon the fretful porpentine . 
▁ xxmaj but this eternal blazon must not be 
▁ xxmaj to ears of flesh and blood . xxmaj list , list , xxup o , list ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou didst ever thy dear father love- 
▁ xxmaj ham . o xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj revenge his foul and most unnatural murther . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj murther ? 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj murther most foul , as in the best it is ; 
▁ xxmaj but this most foul , strange , and unnatural . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj haste me to know't , that xxup i , with wings as swift 
▁ xxmaj as meditation or the thoughts of love , 
▁ xxmaj may sweep to my revenge . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . i find thee apt ; 
▁ xxmaj and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed 
▁ xxmaj that rots itself in ease on xxmaj lethe wharf , 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou not stir in this . xxmaj now , xxmaj hamlet , hear . 
▁ ' tis given out that , sleeping in my orchard , 
▁ a serpent stung me . xxmaj so the whole ear of xxmaj denmark 
▁ xxmaj is by a forged process of my death 
▁ xxmaj rankly abus'd . xxmaj but know , thou noble youth , 
▁ xxmaj the serpent that did sting thy father 's life 
▁ xxmaj now wears his crown . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o my prophetic soul ! 
▁ xxmaj my uncle ? 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj ay , that incestuous , that adulterate beast , 
▁ xxmaj with witchcraft of his wit , with traitorous gifts- 
▁ o wicked wit and gifts , that have the power 
▁ xxmaj so to seduce!- won to his shameful lust 
▁ xxmaj the will of my most seeming - virtuous queen . 
▁ o xxmaj hamlet , what a falling - off was there , 
▁ xxmaj from me , whose love was of that dignity 
▁ xxmaj that it went hand in hand even with the vow 
▁ i made to her in marriage , and to decline 
▁ xxmaj upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor 
▁ xxmaj to those of mine ! 
▁ xxmaj but virtue , as it never will be mov'd , 
▁ xxmaj though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj so lust , though to a radiant angel link'd , 
▁ xxmaj will sate itself in a celestial bed 
▁ xxmaj and prey on garbage . 
▁ xxmaj but soft ! methinks i scent the morning air . 
▁ xxmaj brief let me be . xxmaj sleeping within my orchard , 
▁ xxmaj my custom always of the afternoon , 
▁ xxmaj upon my secure hour thy uncle stole , 
▁ xxmaj with juice of cursed hebona in a vial , 
▁ xxmaj and in the porches of my ears did pour 
▁ xxmaj the leperous distilment ; whose effect 
▁ xxmaj holds such an enmity with blood of man 
▁ xxmaj that swift as quicksilverr it courses through 
▁ xxmaj the natural gates and alleys of the body , 
▁ xxmaj and with a sudden vigour it doth posset 
▁ xxmaj and curd , like eager droppings into milk , 
▁ xxmaj the thin and wholesome blood . xxmaj so did it mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and a most instant tetter bark'd about , 
▁ xxmaj most lazar - like , with vile and loathsome crust 
▁ xxmaj all my smooth body . 
▁ xxmaj thus was xxup i , sleeping , by a brother 's hand 
▁ xxmaj of life , of crown , of queen , at once dispatch'd ; 
▁ xxmaj cut off even in the blossoms of my sin , 
▁ xxmaj unhous'led , disappointed , unanel'd , 
▁ xxmaj no reckoning made , but sent to my account 
▁ xxmaj with all my imperfections on my head . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxup o , horrible ! xxup o , horrible ! most horrible ! 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj if thou hast nature in thee , bear it not . 
▁ xxmaj let not the royal bed of xxmaj denmark be 
▁ a couch for luxury and damned incest . 
▁ xxmaj but , howsoever thou pursuest this act , 
▁ xxmaj taint not thy mind , nor let thy soul contrive 
▁ xxmaj against thy mother aught . xxmaj leave her to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge 
▁ xxmaj to prick and sting her . xxmaj fare thee well at once . 
▁ xxmaj the glowworm shows the matin to be near 
▁ xxmaj and gins to pale his uneffectual fire . 
▁ xxmaj adieu , adieu , adieu ! xxmaj remember me . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o all you host of heaven ! o earth ! xxmaj what else ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall i couple hell ? xxmaj hold , hold , my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj and you , my sinews , grow not instant old , 
▁ xxmaj but bear me stiffly up . xxmaj remember thee ? 
▁ xxmaj ay , thou poor ghost , while memory holds a seat 
▁ xxmaj in this distracted globe . xxmaj remember thee ? 
▁ xxmaj yea , from the table of my memory 
▁ xxmaj i 'll wipe away all trivial fond records , 
▁ xxmaj all saws of books , all forms , all pressures past 
▁ xxmaj that youth and observation copied there , 
▁ xxmaj and thy commandment all alone shall live 
▁ xxmaj within the book and volume of my brain , 
▁ xxmaj unmix'd with baser matter . xxmaj yes , by heaven ! 
▁ o most pernicious woman ! 
▁ o villain , villain , smiling , damned villain ! 
▁ xxmaj my tables ! xxmaj meet it is i set it down 
▁ xxmaj that one may smile , and smile , and be a villain ; 
▁ xxmaj at least i am sure it may be so in xxmaj denmark . [ writes . ] 
▁ xxmaj so , uncle , there you are . xxmaj now to my word : 
▁ xxmaj it is ' adieu , adieu ! xxmaj remember me . ' 
▁ i have sworn't . 
▁ xxmaj hor . ( within ) xxmaj my lord , my lord ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj horatio and xxmaj marcellus . 

▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj heaven secure him ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj so be it ! 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj illo , ho , ho , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj hillo , ho , ho , boy ! xxmaj come , bird , come . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj how is't , my noble lord ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what news , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxup o , wonderful ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj good my lord , tell it . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , you will reveal it . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj not xxup i , my lord , by heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj nor xxup i , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how say you then ? xxmaj would heart of man once think it ? 
▁ xxmaj but you 'll be secret ? 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj ay , by heaven , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj there 's neer a villain dwelling in all xxmaj denmark 
▁ xxmaj but he 's an arrant knave . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj there needs no ghost , my lord , come from the grave 
▁ xxmaj to tell us this . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , right ! xxmaj you are in the right ! 
▁ xxmaj and so , without more circumstance at all , 
▁ i hold it fit that we shake hands and part ; 
▁ xxmaj you , as your business and desires shall point you , 
▁ xxmaj for every man hath business and desire , 
▁ xxmaj such as it is ; and for my own poor part , 
▁ xxmaj look you , xxmaj i 'll go pray . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj these are but wild and whirling words , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am sorry they offend you , heartily ; 
▁ xxmaj yes , faith , heartily . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj there 's no offence , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj yes , by xxmaj saint xxmaj patrick , but there is , xxmaj horatio , 
▁ xxmaj and much offence too . xxmaj touching this vision here , 
▁ xxmaj it is an honest ghost , that let me tell you . 
▁ xxmaj for your desire to know what is between us , 
▁ xxmaj o'ermaster't as you may . xxmaj and now , good friends , 
▁ xxmaj as you are friends , scholars , and soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj give me one poor request . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what is't , my lord ? xxmaj we will . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj never make known what you have seen to - night . 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj my lord , we will not . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay , but swear't . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj in faith , 
▁ xxmaj my lord , not xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj nor xxup i , my lord- in faith . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj upon my sword . 
▁ xxmaj mar . xxmaj we have sworn , my lord , already . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj indeed , upon my sword , indeed . 

▁ xxmaj ghost cries under the stage . 

▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj swear . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj aha boy , say'st thou so ? xxmaj art thou there , truepenny ? 
▁ xxmaj come on ! xxmaj you hear this fellow in the cellarage . 
▁ xxmaj consent to swear . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj propose the oath , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj never to speak of this that you have seen . 
▁ xxmaj swear by my sword . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . [ beneath ] xxmaj swear . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj hic et ubique ? xxmaj then we 'll shift our ground . 
▁ xxmaj come hither , gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj and lay your hands again upon my sword . 
▁ xxmaj never to speak of this that you have heard : 
▁ xxmaj swear by my sword . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . [ beneath ] xxmaj swear by his sword . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj well said , old mole ! xxmaj canst work i ' th ' earth so fast ? 
▁ a worthy pioner ! xxmaj once more remove , good friends . " 
▁ xxmaj hor . o day and night , but this is wondrous strange ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj and therefore as a stranger give it welcome . 
▁ xxmaj there are more things in heaven and earth , xxmaj horatio , 
▁ xxmaj than are dreamt of in your philosophy . 
▁ xxmaj but come ! 
▁ xxmaj here , as before , never , so help you mercy , 
▁ xxmaj how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself 
▁ ( as i perchance hereafter shall think meet 
▁ xxmaj to put an antic disposition on ) , 
▁ xxmaj that you , at such times seeing me , never shall , 
▁ xxmaj with arms encumb'red thus , or this head - shake , 
▁ xxmaj or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase , 
▁ xxmaj as ' well , well , we know , ' or ' we could , an if we would , ' 
▁ xxmaj or ' if we list to speak , ' or ' there be , an if they might , ' 
▁ xxmaj or such ambiguous giving out , to note 
▁ xxmaj that you know aught of me- this is not to do , 
▁ xxmaj so grace and mercy at your most need help you , 
▁ xxmaj swear . 
▁ xxmaj ghost . [ beneath ] xxmaj swear . 
▁ [ they swear . ] 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj rest , rest , perturbed spirit ! xxmaj so , gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj with all my love i do commend me to you ; 
▁ xxmaj and what so poor a man as xxmaj hamlet is 
▁ xxmaj may do t ' express his love and friending to you , 
▁ xxmaj god willing , shall not lack . xxmaj let us go in together ; 
▁ xxmaj and still your fingers on your lips , i pray . 
▁ xxmaj the time is out of joint . o cursed spite 
▁ xxmaj that ever i was born to set it right ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , come , let 's go together . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj act xxup ii . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the house of xxmaj polonius . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius and xxmaj reynaldo . 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj give him this money and these notes , xxmaj reynaldo . 
▁ xxmaj rey . i will , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj you shall do marvell 's wisely , good xxmaj reynaldo , 
▁ xxmaj before xxmaj you visit him , to make inquire 
▁ xxmaj of his behaviour . 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj my lord , i did intend it . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj marry , well said , very well said . xxmaj look you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj enquire me first what xxmaj danskers are in xxmaj paris ; 
▁ xxmaj and how , and who , what means , and where they keep ,