xxbos xxmaj what company , at what expense ; and finding 
▁ xxmaj by this encompassment and drift of question 
▁ xxmaj that they do know my son , come you more nearer 
▁ xxmaj than your particular demands will touch it . 
▁ xxmaj take you , as ' twere , some distant knowledge of him ; 
▁ xxmaj as thus , ' i know his father and his friends , 
▁ xxmaj and in part him . ' xxmaj do you mark this , xxmaj reynaldo ? 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj ay , very well , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . ' and in part him , but , ' you may say , ' not well . 
▁ xxmaj but if't be he i mean , he 's very wild 
▁ xxmaj addicted so and so ' ; and there put on him 
▁ xxmaj what forgeries you please ; marry , none so rank 
▁ xxmaj as may dishonour him- take heed of that ; 
▁ xxmaj but , sir , such wanton , wild , and usual slips 
▁ xxmaj as are companions noted and most known 
▁ xxmaj to youth and liberty . 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj as gaming , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj ay , or drinking , fencing , swearing , quarrelling , 
▁ xxmaj drabbing . xxmaj you may go so far . 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj my lord , that would dishonour him . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj faith , no , as you may season it in the charge . 
▁ xxmaj you must not put another scandal on him , 
▁ xxmaj that he is open to incontinency . 
▁ xxmaj that 's not my meaning . xxmaj but breathe his faults so quaintly 
▁ xxmaj that they may seem the taints of liberty , 
▁ xxmaj the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind , 
▁ a savageness in unreclaimed blood , 
▁ xxmaj of general assault . 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj but , my good lord- 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj wherefore should you do this ? 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj ay , my lord , 
▁ i would know that . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj marry , sir , here 's my drift , 
▁ xxmaj and i believe it is a fetch of warrant . 
▁ xxmaj you laying these slight sullies on my son 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere a thing a little soil'd i ' th ' working , 
▁ xxmaj mark you , 
▁ xxmaj your party in converse , him you would sound , 
▁ xxmaj having ever seen in the prenominate crimes 
▁ xxmaj the youth you breathe of guilty , be assur'd 
▁ xxmaj he closes with you in this consequence : 
▁ ' good sir , ' or so , or ' friend , ' or ' gentleman'- 
▁ xxmaj according to the phrase or the addition 
▁ xxmaj of man and country- 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj very good , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj and then , sir , does ' a this- ' a does- xxmaj what was i about to say ? 
▁ xxmaj by the mass , i was about to say something ! xxmaj where did i leave ? 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj at ' closes in the consequence , ' at ' friend or so , ' and 
▁ gentleman . ' 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj at ' closes in the consequence'- xxmaj ay , marry ! 
▁ xxmaj he closes thus : ' i know the gentleman . 
▁ i saw him yesterday , or t'other day , 
▁ xxmaj or then , or then , with such or such ; and , as you say , 
▁ xxmaj there was ' a gaming ; there o'ertook in 's rouse ; 
▁ xxmaj there falling out at tennis ' ; or perchance , 
▁ ' i saw him enter such a house of sale , ' 
▁ xxmaj videlicet , a brothel , or so forth . 
▁ xxmaj see you now- 
▁ xxmaj your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth ; 
▁ xxmaj and thus do we of wisdom and of reach , 
▁ xxmaj with windlasses and with assays of bias , 
▁ xxmaj by indirections find directions out . 
▁ xxmaj so , by my former lecture and advice , 
▁ xxmaj shall you my son . xxmaj you have me , have you not 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj my lord , i have . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj god b ' wi ' ye , fare ye well ! 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj good my lord ! [ going . ] 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj observe his inclination in yourself . 
▁ xxmaj rey . i shall , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj and let him ply his music . 
▁ xxmaj rey . xxmaj well , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj farewell ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj reynaldo . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ophelia . 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj ophelia ? xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . o my lord , my lord , i have been so affrighted ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj with what , i ' th ' name of xxmaj god i 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj my lord , as i was sewing in my closet , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet , with his doublet all unbrac'd , 
▁ xxmaj no hat upon his head , his stockings foul'd , 
▁ xxmaj ungart'red , and down - gyved to his ankle ; 
▁ xxmaj pale as his shirt , his knees knocking each other , 
▁ xxmaj and with a look so piteous in purport 
▁ xxmaj as if he had been loosed out of hell 
▁ xxmaj to speak of horrors- he comes before me . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj mad for thy love ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj my lord , i do not know , 
▁ xxmaj but truly i do fear it . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj what said he ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj he took me by the wrist and held me hard ; 
▁ xxmaj then goes he to the length of all his arm , 
▁ xxmaj and , with his other hand thus o'er his brow , 
▁ xxmaj he falls to such perusal of my face 
▁ xxmaj as he would draw it . xxmaj long stay'd he so . 
▁ xxmaj at last , a little shaking of mine arm , 
▁ xxmaj and thrice his head thus waving up and down , 
▁ xxmaj he rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound 
▁ xxmaj as it did seem to shatter all his bulk 
▁ xxmaj and end his being . xxmaj that done , he lets me go , 
▁ xxmaj and with his head over his shoulder turn'd 
▁ xxmaj he seem'd to find his way without his eyes , 
▁ xxmaj for out o ' doors he went without their help 
▁ xxmaj and to the last bended their light on me . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj come , go with me . i will go seek the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj this is the very ecstasy of love , 
▁ xxmaj whose violent property fordoes itself 
▁ xxmaj and leads the will to desperate undertakings 
▁ xxmaj as oft as any passion under heaven 
▁ xxmaj that does afflict our natures . i am sorry . 
▁ xxmaj what , have you given him any hard words of late ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj no , my good lord ; but , as you did command , 
▁ i did repel his letters and denied 
▁ xxmaj his access to me . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj that hath made him mad . 
▁ i am sorry that with better heed and judgment 
▁ i had not quoted him . i fear'd he did but trifle 
▁ xxmaj and meant to wrack thee ; but beshrew my jealousy ! 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , it is as proper to our age 
▁ xxmaj to cast beyond ourselves in our opinions 
▁ xxmaj as it is common for the younger sort 
▁ xxmaj to lack discretion . xxmaj come , go we to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj this must be known ; which , being kept close , might move 
▁ xxmaj more grief to hide than hate to utter love . 
▁ xxmaj come . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 

 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj flourish . [ enter xxmaj king and xxmaj queen , xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern , cum aliis . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj welcome , dear xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 
▁ xxmaj moreover that we much did long to see you , 
▁ xxmaj the need we have to use you did provoke 
▁ xxmaj our hasty sending . xxmaj something have you heard 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj hamlet 's transformation . xxmaj so i call it , 
▁ xxmaj sith nor th ' exterior nor the inward man 
▁ xxmaj resembles that it was . xxmaj what it should be , 
▁ xxmaj more than his father 's death , that thus hath put him 
▁ xxmaj so much from th ' understanding of himself , 
▁ i can not dream of . i entreat you both 
▁ xxmaj that , being of so young clays brought up with him , 
▁ xxmaj and since so neighbour'd to his youth and haviour , 
▁ xxmaj that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court 
▁ xxmaj some little time ; so by your companies 
▁ xxmaj to draw him on to pleasures , and to gather 
▁ xxmaj so much as from occasion you may glean , 
▁ xxmaj whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus 
▁ xxmaj that , open'd , lies within our remedy . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj good gentlemen , he hath much talk'd of you , 
▁ xxmaj and sure i am two men there are not living 
▁ xxmaj to whom he more adheres . xxmaj if it will please you 
▁ xxmaj to show us so much gentry and good will 
▁ xxmaj as to expend your time with us awhile 
▁ xxmaj for the supply and profit of our hope , 
▁ xxmaj your visitation shall receive such thanks 
▁ xxmaj as fits a king 's remembrance . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj both your xxmaj majesties 
▁ xxmaj might , by the sovereign power you have of us , 
▁ xxmaj put your dread pleasures more into command 
▁ xxmaj than to entreaty . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj but we both obey , 
▁ xxmaj and here give up ourselves , in the full bent , 
▁ xxmaj to lay our service freely at your feet , 
▁ xxmaj to be commanded . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thanks , xxmaj rosencrantz and gentle xxmaj guildenstern . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj thanks , xxmaj guildenstern and gentle xxmaj rosencrantz . 
▁ xxmaj and i beseech you instantly to visit 
▁ xxmaj my too much changed son.- xxmaj go , some of you , 
▁ xxmaj and bring these gentlemen where xxmaj hamlet is . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj heavens make our presence and our practices 
▁ xxmaj pleasant and helpful to him ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj ay , amen ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern , [ with some 
▁ xxmaj attendants ] . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj th ' ambassadors from xxmaj norway , my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj are joyfully return'd . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thou still hast been the father of good news . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj have xxup i , my lord ? xxmaj assure you , my good liege , 
▁ i hold my duty as i hold my soul , 
▁ xxmaj both to my xxmaj god and to my gracious king ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do think- or else this brain of mine 
▁ xxmaj hunts not the trail of policy so sure 
▁ xxmaj as it hath us'd to do- that i have found 
▁ xxmaj the very cause of xxmaj hamlet 's lunacy . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxup o , speak of that ! xxmaj that do i long to hear . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj give first admittance to th ' ambassadors . 
▁ xxmaj my news shall be the fruit to that great feast . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thyself do grace to them , and bring them in . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj polonius . ] 
▁ xxmaj he tells me , my dear xxmaj gertrude , he hath found 
▁ xxmaj the head and source of all your son 's distemper . 
▁ xxmaj queen . i doubt it is no other but the main , 
▁ xxmaj his father 's death and our o'erhasty marriage . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj well , we shall sift him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius , xxmaj voltemand , and xxmaj cornelius . 

▁ xxmaj welcome , my good friends . 
▁ xxmaj say , xxmaj voltemand , what from our brother xxmaj norway ? 
▁ xxmaj volt . xxmaj most fair return of greetings and desires . 
▁ xxmaj upon our first , he sent out to suppress 
▁ xxmaj his nephew 's levies ; which to him appear'd 
▁ xxmaj to be a preparation ' gainst the xxmaj polack , 
▁ xxmaj but better look'd into , he truly found 
▁ xxmaj it was against your xxmaj highness ; whereat griev'd , 
▁ xxmaj that so his sickness , age , and impotence 
▁ xxmaj was falsely borne in hand , sends out arrests 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj fortinbras ; which he , in brief , obeys , 
▁ xxmaj receives rebuke from xxmaj norway , and , in fine , 
▁ xxmaj makes vow before his uncle never more 
▁ xxmaj to give th ' assay of arms against your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj whereon old xxmaj norway , overcome with joy , 
▁ xxmaj gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee 
▁ xxmaj and his commission to employ those soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj so levied as before , against the xxmaj polack ; 
▁ xxmaj with an entreaty , herein further shown , 
▁ [ gives a paper . ] 
▁ xxmaj that it might please you to give quiet pass 
▁ xxmaj through your dominions for this enterprise , 
▁ xxmaj on such regards of safety and allowance 
▁ xxmaj as therein are set down . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj it likes us well ; 
▁ xxmaj and at our more consider'd time we 'll read , 
▁ xxmaj answer , and think upon this business . 
▁ xxmaj meantime we thank you for your well - took labour . 
▁ xxmaj go to your rest ; at night we 'll feast together . 
▁ xxmaj most welcome home ! xxmaj exeunt xxmaj ambassadors . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj this business is well ended . 
▁ xxmaj my liege , and madam , to expostulate 
▁ xxmaj what majesty should be , what duty is , 
▁ xxmaj why day is day , night is night , and time is time . 
▁ xxmaj were nothing but to waste night , day , and time . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , since brevity is the soul of wit , 
▁ xxmaj and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes , 
▁ i will be brief . xxmaj your noble son is mad . 
▁ xxmaj mad call i it ; for , to define true madness , 
▁ xxmaj what is't but to be nothing else but mad ? 
▁ xxmaj but let that go . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj more matter , with less art . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj madam , i swear i use no art at all . 
▁ xxmaj that he is mad , ' tis true : ' tis true ' tis pity ; 
▁ xxmaj and pity ' tis ' tis true . a foolish figure ! 
▁ xxmaj but farewell it , for i will use no art . 
▁ xxmaj mad let us grant him then . xxmaj and now remains 
▁ xxmaj that we find out the cause of this effect- 
▁ xxmaj or rather say , the cause of this defect , 
▁ xxmaj for this effect defective comes by cause . 
▁ xxmaj thus it remains , and the remainder thus . 
▁ xxmaj perpend . 
▁ i have a daughter ( have while she is mine ) , 
▁ xxmaj who in her duty and obedience , mark , 
▁ xxmaj hath given me this . xxmaj now gather , and surmise . 
▁ [ reads ] the letter . 
▁ ' to the celestial , and my soul 's idol , the most beautified 
▁ xxmaj ophelia,'- 

▁ xxmaj that 's an ill phrase , a vile phrase ; ' beautified ' is a vile 
▁ phrase . 
▁ xxmaj but you shall hear . xxmaj thus : 
▁ [ reads . ] 
▁ ' in her excellent white bosom , these , & c. ' 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj came this from xxmaj hamlet to her ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj good madam , stay awhile . i will be faithful . [ reads . ] 

▁ ' doubt thou the stars are fire ; 
▁ xxmaj doubt that the sun doth move ; 
▁ xxmaj doubt truth to be a liar ; 
▁ xxmaj but never doubt i love . 
▁ ' o dear xxmaj ophelia , i am ill at these numbers ; i have not art to 
▁ reckon my groans ; but that i love thee best , o most best , believe 
▁ it . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ ' thine evermore , most dear lady , whilst this machine is to him , 
▁ xxup hamlet . ' 

▁ xxmaj this , in obedience , hath my daughter shown me ; 
▁ xxmaj and more above , hath his solicitings , 
▁ xxmaj as they fell out by time , by means , and place , 
▁ xxmaj all given to mine ear . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj but how hath she 
▁ xxmaj receiv'd his love ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj what do you think of me ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj as of a man faithful and honourable . 
▁ xxmaj pol . i would fain prove so . xxmaj but what might you think , 
▁ xxmaj when i had seen this hot love on the wing 
▁ ( as i perceiv'd it , i must tell you that , 
▁ xxmaj before my daughter told me ) , what might you , 
▁ xxmaj or my dear xxmaj majesty your queen here , think , 
▁ xxmaj if i had play'd the desk or table book , 
▁ xxmaj or given my heart a winking , mute and dumb , 
▁ xxmaj or look'd upon this love with idle sight ? 
▁ xxmaj what might you think ? xxmaj no , i went round to work 
▁ xxmaj and my young mistress thus i did bespeak : 
▁ ' lord xxmaj hamlet is a prince , out of thy star . 
▁ xxmaj this must not be . ' xxmaj and then i prescripts gave her , 
▁ xxmaj that she should lock herself from his resort , 
▁ xxmaj admit no messengers , receive no tokens . 
▁ xxmaj which done , she took the fruits of my advice , 
▁ xxmaj and he , repulsed , a short tale to make , 
▁ xxmaj fell into a sadness , then into a fast , 
▁ xxmaj thence to a watch , thence into a weakness , 
▁ xxmaj thence to a lightness , and , by this declension , 
▁ xxmaj into the madness wherein now he raves , 
▁ xxmaj and all we mourn for . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj do you think ' tis this ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . it may be , very like . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj hath there been such a time- i would fain know that- 
▁ xxmaj that i have xxmaj positively said '' tis so , ' 
▁ xxmaj when it prov'd otherwise . ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj not that i know . 
▁ xxmaj pol . [ points to his head and shoulder ] xxmaj take this from this , if this 
▁ be otherwise . 
▁ xxmaj if circumstances lead me , i will find 
▁ xxmaj where truth is hid , though it were hid indeed 
▁ xxmaj within the centre . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj how may we try it further ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj you know sometimes he walks four hours together 
▁ xxmaj here in the lobby . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj so he does indeed . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj at such a time xxmaj i 'll loose my daughter to him . 
▁ xxmaj be you and i behind an arras then . 
▁ xxmaj mark the encounter . xxmaj if he love her not , 
▁ xxmaj and he not from his reason fall'n thereon 
▁ xxmaj let me be no assistant for a state , 
▁ xxmaj but keep a farm and carters . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj we will try it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet , reading on a book . 

▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj but look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj away , i do beseech you , both away 
▁ xxmaj i 'll board him presently . xxup o , give me leave . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj king and xxmaj queen , [ with xxmaj attendants ] . 
▁ xxmaj how does my good xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj well , xxmaj god - a - mercy . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj do you know me , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj excellent well . xxmaj you are a fishmonger . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj not xxup i , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then i would you were so honest a man . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj honest , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , sir . xxmaj to be honest , as this world goes , is to be one man 
▁ pick'd out of ten thousand . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj that 's very true , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj for if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog , being a god 
▁ kissing carrion- xxmaj have you a daughter ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . i have , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj let her not walk i ' th ' sun . xxmaj conception is a blessing , but not 
▁ as your daughter may conceive . xxmaj friend , look to't . 
▁ xxmaj pol . [ aside ] xxmaj how say you by that ? xxmaj still harping on my daughter . xxmaj yet 
▁ he knew me not at first . xxmaj he said i was a fishmonger . xxmaj he is far 
▁ gone , far gone ! xxmaj and truly in my youth i suff'red much extremity 
▁ for love- very near this . xxmaj i 'll speak to him again.- xxmaj what do you 
▁ read , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj words , words , words . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj what is the matter , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj between who ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . i mean , the matter that you read , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj slanders , sir ; for the satirical rogue says here that old men 
▁ have grey beards ; that their faces are wrinkled ; their eyes 
▁ purging thick amber and plum - tree gum ; and that they have a 
▁ plentiful lack of wit , together with most weak hams . xxmaj all which , 
▁ sir , though i most powerfully and potently believe , yet i hold it 
▁ not honesty to have it thus set down ; for you yourself , sir , 
▁ should be old as i am if , like a crab , you could go backward . 
▁ xxmaj pol . [ aside ] xxmaj though this be madness , yet there is a method in't.- 
▁ xxmaj will xxmaj you walk out of the air , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj into my grave ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj indeed , that is out o ' th ' air . [ aside ] xxmaj how pregnant sometimes 
▁ his replies are ! a happiness that often madness hits on , which 
▁ reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of . i 
▁ will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between 
▁ him and my daughter.- xxmaj my honourable lord , i will most humbly take 
▁ my leave of you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj you can not , sir , take from me anything that i will more 
▁ willingly part withal- except my life , except my life , except my 
▁ life , 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj fare you well , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj these tedious old fools ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj you go to seek the xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet . xxmaj there he is . 
▁ xxmaj ros . [ to xxmaj polonius ] xxmaj god save you , sir ! 
▁ xxmaj exit [ polonius ] . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj my honour'd lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj my most dear lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj my excellent good friends ! xxmaj how dost thou , xxmaj guildenstern ? xxmaj ah , 
▁ xxmaj rosencrantz ! xxmaj good lads , how do ye both ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj as the indifferent children of the earth . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj happy in that we are not over - happy . 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj fortune 's cap we are not the very button . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nor the soles of her shoe ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj neither , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then you live about her waist , or in the middle of her 
▁ favours ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj faith , her privates we . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj in the secret parts of xxmaj fortune ? xxup o ! most true ! she is a 
▁ strumpet . xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj none , my lord , but that the world 's grown honest . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then is doomsday near ! xxmaj but your news is not true . xxmaj let me 
▁ question more in particular . xxmaj what have you , my good friends , 
▁ deserved at the hands of xxmaj fortune that she sends you to prison 
▁ hither ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj prison , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj denmark 's a prison . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj then is the world one . 
▁ xxmaj ham . a goodly one ; in which there are many confines , wards , and 
▁ dungeons , xxmaj denmark being one o ' th ' worst . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj we think not so , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , then ' tis none to you ; for there is nothing either good 
▁ or bad but thinking makes it so . xxmaj to me it is a prison . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj why , then your ambition makes it one . ' tis too narrow for your 
▁ mind . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o xxmaj god , i could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a 
▁ king of infinite space , were it not that i have bad dreams . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj which dreams indeed are ambition ; for the very substance of 
▁ the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream . 
▁ xxmaj ham . a dream itself is but a shadow . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj truly , and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that 
▁ it is but a shadow 's shadow . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then are our beggars bodies , and our monarchs and outstretch'd 
▁ heroes the beggars ' shadows . xxmaj shall we to th ' court ? for , by my 
▁ fay , i can not reason . 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj we 'll wait upon you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no such matter ! i will not sort you with the rest of my 
▁ servants ; for , to speak to you like an honest man , i am most 
▁ dreadfully attended . xxmaj but in the beaten way of friendship , what 
▁ make you at xxmaj elsinore ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj to visit you , my lord ; no other occasion . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj beggar that i am , i am even poor in thanks ; but i thank you ; 
▁ and sure , dear friends , my thanks are too dear a halfpenny . xxmaj were 
▁ you not sent for ? xxmaj is it your own inclining ? xxmaj is it a free 
▁ visitation ? xxmaj come , deal justly with me . xxmaj come , come ! xxmaj nay , speak . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj what should we say , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , anything- but to th ' purpose . xxmaj you were sent for ; and 
▁ there is a kind of confession in your looks , which your modesties 
▁ have not craft enough to colour . i know the good xxmaj king and xxmaj queen 
▁ have sent for you . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj to what end , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that you must teach me . xxmaj but let me conjure you by the rights 
▁ of our fellowship , by the consonancy of our youth , by the 
▁ obligation of our ever - preserved love , and by what more dear a 
▁ better proposer could charge you withal , be even and direct with 
▁ me , whether you were sent for or no . 
▁ xxmaj ros . [ aside to xxmaj guildenstern ] xxmaj what say you ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . [ aside ] xxmaj nay then , i have an eye of you.- xxmaj if you love me , hold 
▁ not off . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj my lord , we were sent for . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i will tell you why . xxmaj so shall my anticipation prevent your 
▁ discovery , and your secrecy to the xxmaj king and xxmaj queen moult no 
▁ feather . i have of late- but wherefore i know not- lost all my 
▁ mirth , forgone all custom of exercises ; and indeed , it goes so 
▁ heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame , the earth , 
▁ seems to me a sterile promontory ; this most excellent canopy , the 
▁ air , look you , this brave o'erhanging firmament , this majestical 
▁ roof fretted with golden fire- why , it appeareth no other thing 
▁ to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours . xxmaj what a 
▁ piece of work is a man ! how noble in reason ! how infinite in 
▁ faculties ! in form and moving how express and admirable ! in 
▁ action how like an angel ! in apprehension how like a god ! the 
▁ beauty of the world , the paragon of animals ! xxmaj and yet to me what 
▁ is this quintessence of dust ? xxmaj man delights not me- no , nor woman 
▁ neither , though by your smiling you seem to say so . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj my lord , there was no such stuff in my thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why did you laugh then , when i said ' man delights not me ' ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj to think , my lord , if you delight not in man , what lenten 
▁ entertainment the players shall receive from you . xxmaj we coted them 
▁ on the way , and hither are they coming to offer you service . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj he that plays the king shall be welcome- his xxmaj majesty shall 
▁ have tribute of me ; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and 
▁ target ; the lover shall not sigh gratis ; the humorous man shall 
▁ end his part in peace ; the clown shall make those laugh whose 
▁ lungs are tickle o ' th ' sere ; and the lady shall say her mind 
▁ freely , or the blank verse shall halt fort . xxmaj what players are 
▁ they ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj even those you were wo nt to take such delight in , the 
▁ tragedians of the city . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how chances it they travel ? xxmaj their residence , both in 
▁ reputation and profit , was better both ways . 
▁ xxmaj ros . i think their inhibition comes by the means of the late 
▁ innovation . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the 
▁ city ? xxmaj are they so follow'd ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj no indeed are they not . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how comes it ? xxmaj do they grow rusty ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj nay , their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace ; but there is , 
▁ sir , an eyrie of children , little eyases , that cry out on the top 
▁ of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd fort . xxmaj these are now 
▁ the fashion , and so berattle the common stages ( so they call 
▁ them ) that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goosequills and 
▁ dare scarce come thither . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what , are they children ? xxmaj who maintains 'em ? xxmaj how are they 
▁ escoted ? xxmaj will they pursue the quality no longer than they can 
▁ sing ? xxmaj will they not say afterwards , if they should grow 
▁ themselves to common players ( as it is most like , if their means 
▁ are no better ) , their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim 
▁ against their own succession . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj faith , there has been much to do on both sides ; and the nation 
▁ holds it no sin to tarre them to controversy . xxmaj there was , for a 
▁ while , no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player 
▁ went to cuffs in the question . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxup o , there has been much throwing about of brains . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do the boys carry it away ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj ay , that they do , my lord- xxmaj hercules and his load too . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it is not very strange ; for my uncle is xxmaj king of xxmaj denmark , and 
▁ those that would make mows at him while my father lived give 
▁ twenty , forty , fifty , a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in 
▁ little . ' sblood , there is something in this more than natural , if 
▁ philosophy could find it out . 

▁ xxmaj flourish for the xxmaj players . 

▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj there are the players . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj gentlemen , you are welcome to xxmaj elsinore . xxmaj your hands , come ! xxmaj th ' 
▁ appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony . xxmaj let me comply 
▁ with you in this garb , lest my extent to the players ( which i 
▁ tell you must show fairly outwards ) should more appear like 
▁ entertainment than yours . xxmaj you are welcome . xxmaj but my uncle - father 
▁ and aunt - mother are deceiv'd . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj in what , my dear lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am but mad north - north - west . xxmaj when the wind is southerly i 
▁ know a hawk from a handsaw . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj well be with you , gentlemen ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj hark you , xxmaj guildenstern- and you too- at each ear a hearer ! 
▁ xxmaj that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling 
▁ clouts . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj happily he 's the second time come to them ; for they say an old 
▁ man is twice a child . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players . xxmaj mark it.- 
▁ xxmaj you say right , sir ; a xxmaj monday morning ; twas so indeed . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj my lord , i have news to tell you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj my lord , i have news to tell you . xxmaj when xxmaj roscius was an actor in 
▁ xxmaj rome- 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj the actors are come hither , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj buzz , buzz ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj upon my honour- 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then came each actor on his ass- 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj the best actors in the world , either for tragedy , comedy , 
▁ history , pastoral , pastoral - comical , historical - pastoral , 
▁ tragical - historical , tragical - comical - historical - pastoral ; scene 
▁ individable , or poem unlimited . xxmaj seneca can not be too heavy , nor 
▁ xxmaj plautus too light . xxmaj for the law of writ and the liberty , these are 
▁ the only men . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o xxmaj jephthah , judge of xxmaj israel , what a treasure hadst thou ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj what treasure had he , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , 

▁ ' one fair daughter , and no more , 
▁ xxmaj the which he loved passing well . ' 

▁ xxmaj pol . [ aside ] xxmaj still on my daughter . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj am i not i ' th ' right , old xxmaj jephthah ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj if you call me xxmaj jephthah , my lord , i have a daughter that i 
▁ love passing well . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay , that follows not . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj what follows then , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , 

▁ ' as by lot , xxmaj god wot , ' 

▁ and then , you know , 
▁
▁ ' it came to pass , as most like it was . ' 

▁ xxmaj the first row of the pious chanson will show you more ; for look 
▁ where my abridgment comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter four or five xxmaj players . 

▁ xxmaj you are welcome , masters ; welcome , all.- i am glad to see thee 
▁ well.- xxmaj welcome , good friends.- xxup o , my old friend ? xxmaj why , thy face is 
▁ valanc'd since i saw thee last . xxmaj com'st ' thou to ' beard me in 
▁ xxmaj denmark?- xxmaj what , my young lady and mistress ? xxmaj by'r xxmaj lady , your 
▁ ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last by the 
▁ altitude of a chopine . xxmaj pray xxmaj god your voice , like a piece of 
▁ uncurrent gold , be not crack'd within the ring.- xxmaj masters , you are 
▁ all welcome . xxmaj we 'll e'en to't like xxmaj french falconers , fly at 
▁ anything we see . xxmaj we 'll have a speech straight . xxmaj come , give us a 
▁ taste of your quality . xxmaj come , a passionate speech . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj play . xxmaj what speech , my good lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . i heard thee speak me a speech once , but it was never acted ; 
▁ or if it was , not above once ; for the play , i remember , pleas'd 
▁ not the million , ' twas caviary to the general ; but it was ( as i 
▁ receiv'd it , and others , whose judgments in such matters cried in 
▁ the top of mine ) an excellent play , well digested in the scenes , 
▁ set down with as much modesty as cunning . i remember one said 
▁ there were no sallets in the lines to make the matter savoury , 
▁ nor no matter in the phrase that might indict the author of 
▁ affectation ; but call'd it an honest method , as wholesome as 
▁ sweet , and by very much more handsome than fine . xxmaj one speech in't 
▁ i chiefly lov'd . ' twas aeneas ' tale to xxmaj dido , and thereabout of it 
▁ especially where he speaks of xxmaj priam 's slaughter . xxmaj if it live in 
▁ your memory , begin at this line- let me see , let me see : 

▁ ' the rugged xxmaj pyrrhus , like th ' xxmaj hyrcanian beast- ' 

▁ ' tis not so ; it begins with xxmaj pyrrhus : 

▁ ' the rugged xxmaj pyrrhus , he whose sable arms , 
▁ xxmaj black as his purpose , did the night resemble 
▁ xxmaj when he lay couched in the ominous horse , 
▁ xxmaj hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd 
▁ xxmaj with heraldry more dismal . xxmaj head to foot 
▁ xxmaj now is be total gules , horridly trick'd 
▁ xxmaj with blood of fathers , mothers , daughters , sons , 
▁ xxmaj bak'd and impasted with the parching streets , 
▁ xxmaj that lend a tyrannous and a damned light 
▁ xxmaj to their lord 's murther . xxmaj roasted in wrath and fire , 
▁ xxmaj and thus o'ersized with coagulate gore , 
▁ xxmaj with eyes like carbuncles , the hellish xxmaj pyrrhus 
▁ xxmaj old grandsire xxmaj priam seeks . ' 

▁ xxmaj so , proceed you . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj fore xxmaj god , my lord , well spoken , with good accent and good 
▁ discretion . 

▁ 1 . xxmaj play . ' anon he finds him , 
▁ xxmaj striking too short at xxmaj greeks . xxmaj his antique sword , 
▁ xxmaj rebellious to his arm , lies where it falls , 
▁ xxmaj repugnant to command . xxmaj unequal match'd , 
▁ xxmaj pyrrhus at xxmaj priam drives , in rage strikes wide ; 
▁ xxmaj but with the whiff and wind of his fell sword 
▁ xxmaj th ' unnerved father falls . xxmaj then senseless xxmaj ilium , 
▁ xxmaj seeming to feel this blow , with flaming top 
▁ xxmaj stoops to his base , and with a hideous crash 
▁ xxmaj takes prisoner xxmaj pyrrhus ' ear . xxmaj for lo ! his sword , 
▁ xxmaj which was declining on the milky head 
▁ xxmaj of reverend xxmaj priam , seem'd i ' th ' air to stick . 
▁ xxmaj so , as a painted tyrant , xxmaj pyrrhus stood , 
▁ xxmaj and , like a neutral to his will and matter , 
▁ xxmaj did nothing . 
▁ xxmaj but , as we often see , against some storm , 
▁ a silence in the heavens , the rack stand still , 
▁ xxmaj the bold winds speechless , and the orb below 
▁ xxmaj as hush as death- anon the dreadful thunder 
▁ xxmaj doth rend the region ; so , after xxmaj pyrrhus ' pause , 
▁ xxmaj aroused vengeance sets him new awork ; 
▁ xxmaj and never did the xxmaj cyclops ' hammers fall 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj mars 's armour , forg'd for proof eterne , 
▁ xxmaj with less remorse than xxmaj pyrrhus ' bleeding sword 
▁ xxmaj now falls on xxmaj priam . 
▁ xxmaj out , out , thou strumpet xxmaj fortune ! xxmaj all you gods , 
▁ xxmaj in general synod take away her power ; 
▁ xxmaj break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel , 
▁ xxmaj and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj as low as to the fiends ! 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj this is too long . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it shall to the barber 's , with your beard.- xxmaj prithee say on . 
▁ xxmaj he 's for a jig or a tale of bawdry , or he sleeps . xxmaj say on ; come to 
▁ xxmaj hecuba . 

▁ 1 . xxmaj play . ' but who , o who , had seen the mobled queen- ' 

▁ xxmaj ham . ' the mobled queen ' ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj that 's good ! ' mobled queen ' is good . 

▁ 1 . xxmaj play . ' run barefoot up and down , threat'ning the flames 
▁ xxmaj with bisson rheum ; a clout upon that head 
▁ xxmaj where late the diadem stood , and for a robe , 
▁ xxmaj about her lank and all o'erteemed loins , 
▁ a blanket , in the alarm of fear caught up- 
▁ xxmaj who this had seen , with tongue in venom steep'd 
▁ ' gainst xxmaj fortune 's state would treason have pronounc'd . 
▁ xxmaj but if the gods themselves did see her then , 
▁ xxmaj when she saw xxmaj pyrrhus make malicious sport 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj mincing with his sword her husband 's limbs , 
▁ xxmaj the instant burst of clamour that she made 
▁ ( unless things mortal move them not at all ) 
▁ xxmaj would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven 
▁ xxmaj and passion in the gods . ' 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj look , whe'r he has not turn'd his colour , and has tears in 's 
▁ eyes . xxmaj prithee no more ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . ' tis well . xxmaj i 'll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.- 
▁ xxmaj good my lord , will you see the players well bestow'd ? xxmaj do you 
▁ hear ? xxmaj let them be well us'd ; for they are the abstract and brief 
▁ chronicles of the time . xxmaj after your death you were better have a 
▁ bad epitaph than their ill report while you live . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj my lord , i will use them according to their desert . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj god 's bodykins , man , much better ! xxmaj use every man after his 
▁ desert , and who should scape whipping ? xxmaj use them after your own 
▁ honour and dignity . xxmaj the less they deserve , the more merit is in 
▁ your bounty . xxmaj take them in . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj come , sirs . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj follow him , friends . xxmaj we 'll hear a play to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj polonius and xxmaj players [ except the xxmaj first ] . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou hear me , old friend ? xxmaj can you play ' the xxmaj murther of 
▁ xxmaj gonzago ' ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj play . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj we 'll ha't to - morrow night . xxmaj you could , for a need , study a 
▁ speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i would set down and 
▁ insert in't , could you not ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj play . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj very well . xxmaj follow that lord- and look you mock him not . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj first xxmaj player . ] 
▁ xxmaj my good friends , xxmaj i 'll leave you till night . xxmaj you are welcome to 
▁ xxmaj elsinore . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj good my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , so , xxmaj god b ' wi ' ye ! 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern 
▁ xxmaj now i am alone . 
▁ o what a rogue and peasant slave am xxup i ! 
▁ xxmaj is it not monstrous that this player here , 
▁ xxmaj but in a fiction , in a dream of passion , 
▁ xxmaj could force his soul so to his own conceit 
▁ xxmaj that , from her working , all his visage wann'd , 
▁ xxmaj tears in his eyes , distraction in 's aspect , 
▁ a broken voice , and his whole function suiting 
▁ xxmaj with forms to his conceit ? xxmaj and all for nothing ! 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj hecuba ! 
▁ xxmaj what 's xxmaj hecuba to him , or he to xxmaj hecuba , 
▁ xxmaj that he should weep for her ? xxmaj what would he do , 
▁ xxmaj had he the motive and the cue for passion 
▁ xxmaj that i have ? xxmaj he would drown the stage with tears 
▁ xxmaj and cleave the general ear with horrid speech ; 
▁ xxmaj make mad the guilty and appal the free , 
▁ xxmaj confound the ignorant , and amaze indeed 
▁ xxmaj the very faculties of eyes and ears . 
▁ xxmaj yet xxup i , 
▁ a dull and muddy - mettled rascal , peak 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj john - a - dreams , unpregnant of my cause , 
▁ xxmaj and can say nothing ! xxmaj no , not for a king , 
▁ xxmaj upon whose property and most dear life 
▁ a damn'd defeat was made . xxmaj am i a coward ? 
▁ xxmaj who calls me villain ? breaks my pate across ? 
▁ xxmaj plucks off my beard and blows it in my face ? 
▁ xxmaj tweaks me by th ' nose ? gives me the lie i ' th ' throat 
▁ xxmaj as deep as to the lungs ? xxmaj who does me this , ha ? 
▁ ' swounds , i should take it ! for it can not be 
▁ xxmaj but i am pigeon - liver'd and lack gall 
▁ xxmaj to make oppression bitter , or ere this 
▁ i should have fatted all the region kites 
▁ xxmaj with this slave 's offal . xxmaj bloody bawdy villain ! 
▁ xxmaj remorseless , treacherous , lecherous , kindless villain ! 
▁ xxup o , vengeance ! 
▁ xxmaj why , what an ass am xxup i ! xxmaj this is most brave , 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , the son of a dear father murther'd , 
▁ xxmaj prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell , 
▁ xxmaj must ( like a whore ) unpack my heart with words 
▁ xxmaj and fall a - cursing like a very drab , 
▁ a scullion ! 
▁ xxmaj fie upon't ! foh ! xxmaj about , my brain ! xxmaj hum , i have heard 
▁ xxmaj that guilty creatures , sitting at a play , 
▁ xxmaj have by the very cunning of the scene 
▁ xxmaj been struck so to the soul that presently 
▁ xxmaj they have proclaim'd their malefactions ; 
▁ xxmaj for murther , though it have no tongue , will speak 
▁ xxmaj with most miraculous organ , xxmaj i 'll have these xxmaj players 
▁ xxmaj play something like the murther of my father 
▁ xxmaj before mine uncle . xxmaj i 'll observe his looks ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tent him to the quick . xxmaj if he but blench , 
▁ i know my course . xxmaj the spirit that i have seen 
▁ xxmaj may be a devil ; and the devil hath power 
▁ xxup t ' assume a pleasing shape ; yea , and perhaps 
▁ xxmaj out of my weakness and my melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj as he is very potent with such spirits , 
▁ xxmaj abuses me to damn me . xxmaj i 'll have grounds 
▁ xxmaj more relative than this . xxmaj the play 's the thing 
▁ xxmaj wherein xxmaj i 'll catch the conscience of the xxmaj king . xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj king , xxmaj queen , xxmaj polonius , xxmaj ophelia , xxmaj rosencrantz , xxmaj guildenstern , and xxmaj lords . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj and can you by no drift of circumstance 
▁ xxmaj get from him why he puts on this confusion , 
▁ xxmaj grating so harshly all his days of quiet 
▁ xxmaj with turbulent and dangerous lunacy ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj he does confess he feels himself distracted , 
▁ xxmaj but from what cause he will by no means speak . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj nor do we find him forward to be sounded , 
▁ xxmaj but with a crafty madness keeps aloof 
▁ xxmaj when we would bring him on to some confession 
▁ xxmaj of his true state . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj did he receive you well ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj most like a gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj but with much forcing of his disposition . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj niggard of question , but of our demands 
▁ xxmaj most free in his reply . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj did you assay him 
▁ xxmaj to any pastime ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj madam , it so fell out that certain players 
▁ xxmaj we o'erraught on the way . xxmaj of these we told him , 
▁ xxmaj and there did seem in him a kind of joy 
▁ xxmaj to hear of it . xxmaj they are here about the court , 
▁ xxmaj and , as i think , they have already order 
▁ xxmaj this night to play before him . 
▁ xxmaj pol . ' tis most true ; 
▁ xxmaj and he beseech'd me to entreat your xxmaj majesties 
▁ xxmaj to hear and see the matter . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj with all my heart , and it doth much content me 
▁ xxmaj to hear him so inclin'd . 
▁ xxmaj good gentlemen , give him a further edge 
▁ xxmaj and drive his purpose on to these delights . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj we shall , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj sweet xxmaj gertrude , leave us too ; 
▁ xxmaj for we have closely sent for xxmaj hamlet hither , 
▁ xxmaj that he , as ' twere by accident , may here 
▁ xxmaj affront xxmaj ophelia . 
▁ xxmaj her father and myself ( lawful espials ) 
▁ xxmaj will so bestow ourselves that , seeing unseen , 
▁ xxmaj we may of their encounter frankly judge 
▁ xxmaj and gather by him , as he is behav'd , 
▁ xxmaj if't be th ' affliction of his love , or no , 
▁ xxmaj that thus he suffers for . 
▁ xxmaj queen . i shall obey you ; 
▁ xxmaj and for your part , xxmaj ophelia , i do wish 
▁ xxmaj that your good beauties be the happy cause 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj hamlet 's wildness . xxmaj so shall i hope your virtues 
▁ xxmaj will bring him to his wonted way again , 
▁ xxmaj to both your honours . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj madam , i wish it may . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj queen . ] 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj ophelia , walk you here.- xxmaj gracious , so please you , 
▁ xxmaj we will bestow ourselves.- [ to xxmaj ophelia ] xxmaj read on this book , 
▁ xxmaj that show of such an exercise may colour 
▁ xxmaj your loneliness.- xxmaj we are oft to blame in this , 
▁ ' tis too much prov'd , that with devotion 's visage 
▁ xxmaj and pious action we do sugar o'er 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj devil himself . 
▁ xxmaj king . [ aside ] xxup o , ' tis too true ! 
▁ xxmaj how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience ! 
▁ xxmaj the harlot 's cheek , beautied with plast'ring art , 
▁ xxmaj is not more ugly to the thing that helps it 
▁ xxmaj than is my deed to my most painted word . 
▁ o heavy burthen ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . i hear him coming . xxmaj let 's withdraw , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj king and xxmaj polonius ] . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj to be , or not to be- that is the question : 
▁ xxmaj whether ' tis nobler in the mind to suffer 
▁ xxmaj the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune 
▁ xxmaj or to take arms against a sea of troubles , 
▁ xxmaj and by opposing end them . xxmaj to die- to sleep- 
▁ xxmaj no more ; and by a sleep to say we end 
▁ xxmaj the heartache , and the thousand natural shocks 
▁ xxmaj that flesh is heir to . ' tis a consummation 
▁ xxmaj devoutly to be wish'd . xxmaj to die- to sleep . 
▁ xxmaj to sleep- perchance to dream : ay , there 's the rub ! 
▁ xxmaj for in that sleep of death what dreams may come 
▁ xxmaj when we have shuffled off this mortal coil , 
▁ xxmaj must give us pause . xxmaj there 's the respect 
▁ xxmaj that makes calamity of so long life . 
▁ xxmaj for who would bear the whips and scorns of time , 
▁ xxmaj th ' oppressor 's wrong , the proud man 's contumely , 
▁ xxmaj the pangs of despis'd love , the law 's delay , 
▁ xxmaj the insolence of office , and the spurns 
▁ xxmaj that patient merit of th ' unworthy takes , 
▁ xxmaj when he himself might his quietus make 
▁ xxmaj with a bare bodkin ? xxmaj who would these fardels bear , 
▁ xxmaj to grunt and sweat under a weary life , 
▁ xxmaj but that the dread of something after death- 
▁ xxmaj the undiscover'd country , from whose bourn 
▁ xxmaj no traveller returns- puzzles the will , 
▁ xxmaj and makes us rather bear those ills we have 
▁ xxmaj than fly to others that we know not of ? 
▁ xxmaj thus conscience does make cowards of us all , 
▁ xxmaj and thus the native hue of resolution 
▁ xxmaj is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought , 
▁ xxmaj and enterprises of great pith and moment 
▁ xxmaj with this regard their currents turn awry 
▁ xxmaj and lose the name of action.- xxmaj soft you now ! 
▁ xxmaj the fair xxmaj ophelia!- xxmaj nymph , in thy orisons 
▁ xxmaj be all my sins rememb'red . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj how does your honour for this many a day ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . i humbly thank you ; well , well , well . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj my lord , i have remembrances of yours 
▁ xxmaj that i have longed long to re - deliver . 
▁ i pray you , now receive them . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , not xxup i ! 
▁ i never gave you aught . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj my honour'd lord , you know right well you did , 
▁ xxmaj and with them words of so sweet breath compos'd 
▁ xxmaj as made the things more rich . xxmaj their perfume lost , 
▁ xxmaj take these again ; for to the noble mind 
▁ xxmaj rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind . 
▁ xxmaj there , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ha , ha ! xxmaj are you honest ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj are you fair ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj what means your lordship ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that if you be honest and fair , your honesty should admit no 
▁ discourse to your beauty . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj could beauty , my lord , have better commerce than with honesty ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , truly ; for the power of beauty will sooner transform 
▁ honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can 
▁ translate beauty into his likeness . xxmaj this was sometime a paradox , 
▁ but now the time gives it proof . i did love you once . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj indeed , my lord , you made me believe so . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj you should not have believ'd me ; for virtue can not so 
▁ inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it . i loved you 
▁ not . 
▁ xxmaj oph . i was the more deceived . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj get thee to a nunnery ! xxmaj why wouldst thou be a breeder of 
▁ sinners ? i am myself indifferent honest , but yet i could accuse 
▁ me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me . 
▁ i am very proud , revengeful , ambitious ; with more offences at my 
▁ beck than i have thoughts to put them in , imagination to give 
▁ them shape , or time to act them in . xxmaj what should such fellows as i 
▁ do , crawling between earth and heaven ? xxmaj we are arrant knaves all ; 
▁ believe none of us . xxmaj go thy ways to a nunnery . xxmaj where 's your 
▁ father ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj at home , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj let the doors be shut upon him , that he may play the fool 
▁ nowhere but in 's own house . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxup o , help him , you sweet heavens ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj if thou dost marry , xxmaj i 'll give thee this plague for thy dowry : 
▁ be thou as chaste as ice , as pure as snow , thou shalt not escape 
▁ calumny . xxmaj get thee to a nunnery . xxmaj go , farewell . xxmaj or if thou wilt 
▁ needs marry , marry a fool ; for wise men know well enough what 
▁ monsters you make of them . xxmaj to a nunnery , go ; and quickly too . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj oph . o heavenly powers , restore him ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . i have heard of your paintings too , well enough . xxmaj god hath 
▁ given you one face , and you make yourselves another . xxmaj you jig , you 
▁ amble , and you lisp ; you nickname xxmaj god 's creatures and make your 
▁ wantonness your ignorance . xxmaj go to , xxmaj i 'll no more on't ! it hath made 
▁ me mad . i say , we will have no moe marriages . xxmaj those that are 
▁ married already- all but one- shall live ; the rest shall keep as 
▁ they are . xxmaj to a nunnery , go . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxup o , what a noble mind is here o'erthrown ! 
▁ xxmaj the courtier 's , scholar 's , soldier 's , eye , tongue , sword , 
▁ xxmaj th ' expectancy and rose of the fair state , 
▁ xxmaj the glass of fashion and the mould of form , 
▁ xxmaj th ' observ'd of all observers- quite , quite down ! 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , of ladies most deject and wretched , 
▁ xxmaj that suck'd the honey of his music vows , 
▁ xxmaj now see that noble and most sovereign reason , 
▁ xxmaj like sweet bells jangled , out of tune and harsh ; 
▁ xxmaj that unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth 
▁ xxmaj blasted with ecstasy . xxup o , woe is me 
▁ xxup t ' have seen what i have seen , see what i see ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj king and xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj love ? his affections do not that way tend ; 
▁ xxmaj nor what he spake , though it lack'd form a little , 
▁ xxmaj was not like madness . xxmaj there 's something in his soul 
▁ xxmaj o'er which his melancholy sits on brood ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose 
▁ xxmaj will be some danger ; which for to prevent , 
▁ i have in quick determination 
▁ xxmaj thus set it down : he shall with speed to xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj for the demand of our neglected tribute . 
▁ xxmaj haply the seas , and countries different , 
▁ xxmaj with variable objects , shall expel 
▁ xxmaj this something - settled matter in his heart , 
▁ xxmaj whereon his brains still beating puts him thus 
▁ xxmaj from fashion of himself . xxmaj what think you on't ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj it shall do well . xxmaj but yet do i believe 
▁ xxmaj the origin and commencement of his grief 
▁ xxmaj sprung from neglected love.- xxmaj how now , xxmaj ophelia ? 
▁ xxmaj you need not tell us what xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet said . 
▁ xxmaj we heard it all.- xxmaj my lord , do as you please ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you hold it fit , after the play 
▁ xxmaj let his queen mother all alone entreat him 
▁ xxmaj to show his grief . xxmaj let her be round with him ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be plac'd so please you , in the ear 
▁ xxmaj of all their conference . xxmaj if she find him not , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj england send him ; or confine him where 
▁ xxmaj your wisdom best shall think . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj it shall be so . 
▁ xxmaj madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj elsinore . hall in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet and three of the xxmaj players .