xxbos xxmaj ham . xxmaj speak the speech , i pray you , as i pronounc'd it to you , 
▁ trippingly on the tongue . xxmaj but if you mouth it , as many of our 
▁ players do , i had as live the town crier spoke my lines . xxmaj nor do 
▁ not saw the air too much with your hand , thus , but use all 
▁ gently ; for in the very torrent , tempest , and ( as i may say ) 
▁ whirlwind of your passion , you must acquire and beget a 
▁ temperance that may give it smoothness . xxup o , it offends me to the 
▁ soul to hear a robustious periwig - pated fellow tear a passion to 
▁ tatters , to very rags , to split the cars of the groundlings , who 
▁ ( for the most part ) are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb 
▁ shows and noise . i would have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing 
▁ xxmaj termagant . xxmaj it out - herods xxmaj herod . xxmaj pray you avoid it . 
▁ xxmaj player . i warrant your honour . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj be not too tame neither ; but let your own discretion be your 
▁ tutor . xxmaj suit the action to the word , the word to the action ; with 
▁ this special observance , that you o'erstep not the modesty of 
▁ nature : for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing , 
▁ whose end , both at the first and now , was and is , to hold , as 
▁ ' twere , the mirror up to nature ; to show xxmaj virtue her own feature , 
▁ scorn her own image , and the very age and body of the time his 
▁ form and pressure . xxmaj now this overdone , or come tardy off , though 
▁ it make the unskilful laugh , can not but make the judicious 
▁ grieve ; the censure of the which one must in your allowance 
▁ o'erweigh a whole theatre of others . xxup o , there be players that i 
▁ have seen play , and heard others praise , and that highly ( not to 
▁ speak it profanely ) , that , neither having the accent of 
▁ xxmaj christians , nor the gait of xxmaj christian , pagan , nor man , have so 
▁ strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of xxmaj nature 's 
▁ journeymen had made men , and not made them well , they imitated 
▁ humanity so abominably . 
▁ xxmaj player . i hope we have reform'd that indifferently with us , sir . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxup o , reform it altogether ! xxmaj and let those that play your clowns 
▁ speak no more than is set down for them . xxmaj for there be of them 
▁ that will themselves laugh , to set on some quantity of barren 
▁ spectators to laugh too , though in the mean time some necessary 
▁ question of the play be then to be considered . xxmaj that 's villanous 
▁ and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it . xxmaj go 
▁ make you ready . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj players . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius , xxmaj rosencrantz , and xxmaj guildenstern . 

▁ xxmaj how now , my lord ? xxmaj will the xxmaj king hear this piece of work ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj and the xxmaj queen too , and that presently . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj bid the players make haste , [ exit xxmaj polonius . ] xxmaj will you two 
▁ help to hasten them ? 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj we will , my lord . xxmaj exeunt they two . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what , ho , xxmaj horatio ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj horatio . 

▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj here , sweet lord , at your service . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj horatio , thou art e'en as just a man 
▁ xxmaj as e'er my conversation cop'd withal . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxup o , my dear lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay , do not think i flatter ; 
▁ xxmaj for what advancement may i hope from thee , 
▁ xxmaj that no revenue hast but thy good spirits 
▁ xxmaj to feed and clothe thee ? xxmaj why should the poor be flatter'd ? 
▁ xxmaj no , let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp , 
▁ xxmaj and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee 
▁ xxmaj where thrift may follow fawning . xxmaj dost thou hear ? 
▁ xxmaj since my dear soul was mistress of her choice 
▁ xxmaj and could of men distinguish , her election 
▁ xxmaj hath scald thee for herself . xxmaj for thou hast been 
▁ xxmaj as one , in suff'ring all , that suffers nothing ; 
▁ a man that xxmaj fortune 's buffets and rewards 
▁ xxmaj hast ta'en with equal thanks ; and blest are those 
▁ xxmaj whose blood and judgment are so well commingled 
▁ xxmaj that they are not a pipe for xxmaj fortune 's finger 
▁ xxmaj to sound what stop she please . xxmaj give me that man 
▁ xxmaj that is not passion 's slave , and i will wear him 
▁ xxmaj in my heart 's core , ay , in my heart of heart , 
▁ xxmaj as i do thee . xxmaj something too much of this i 
▁ xxmaj there is a play to - night before the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj one scene of it comes near the circumstance , 
▁ xxmaj which i have told thee , of my father 's death . 
▁ i prithee , when thou seest that act afoot , 
▁ xxmaj even with the very comment of thy soul 
▁ xxmaj observe my uncle . xxmaj if his occulted guilt 
▁ xxmaj do not itself unkennel in one speech , 
▁ xxmaj it is a damned ghost that we have seen , 
▁ xxmaj and my imaginations are as foul 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj vulcan 's stithy . xxmaj give him heedful note ; 
▁ xxmaj for i mine eyes will rivet to his face , 
▁ xxmaj and after we will both our judgments join 
▁ xxmaj in censure of his seeming . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj well , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj if he steal aught the whilst this play is playing , 
▁ xxmaj and scape detecting , i will pay the theft . 

▁ xxmaj sound a flourish . [ enter xxmaj trumpets and xxmaj kettledrums . xxmaj danish 
▁ march . [ enter xxmaj king , xxmaj queen , xxmaj polonius , xxmaj ophelia , xxmaj rosencrantz , 
▁ xxmaj guildenstern , and other xxmaj lords attendant , with the xxmaj guard 
▁ carrying torches . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj they are coming to the play . i must be idle . 
▁ xxmaj get you a place . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj how fares our cousin xxmaj hamlet ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj excellent , i ' faith ; of the chameleon 's dish . i eat the air , 
▁ promise - cramm'd . xxmaj you can not feed capons so . 
▁ xxmaj king . i have nothing with this answer , xxmaj hamlet . xxmaj these words are not 
▁ mine . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , nor mine now . [ to xxmaj polonius ] xxmaj my lord , you play'd once 
▁ i ' th ' university , you say ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj that did xxup i , my lord , and was accounted a good actor . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what did you enact ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . i did enact xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar ; i was kill'd i ' th ' xxmaj capitol ; xxmaj brutus 
▁ kill'd me . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there . xxmaj be 
▁ the players ready . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj ay , my lord . xxmaj they stay upon your patience . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj come hither , my dear xxmaj hamlet , sit by me . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , good mother . xxmaj here 's metal more attractive . 
▁ xxmaj pol . [ to the xxmaj king ] xxup o , ho ! do you mark that ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj lady , shall i lie in your lap ? 
▁ [ sits down at xxmaj ophelia 's feet . ] 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i mean , my head upon your lap ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do you think i meant country matters ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . i think nothing , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that 's a fair thought to lie between maids ' legs . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj what is , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nothing . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj you are merry , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj who , xxup i ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o xxmaj god , your only jig - maker ! xxmaj what should a man do but be merry ? 
▁ xxmaj for look you how cheerfully my mother looks , and my father died 
▁ within 's two hours . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj nay ' tis twice two months , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj so long ? xxmaj nay then , let the devil wear black , for xxmaj i 'll have a 
▁ suit of sables . o heavens ! die two months ago , and not forgotten 
▁ yet ? xxmaj then there 's hope a great man 's memory may outlive his life 
▁ half a year . xxmaj but , by'r xxmaj lady , he must build churches then ; or else 
▁ shall he suffer not thinking on , with the hobby - horse , whose 
▁ epitaph is ' for xxup o , for xxup o , the hobby - horse is forgot ! ' 

▁ xxmaj hautboys play . xxmaj the dumb show enters . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj king and a xxmaj queen very lovingly ; the xxmaj queen embracing 
▁ him and he her . xxmaj she kneels , and makes show of protestation 
▁ unto him . xxmaj he takes her up , and declines his head upon her 
▁ neck . xxmaj he lays him down upon a bank of flowers . xxmaj she , seeing 
▁ him asleep , leaves him . xxmaj anon comes in a fellow , takes off his 
▁ crown , kisses it , pours poison in the sleeper 's ears , and 
▁ leaves him . xxmaj the xxmaj queen returns , finds the xxmaj king dead , and makes 
▁ passionate action . xxmaj the xxmaj poisoner with some three or four xxmaj mutes , 
▁ comes in again , seem to condole with her . xxmaj the dead body is 
▁ carried away . xxmaj the xxmaj poisoner wooes the xxmaj queen with gifts ; she 
▁ seems harsh and unwilling awhile , but in the end accepts 
▁ his love . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 

▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj what means this , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj marry , this is miching malhecho ; it means mischief . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj belike this show imports the argument of the play . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj prologue . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj we shall know by this fellow . xxmaj the players can not keep counsel ; 
▁ they 'll tell all . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj will he tell us what this show meant ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , or any show that you 'll show him . xxmaj be not you asham'd to 
▁ show , he 'll not shame to tell you what it means . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj you are naught , you are naught ! xxmaj i 'll mark the play . 

▁ xxmaj pro . xxmaj for us , and for our tragedy , 
▁ xxmaj here stooping to your clemency , 
▁ xxmaj we beg your hearing patiently . [ exit . ] 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj is this a prologue , or the posy of a ring ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . ' tis brief , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj as woman 's love . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ two xxmaj players as ] xxmaj king and xxmaj queen . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj full thirty times hath xxmaj phoebus ' cart gone round 
▁ xxmaj neptune 's salt wash and xxmaj tellus ' orbed ground , 
▁ xxmaj and thirty dozed moons with borrowed sheen 
▁ xxmaj about the world have times twelve thirties been , 
▁ xxmaj since love our hearts , and xxmaj hymen did our hands , 
▁ xxmaj unite comutual in most sacred bands . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj so many journeys may the sun and moon 
▁ xxmaj make us again count o'er ere love be done ! 
▁ xxmaj but woe is me ! you are so sick of late , 
▁ xxmaj so far from cheer and from your former state . 
▁ xxmaj that i distrust you . xxmaj yet , though i distrust , 
▁ xxmaj discomfort you , my lord , it nothing must ; 
▁ xxmaj for women 's fear and love holds quantity , 
▁ xxmaj in neither aught , or in extremity . 
▁ xxmaj now what my love is , proof hath made you know ; 
▁ xxmaj and as my love is siz'd , my fear is so . 
▁ xxmaj where love is great , the littlest doubts are fear ; 
▁ xxmaj where little fears grow great , great love grows there . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj faith , i must leave thee , love , and shortly too ; 
▁ xxmaj my operant powers their functions leave to do . 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt live in this fair world behind , 
▁ xxmaj honour'd , belov'd , and haply one as kind 
▁ xxmaj for husband shalt thou- 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxup o , confound the rest ! 
▁ xxmaj such love must needs be treason in my breast . 
▁ xxmaj when second husband let me be accurst ! 
▁ xxmaj none we d the second but who killed the first . 

▁ xxmaj ham . [ aside ] xxmaj wormwood , wormwood ! 

▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj the instances that second marriage move 
▁ xxmaj are base respects of thrift , but none of love . 
▁ a second time i kill my husband dead 
▁ xxmaj when second husband kisses me in bed . 
▁ xxmaj king . i do believe you think what now you speak ; 
▁ xxmaj but what we do determine oft we break . 
▁ xxmaj purpose is but the slave to memory , 
▁ xxmaj of violent birth , but poor validity ; 
▁ xxmaj which now , like fruit unripe , sticks on the tree , 
▁ xxmaj but fill unshaken when they mellow be . 
▁ xxmaj most necessary ' tis that we forget 
▁ xxmaj to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt . 
▁ xxmaj what to ourselves in passion we propose , 
▁ xxmaj the passion ending , doth the purpose lose . 
▁ xxmaj the violence of either grief or joy 
▁ xxmaj their own enactures with themselves destroy . 
▁ xxmaj where joy most revels , grief doth most lament ; 
▁ xxmaj grief joys , joy grieves , on slender accident . 
▁ xxmaj this world is not for aye , nor ' tis not strange 
▁ xxmaj that even our loves should with our fortunes change ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a question left us yet to prove , 
▁ xxmaj whether love lead fortune , or else fortune love . 
▁ xxmaj the great man down , you mark his favourite flies , 
▁ xxmaj the poor advanc'd makes friends of enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj and hitherto doth love on fortune tend , 
▁ xxmaj for who not needs shall never lack a friend , 
▁ xxmaj and who in want a hollow friend doth try , 
▁ xxmaj directly seasons him his enemy . 
▁ xxmaj but , orderly to end where i begun , 
▁ xxmaj our wills and fates do so contrary run 
▁ xxmaj that our devices still are overthrown ; 
▁ xxmaj our thoughts are ours , their ends none of our own . 
▁ xxmaj so think thou wilt no second husband we d ; 
▁ xxmaj but die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj nor earth to me give food , nor heaven light , 
▁ xxmaj sport and repose lock from me day and night , 
▁ xxmaj to desperation turn my trust and hope , 
▁ xxmaj an anchor 's cheer in prison be my scope , 
▁ xxmaj each opposite that blanks the face of joy 
▁ xxmaj meet what i would have well , and it destroy , 
▁ xxmaj both here and hence pursue me lasting strife , 
▁ xxmaj if , once a widow , ever i be wife ! 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj if she should break it now ! 

▁ xxmaj king . ' tis deeply sworn . xxmaj sweet , leave me here awhile . 
▁ xxmaj my spirits grow dull , and fain i would beguile 
▁ xxmaj the tedious day with sleep . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj sleep rock thy brain , 
▁ [ he ] sleeps . 
▁ xxmaj and never come mischance between us twain ! 
 xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj madam , how like you this play ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj the lady doth protest too much , methinks . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxup o , but she 'll keep her word . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj have you heard the argument ? xxmaj is there no offence in't ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , no ! xxmaj they do but jest , poison in jest ; no offence i ' th ' 
▁ world . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj what do you call the play ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . ' the xxmaj mousetrap . ' xxmaj marry , how ? xxmaj tropically . xxmaj this play is the 
▁ image of a murther done in xxmaj vienna . xxmaj gonzago is the duke 's name ; 
▁ his wife , xxmaj baptista . xxmaj you shall see anon . ' tis a knavish piece of 
▁ work ; but what o ' that ? xxmaj your xxmaj majesty , and we that have free 
▁ souls , it touches us not . xxmaj let the gall'd jade winch ; our withers 
▁ are unwrung . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lucianus . 
▁
▁ xxmaj this is one xxmaj lucianus , nephew to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj you are as good as a chorus , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i could interpret between you and your love , if i could see 
▁ the puppets dallying . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj you are keen , my lord , you are keen . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it would cost you a groaning to take off my edge . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj still better , and worse . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj so you must take your husbands.- xxmaj begin , murtherer . xxmaj pox , leave 
▁ thy damnable faces , and begin ! xxmaj come , the croaking raven doth 
▁ bellow for revenge . 

▁ xxmaj luc . xxmaj thoughts black , hands apt , drugs fit , and time agreeing ; 
▁ xxmaj confederate season , else no creature seeing ; 
▁ xxmaj thou mixture rank , of midnight weeds collected , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj hecate 's ban thrice blasted , thrice infected , 
▁ xxmaj thy natural magic and dire property 
▁ xxmaj on wholesome life usurp immediately . 
▁ xxmaj pours the poison in his ears . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj he poisons him i ' th ' garden for 's estate . xxmaj his name 's xxmaj gonzago . 
▁ xxmaj the story is extant , and written in very choice xxmaj italian . xxmaj you 
▁ shall see anon how the murtherer gets the love of xxmaj gonzago 's wife . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj the xxmaj king rises . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what , frighted with false fire ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj how fares my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj give o'er the play . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj give me some light ! xxmaj away ! 
▁ xxmaj all . xxmaj lights , lights , lights ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj hamlet and xxmaj horatio . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , let the strucken deer go weep , 
▁ xxmaj the hart ungalled play ; 
▁ xxmaj for some must watch , while some must sleep : 
▁ xxmaj thus runs the world away . 
▁ xxmaj would not this , sir , and a forest of feathers- if the rest of my 
▁ fortunes turn xxmaj turk with me - with two xxmaj provincial roses on my raz'd 
▁ shoes , get me a fellowship in a cry of players , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj half a share . 
▁ xxmaj ham . a whole one xxup i ! 
▁ xxmaj for thou dost know , o xxmaj damon dear , 
▁ xxmaj this realm dismantled was 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj jove himself ; and now reigns here 
▁ a very , very- pajock . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj you might have rhym'd . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o good xxmaj horatio , xxmaj i 'll take the ghost 's word for a thousand 
▁ pound ! xxmaj didst perceive ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj very well , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj upon the talk of the poisoning ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . i did very well note him . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj aha ! xxmaj come , some music ! xxmaj come , the recorders ! 
▁ xxmaj for if the xxmaj king like not the comedy , 
▁ xxmaj why then , belike he likes it not , perdy . 
▁ xxmaj come , some music ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 

▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj good my lord , vouchsafe me a word with you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , a whole history . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj the xxmaj king , sir- 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , sir , what of him ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj is in his retirement , marvellous distemper'd . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj with drink , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj no , my lord ; rather with choler . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to 
▁ the doctor ; for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps 
▁ plunge him into far more choler . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj good my lord , put your discourse into some frame , and start 
▁ not so wildly from my affair . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am tame , sir ; pronounce . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj the xxmaj queen , your mother , in most great affliction of spirit 
▁ hath sent me to you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj you are welcome . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj nay , good my lord , this courtesy is not of the right breed . 
▁ xxmaj if it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer , i will do 
▁ your mother 's commandment ; if not , your pardon and my return 
▁ shall be the end of my business . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , i can not . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj what , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj make you a wholesome answer ; my wit 's diseas'd . xxmaj but , sir , such 
▁ answer is i can make , you shall command ; or rather , as you say , 
▁ my mother . xxmaj therefore no more , but to the matter ! xxmaj my mother , you 
▁ say- 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj then thus she says : your behaviour hath struck her into 
▁ amazement and admiration . 
▁ xxmaj ham . o wonderful son , that can so stonish a mother ! xxmaj but is there no 
▁ sequel at the heels of this mother 's admiration ? xxmaj impart . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj she desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj we shall obey , were she ten times our mother . xxmaj have you any 
▁ further trade with us ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj my lord , you once did love me . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj and do still , by these pickers and stealers ! 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj good my lord , what is your cause of distemper ? xxmaj you do surely 
▁ bar the door upon your own liberty , if you deny your griefs to 
▁ your friend . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , i lack advancement . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj how can that be , when you have the voice of the xxmaj king himself 
▁ for your succession in xxmaj denmark ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , sir , but ' while the grass grows'- the proverb is something 
▁ musty . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj players with recorders . 

▁ xxup o , the recorders ! xxmaj let me see one . xxmaj to withdraw with you- why do 
▁ you go about to recover the wind of me , as if you would drive me 
▁ into a toil ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . o my lord , if my duty be too bold , my love is too unmannerly . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i do not well understand that . xxmaj will you play upon this pipe ? 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj my lord , i can not . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i pray you . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj believe me , i can not . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i do beseech you . 
▁ xxmaj guil . i know , no touch of it , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it is as easy as lying . xxmaj govern these ventages with your 
▁ fingers and thumbs , give it breath with your mouth , and it will 
▁ discourse most eloquent music . xxmaj look you , these are the stops . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj but these can not i command to any utt'rance of harmony . i 
▁ have not the skill . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , look you now , how unworthy a thing you make of me ! xxmaj you 
▁ would play upon me ; you would seem to know my stops ; you would 
▁ pluck out the heart of my mystery ; you would sound me from my 
▁ lowest note to the top of my compass ; and there is much music , 
▁ excellent voice , in this little organ , yet can not you make it 
▁ speak . ' sblood , do you think i am easier to be play'd on than a 
▁ pipe ? xxmaj call me what instrument you will , though you can fret me , 
▁ you can not play upon me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj god bless you , sir ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj my lord , the xxmaj queen would speak with you , and presently . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do you see yonder cloud that 's almost in shape of a camel ? 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj by th ' mass , and ' tis like a camel indeed . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj methinks it is like a weasel . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj it is back'd like a weasel . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj or like a whale . 
▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj very like a whale . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj then will i come to my mother by - and - by.- xxmaj they fool me to the 
▁ top of my bent.- i will come by - and - by . 
▁ xxmaj pol . i will say so . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj ham . ' by - and - by ' is easily said.- xxmaj leave me , friends . 
▁ [ exeunt all but xxmaj hamlet . ] 
▁ ' tis now the very witching time of night , 
▁ xxmaj when churchyards yawn , and hell itself breathes out 
▁ xxmaj contagion to this world . xxmaj now could i drink hot blood 
▁ xxmaj and do such bitter business as the day 
▁ xxmaj would quake to look on . xxmaj soft ! now to my mother ! 
▁ o heart , lose not thy nature ; let not ever 
▁ xxmaj the soul of xxmaj nero enter this firm bosom . 
▁ xxmaj let me be cruel , not unnatural ; 
▁ i will speak daggers to her , but use none . 
▁ xxmaj my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites- 
▁ xxmaj how in my words somever she be shent , 
▁ xxmaj to give them seals never , my soul , consent ! xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj king , xxmaj rosencrantz , and xxmaj guildenstern . 

▁ xxmaj king . i like him not , nor stands it safe with us 
▁ xxmaj to let his madness range . xxmaj therefore prepare you ; 
▁ i your commission will forthwith dispatch , 
▁ xxmaj and he to xxmaj england shall along with you . 
▁ xxmaj the terms of our estate may not endure 
▁ xxmaj hazard so near us as doth hourly grow 
▁ xxmaj out of his lunacies . 
▁ xxmaj guil . xxmaj we will ourselves provide . 
▁ xxmaj most holy and religious fear it is 
▁ xxmaj to keep those many many bodies safe 
▁ xxmaj that live and feed upon your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj the single and peculiar life is bound 
▁ xxmaj with all the strength and armour of the mind 
▁ xxmaj to keep itself from noyance ; but much more 
▁ xxmaj that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests 
▁ xxmaj the lives of many . xxmaj the cesse of majesty 
▁ xxmaj dies not alone , but like a gulf doth draw 
▁ xxmaj what 's near it with it . xxmaj it is a massy wheel , 
▁ xxmaj fix'd on the summit of the highest mount , 
▁ xxmaj to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things 
▁ xxmaj are mortis'd and adjoin'd ; which when it falls , 
▁ xxmaj each small annexment , petty consequence , 
▁ xxmaj attends the boist'rous ruin . xxmaj never alone 
▁ xxmaj did the king sigh , but with a general groan . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj arm you , i pray you , to th ' , speedy voyage ; 
▁ xxmaj for we will fetters put upon this fear , 
▁ xxmaj which now goes too free - footed . 
▁ xxmaj both . xxmaj we will haste us . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj gentlemen . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj my lord , he 's going to his mother 's closet . 
▁ xxmaj behind the arras xxmaj i 'll convey myself 
▁ xxmaj to hear the process . xxmaj i 'll warrant she 'll tax him home ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as you said , and wisely was it said , 
▁ ' tis meet that some more audience than a mother , 
▁ xxmaj since nature makes them partial , should o'erhear 
▁ xxmaj the speech , of vantage . xxmaj fare you well , my liege . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll call upon you ere you go to bed 
▁ xxmaj and tell you what i know . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thanks , dear my lord . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ polonius ] . 
▁ xxup o , my offence is rank , it smells to heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj it hath the primal eldest curse upon't , 
▁ a brother 's murther ! xxmaj pray can i not , 
▁ xxmaj though inclination be as sharp as will . 
▁ xxmaj my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent , 
▁ xxmaj and , like a man to double business bound , 
▁ i stand in pause where i shall first begin , 
▁ xxmaj and both neglect . xxmaj what if this cursed hand 
▁ xxmaj were thicker than itself with brother 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens 
▁ xxmaj to wash it white as snow ? xxmaj whereto serves mercy 
▁ xxmaj but to confront the visage of offence ? 
▁ xxmaj and what 's in prayer but this twofold force , 
▁ xxmaj to be forestalled ere we come to fall , 
▁ xxmaj or pardon'd being down ? xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll look up ; 
▁ xxmaj my fault is past . xxmaj but , xxup o , what form of prayer 
▁ xxmaj can serve my turn ? ' forgive me my foul murther ' ? 
▁ xxmaj that can not be ; since i am still possess'd 
▁ xxmaj of those effects for which i did the murther- 
▁ xxmaj my crown , mine own ambition , and my queen . 
▁ xxmaj may one be pardon'd and retain th ' offence ? 
▁ xxmaj in the corrupted currents of this world 
▁ xxmaj offence 's gilded hand may shove by justice , 
▁ xxmaj and oft ' tis seen the wicked prize itself 
▁ xxmaj buys out the law ; but ' tis not so above . 
▁ xxmaj there is no shuffling ; there the action lies 
▁ xxmaj in his true nature , and we ourselves compell'd , 
▁ xxmaj even to the teeth and forehead of our faults , 
▁ xxmaj to give in evidence . xxmaj what then ? xxmaj what rests ? 
▁ xxmaj try what repentance can . xxmaj what can it not ? 
▁ xxmaj yet what can it when one can not repent ? 
▁ o wretched state ! o bosom black as death ! 
▁ o limed soul , that , struggling to be free , 
▁ xxmaj art more engag'd ! xxmaj help , angels ! xxmaj make assay . 
▁ xxmaj bow , stubborn knees ; and heart with strings of steel , 
▁ xxmaj be soft as sinews of the new - born babe ! 
▁ xxmaj all may be well . xxmaj he kneels . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj now might i do it pat , now he is praying ; 
▁ xxmaj and now xxmaj i 'll do't . xxmaj and so he goes to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and so am i reveng'd . xxmaj that would be scann'd . 
▁ a villain kills my father ; and for that , 
▁ xxup i , his sole son , do this same villain send 
▁ xxmaj to heaven . 
▁ xxmaj why , this is hire and salary , not revenge ! 
▁ xxmaj he took my father grossly , full of bread , 
▁ xxmaj with all his crimes broad blown , as flush as xxmaj may ; 
▁ xxmaj and how his audit stands , who knows save heaven ? 
▁ xxmaj but in our circumstance and course of thought , 
▁ ' tis heavy with him ; and am i then reveng'd , 
▁ xxmaj to take him in the purging of his soul , 
▁ xxmaj when he is fit and seasoned for his passage ? 
▁ xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj up , sword , and know thou a more horrid hent . 
▁ xxmaj when he is drunk asleep ; or in his rage ; 
▁ xxmaj or in th ' incestuous pleasure of his bed ; 
▁ xxmaj at gaming , swearing , or about some act 
▁ xxmaj that has no relish of salvation in't- 
▁ xxmaj then trip him , that his heels may kick at heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and that his soul may be as damn'd and black 
▁ xxmaj as hell , whereto it goes . xxmaj my mother stays . 
▁ xxmaj this physic but prolongs thy sickly days . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj king . [ rises ] xxmaj my words fly up , my thoughts remain below . 
▁ xxmaj words without thoughts never to heaven go . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj queen 's closet . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj queen and xxmaj polonius . 

▁ xxmaj pol . xxmaj he will come straight . xxmaj look you lay home to him . 
▁ xxmaj tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with , 
▁ xxmaj and that your xxmaj grace hath screen'd and stood between 
▁ xxmaj much heat and him . xxmaj i 'll silence me even here . 
▁ xxmaj pray you be round with him . 
▁ xxmaj ham . ( within ) xxmaj mother , mother , mother ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj i 'll warrant you ; fear me not . xxmaj withdraw ; i hear him coming . 
▁ [ polonius hides behind the arras . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj now , mother , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj hamlet , thou hast thy father much offended . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj mother , you have my father much offended . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj come , come , you answer with an idle tongue . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj go , go , you question with a wicked tongue . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj hamlet ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what 's the matter now ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj have you forgot me ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , by the rood , not so ! 
▁ xxmaj you are the xxmaj queen , your husband 's brother 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj and ( would it were not so ! ) you are my mother . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj nay , then xxmaj i 'll set those to you that can speak . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj come , come , and sit you down . xxmaj you shall not budge i 
▁ xxmaj you go not till i set you up a glass 
▁ xxmaj where you may see the inmost part of you . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj what wilt thou do ? xxmaj thou wilt not murther me ? 
▁ xxmaj help , help , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj pol . [ behind ] xxmaj what , ho ! help , help , help ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . [ draws ] xxmaj how now ? a rat ? xxmaj dead for a ducat , dead ! 
▁ [ makes a pass through the arras and ] kills xxmaj polonius . 
▁ xxmaj pol . [ behind ] xxup o , i am slain ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . o me , what hast thou done ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay , i know not . xxmaj is it the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxup o , what a rash and bloody deed is this ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . a bloody deed- almost as bad , good mother , 
▁ xxmaj as kill a king , and marry with his brother . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj as kill a king ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , lady , it was my word . 
▁ [ lifts up the arras and sees xxmaj polonius . ] 
▁ xxmaj thou wretched , rash , intruding fool , farewell ! 
▁ i took thee for thy better . xxmaj take thy fortune . 
▁ xxmaj thou find'st to be too busy is some danger . 
▁ xxmaj leave wringing of your hinds . xxmaj peace ! sit you down 
▁ xxmaj and let me wring your heart ; for so i shall 
▁ xxmaj if it be made of penetrable stuff ; 
▁ xxmaj if damned custom have not braz'd it so 
▁ xxmaj that it is proof and bulwark against sense . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj what have i done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue 
▁ xxmaj in noise so rude against me ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj such an act 
▁ xxmaj that blurs the grace and blush of modesty ; 
▁ xxmaj calls virtue hypocrite ; takes off the rose 
▁ xxmaj from the fair forehead of an innocent love , 
▁ xxmaj and sets a blister there ; makes marriage vows 
▁ xxmaj as false as dicers ' oaths . xxup o , such a deed 
▁ xxmaj as from the body of contraction plucks 
▁ xxmaj the very soul , and sweet religion makes 
▁ a rhapsody of words ! xxmaj heaven 's face doth glow ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , this solidity and compound mass , 
▁ xxmaj with tristful visage , as against the doom , 
▁ xxmaj is thought - sick at the act . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj ay me , what act , 
▁ xxmaj that roars so loud and thunders in the index ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj look here upon th 's picture , and on this , 
▁ xxmaj the counterfeit presentment of two brothers . 
▁ xxmaj see what a grace was seated on this brow ; 
▁ xxmaj hyperion 's curls ; the front of xxmaj jove himself ; 
▁ xxmaj an eye like xxmaj mars , to threaten and command ; 
▁ a station like the herald xxmaj mercury 
▁ xxmaj new lighted on a heaven - kissing hill : 
▁ a combination and a form indeed 
▁ xxmaj where every god did seem to set his seal 
▁ xxmaj to give the world assurance of a man . 
▁ xxmaj this was your husband . xxmaj look you now what follows . 
▁ xxmaj here is your husband , like a mildew'd ear 
▁ xxmaj blasting his wholesome brother . xxmaj have you eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj could you on this fair mountain leave to feed , 
▁ xxmaj and batten on this moor ? xxmaj ha ! have you eyes 
▁ xxmaj you can not call it love ; for at your age 
▁ xxmaj the heyday in the blood is tame , it 's humble , 
▁ xxmaj and waits upon the judgment ; and what judgment 
▁ xxmaj would step from this to this ? xxmaj sense sure you have , 
▁ xxmaj else could you not have motion ; but sure that sense 
▁ xxmaj is apoplex'd ; for madness would not err , 
▁ xxmaj nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd 
▁ xxmaj but it reserv'd some quantity of choice 
▁ xxmaj to serve in such a difference . xxmaj what devil was't 
▁ xxmaj that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman - blind ? 
▁ xxmaj eyes without feeling , feeling without sight , 
▁ xxmaj ears without hands or eyes , smelling sans all , 
▁ xxmaj or but a sickly part of one true sense 
▁ xxmaj could not so mope . 
▁ o shame ! where is thy blush ? xxmaj rebellious hell , 
▁ xxmaj if thou canst mutine in a matron 's bones , 
▁ xxmaj to flaming youth let virtue be as wax 
▁ xxmaj and melt in her own fire . xxmaj proclaim no shame 
▁ xxmaj when the compulsive ardour gives the charge , 
▁ xxmaj since frost itself as actively doth burn , 
▁ xxmaj and reason panders will . 
▁ xxmaj queen . o xxmaj hamlet , speak no more ! 
▁ xxmaj thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul , 
▁ xxmaj and there i see such black and grained spots 
▁ xxmaj as will not leave their tinct . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay , but to live 
▁ xxmaj in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed , 
▁ xxmaj stew'd in corruption , honeying and making love 
▁ xxmaj over the nasty sty ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxup o , speak to me no more ! 
▁ xxmaj these words like daggers enter in mine ears . 
▁ xxmaj no more , sweet xxmaj hamlet ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . a murtherer and a villain ! 
▁ a slave that is not twentieth part the tithe 
▁ xxmaj of your precedent lord ; a vice of kings ; 
▁ a cutpurse of the empire and the rule , 
▁ xxmaj that from a shelf the precious diadem stole 
▁ xxmaj and put it in his pocket ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj no more ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj ghost in his nightgown . 

▁ xxmaj ham . a king of shreds and patches!- 
▁ xxmaj save me and hover o'er me with your wings , 
▁ xxmaj you heavenly guards ! xxmaj what would your gracious figure ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj alas , he 's mad ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do you not come your tardy son to chide , 
▁ xxmaj that , laps'd in time and passion , lets go by 
▁ xxmaj th ' important acting of your dread command ? 
▁ xxup o , say ! 
▁ xxmaj ghost . xxmaj do not forget . xxmaj this visitation 
▁ xxmaj is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose . 
▁ xxmaj but look , amazement on thy mother sits . 
▁ xxup o , step between her and her fighting soul 
▁ xxmaj conceit in weakest bodies strongest works . 
▁ xxmaj speak to her , xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how is it with you , lady ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj alas , how is't with you , 
▁ xxmaj that you do bend your eye on vacancy , 
▁ xxmaj and with th ' encorporal air do hold discourse ? 
▁ xxmaj forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as the sleeping soldiers in th ' alarm , 
▁ xxmaj your bedded hairs , like life in excrements , 
▁ xxmaj start up and stand an end . o gentle son , 
▁ xxmaj upon the beat and flame of thy distemper 
▁ xxmaj sprinkle cool patience ! xxmaj whereon do you look ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj on him , on him ! xxmaj look you how pale he glares ! 
▁ xxmaj his form and cause conjoin'd , preaching to stones , 
▁ xxmaj would make them capable.- xxmaj do not look upon me , 
▁ xxmaj lest with this piteous action you convert 
▁ xxmaj my stern effects . xxmaj then what i have to do 
▁ xxmaj will want true colour- tears perchance for blood . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj to whom do you speak this ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do you see nothing there ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj nothing at all ; yet all that is i see . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nor did you nothing hear ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj no , nothing but ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , look you there ! xxmaj look how it steals away ! 
▁ xxmaj my father , in his habit as he liv'd ! 
▁ xxmaj look where he goes even now out at the portal ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj ghost . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj this is the very coinage of your brain . 
▁ xxmaj this bodiless creation ecstasy 
▁ xxmaj is very cunning in . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ecstasy ? 
▁ xxmaj my pulse as yours doth temperately keep time 
▁ xxmaj and makes as healthful music . xxmaj it is not madness 
▁ xxmaj that i have utt'red . xxmaj bring me to the test , 
▁ xxmaj and i the matter will reword ; which madness 
▁ xxmaj would gambol from . xxmaj mother , for love of grace , 
▁ xxmaj lay not that flattering unction to your soul 
▁ xxmaj that not your trespass but my madness speaks . 
▁ xxmaj it will but skin and film the ulcerous place , 
▁ xxmaj whiles rank corruption , mining all within , 
▁ xxmaj infects unseen . xxmaj confess yourself to heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj repent what 's past ; avoid what is to come ; 
▁ xxmaj and do not spread the compost on the weeds 
▁ xxmaj to make them ranker . xxmaj forgive me this my virtue ; 
▁ xxmaj for in the fatness of these pursy times 
▁ xxmaj virtue itself of vice must pardon beg- 
▁ xxmaj yea , curb and woo for leave to do him good . 
▁ xxmaj queen . o xxmaj hamlet , thou hast cleft my heart in twain . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxup o , throw away the worser part of it , 
▁ xxmaj and live the purer with the other half , 
▁ xxmaj good night- but go not to my uncle 's bed . 
▁ xxmaj assume a virtue , if you have it not . 
▁ xxmaj that monster , custom , who all sense doth eat 
▁ xxmaj of habits evil , is angel yet in this , 
▁ xxmaj that to the use of actions fair and good 
▁ xxmaj he likewise gives a frock or livery , 
▁ xxmaj that aptly is put on . xxmaj refrain to - night , 
▁ xxmaj and that shall lend a kind of easiness 
▁ xxmaj to the next abstinence ; the next more easy ; 
▁ xxmaj for use almost can change the stamp of nature , 
▁ xxmaj and either [ master ] the devil , or throw him out 
▁ xxmaj with wondrous potency . xxmaj once more , good night ; 
▁ xxmaj and when you are desirous to be blest , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll blessing beg of you.- xxmaj for this same lord , 
▁ i do repent ; but heaven hath pleas'd it so , 
▁ xxmaj to punish me with this , and this with me , 
▁ xxmaj that i must be their scourge and minister . 
▁ i will bestow him , and will answer well 
▁ xxmaj the death i gave him . xxmaj so again , good night . 
▁ i must be cruel , only to be kind ; 
▁ xxmaj thus bad begins , and worse remains behind . 
▁ xxmaj one word more , good lady . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj what shall i do ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj not this , by no means , that i bid you do : 
▁ xxmaj let the bloat xxmaj king tempt you again to bed ; 
▁ xxmaj pinch wanton on your cheek ; call you his mouse ; 
▁ xxmaj and let him , for a pair of reechy kisses , 
▁ xxmaj or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers , 
▁ xxmaj make you to ravel all this matter out , 
▁ xxmaj that i essentially am not in madness , 
▁ xxmaj but mad in craft . ' twere good you let him know ; 
▁ xxmaj for who that 's but a queen , fair , sober , wise , 
▁ xxmaj would from a paddock , from a bat , a gib 
▁ xxmaj such dear concernings hide ? xxmaj who would do so ? 
▁ xxmaj no , in despite of sense and secrecy , 
▁ xxmaj unpeg the basket on the house 's top , 
▁ xxmaj let the birds fly , and like the famous ape , 
▁ xxmaj to try conclusions , in the basket creep 
▁ xxmaj and break your own neck down . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj be thou assur'd , if words be made of breath , 
▁ xxmaj and breath of life , i have no life to breathe 
▁ xxmaj what thou hast said to me . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i must to xxmaj england ; you know that ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj alack , 
▁ i had forgot ! ' tis so concluded on . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj there 's letters seal'd ; and my two schoolfellows , 
▁ xxmaj whom i will trust as i will adders fang'd , 
▁ xxmaj they bear the mandate ; they must sweep my way 
▁ xxmaj and marshal me to knavery . xxmaj let it work ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis the sport to have the enginer 
▁ xxmaj hoist with his own petar ; and ' t shall go hard 
▁ xxmaj but i will delve one yard below their mines 
▁ xxmaj and blow them at the moon . xxup o , ' tis most sweet 
▁ xxmaj when in one line two crafts directly meet . 
▁ xxmaj this man shall set me packing . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.- 
▁ xxmaj mother , good night.- xxmaj indeed , this counsellor 
▁ xxmaj is now most still , most secret , and most grave , 
▁ xxmaj who was in life a foolish peating knave . 
▁ xxmaj come , sir , to draw toward an end with you . 
▁ xxmaj good night , mother . 
▁ [ exit the xxmaj queen . xxmaj then ] xxmaj exit xxmaj hamlet , tugging in 
▁ xxmaj polonius . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj king and xxmaj queen , with xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj there 's matter in these sighs . xxmaj these profound heaves 
▁ xxmaj you must translate ; ' tis fit we understand them . 
▁ xxmaj where is your son ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj bestow this place on us a little while . 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . ] 
▁ xxmaj ah , mine own lord , what have i seen to - night ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj what , xxmaj gertrude ? xxmaj how does xxmaj hamlet ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj mad as the sea and wind when both contend 
▁ xxmaj which is the mightier . xxmaj in his lawless fit 
▁ xxmaj behind the arras hearing something stir , 
▁ xxmaj whips out his rapier , cries ' a rat , a rat ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and in this brainish apprehension kills 
▁ xxmaj the unseen good old man . 
▁ xxmaj king . o heavy deed ! 
▁ xxmaj it had been so with us , had we been there . 
▁ xxmaj his liberty is full of threats to all- 
▁ xxmaj to you yourself , to us , to every one . 
▁ xxmaj alas , how shall this bloody deed be answer'd ? 
▁ xxmaj it will be laid to us , whose providence 
▁ xxmaj should have kept short , restrain'd , and out of haunt 
▁ xxmaj this mad young man . xxmaj but so much was our love 
▁ xxmaj we would not understand what was most fit , 
▁ xxmaj but , like the owner of a foul disease , 
▁ xxmaj to keep it from divulging , let it feed 
▁ xxmaj even on the pith of life . xxmaj where is he gone ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj to draw apart the body he hath kill'd ; 
▁ xxmaj o'er whom his very madness , like some ore 
▁ xxmaj among a mineral of metals base , 
▁ xxmaj shows itself pure . xxmaj he weeps for what is done . 
▁ xxmaj king . o xxmaj gertrude , come away ! 
▁ xxmaj the sun no sooner shall the mountains touch 
▁ xxmaj but we will ship him hence ; and this vile deed 
▁ xxmaj we must with all our majesty and skill 
▁ xxmaj both countenance and excuse . xxmaj ho , xxmaj guildenstern ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 
▁
▁ xxmaj friends both , go join you with some further aid . 
▁ xxmaj hamlet in madness hath xxmaj polonius slain , 
▁ xxmaj and from his mother 's closet hath he dragg'd him . 
▁ xxmaj go seek him out ; speak fair , and bring the body 
▁ xxmaj into the chapel . i pray you haste in this . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern ] . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj gertrude , we 'll call up our wisest friends 
▁ xxmaj and let them know both what we mean to do 
▁ xxmaj and what 's untimely done . [ so haply slander- ] 
▁ xxmaj whose whisper o'er the world 's diameter , 
▁ xxmaj as level as the cannon to his blank , 
▁ xxmaj transports his poisoned shot- may miss our name 
▁ xxmaj and hit the woundless air.- xxup o , come away ! 
▁ xxmaj my soul is full of discord and dismay . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj elsinore . a passage in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj safely stow'd . 
▁ xxmaj gentlemen . ( within ) xxmaj hamlet ! xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj but soft ! xxmaj what noise ? xxmaj who calls on xxmaj hamlet ? xxup o , here they come . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern . 

▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj what have you done , my lord , with the dead body ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj compounded it with dust , whereto ' tis kin . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj tell us where ' tis , that we may take it thence 
▁ xxmaj and bear it to the chapel . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj do not believe it . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj believe what ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that i can keep your counsel , and not mine own . xxmaj besides , to be 
▁ demanded of a sponge , what replication should be made by the son 
▁ of a king ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj take you me for a sponge , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , sir ; that soaks up the xxmaj king 's countenance , his rewards , 
▁ his authorities . xxmaj but such officers do the xxmaj king best service in 
▁ the end . xxmaj he keeps them , like an ape , in the corner of his jaw ; 
▁ first mouth'd , to be last xxmaj swallowed . xxmaj when he needs what you have 
▁ glean'd , it is but squeezing you and , sponge , you shall be dry 
▁ again . 
▁ xxmaj ros . i understand you not , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am glad of it . a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj my lord , you must tell us where the body is and go with us to 
▁ the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the body is with the xxmaj king , but the xxmaj king is not with the body . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is a thing- 
▁ xxmaj guil . a thing , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj of nothing . xxmaj bring me to him . xxmaj hide fox , and all after . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj king . i have sent to seek him and to find the body . 
▁ xxmaj how dangerous is it that this man goes loose ! 
▁ xxmaj yet must not we put the strong law on him . 
▁ xxmaj he 's lov'd of the distracted multitude , 
▁ xxmaj who like not in their judgment , but their eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj and where ' tis so , th ' offender 's scourge is weigh'd , 
▁ xxmaj but never the offence . xxmaj to bear all smooth and even , 
▁ xxmaj this sudden sending him away must seem 
▁ xxmaj deliberate pause . xxmaj diseases desperate grown 
▁ xxmaj by desperate appliance are reliev'd , 
▁ xxmaj or not at all . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj rosencrantz . 

▁ xxmaj how now o xxmaj what hath befall'n ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj where the dead body is bestow'd , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj we can not get from him . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj but where is he ? 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj without , my lord ; guarded , to know your pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj bring him before us . 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj ho , xxmaj guildenstern ! xxmaj bring in my lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet and xxmaj guildenstern [ with xxmaj attendants ] . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj now , xxmaj hamlet , where 's xxmaj polonius ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj at supper . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj at supper ? xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj not where he eats , but where he is eaten . a certain 
▁ convocation of politic worms are e'en at him . xxmaj your worm is your 
▁ only emperor for diet . xxmaj we fat all creatures else to fat us , and 
▁ we fat ourselves for maggots . xxmaj your fat king and your lean beggar 
▁ is but variable service- two dishes , but to one table . xxmaj that 's the 
▁ end . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj alas , alas ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . a man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king , and eat 
▁ of the fish that hath fed of that worm . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj what dost thou mean by this ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through 
▁ the guts of a beggar . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj where is xxmaj polonius ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj in heaven . xxmaj send thither to see . xxmaj if your messenger find him not 
▁ there , seek him i ' th ' other place yourself . xxmaj but indeed , if you 
▁ find him not within this month , you shall nose him as you go up 
▁ the stair , into the lobby . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj go seek him there . [ to xxmaj attendants . ] 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj he will stay till you come . 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj attendants . ] 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj hamlet , this deed , for thine especial safety,- 
▁ xxmaj which we do tender as we dearly grieve 
▁ xxmaj for that which thou hast done,- must send thee hence 
▁ xxmaj with fiery quickness . xxmaj therefore prepare thyself . 
▁ xxmaj the bark is ready and the wind at help , 
▁ xxmaj th ' associates tend , and everything is bent 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj for xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj ay , xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj good . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj so is it , if thou knew'st our purposes . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i see a cherub that sees them . xxmaj but come , for xxmaj england ! 
▁ xxmaj farewell , dear mother . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thy loving father , xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj my mother ! xxmaj father and mother is man and wife ; man and wife is 
▁ one flesh ; and so , my mother . xxmaj come , for xxmaj england ! 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj follow him at foot ; tempt him with speed aboard . 
▁ xxmaj delay it not ; xxmaj i 'll have him hence to - night . 
▁ xxmaj away ! for everything is seal'd and done 
▁ xxmaj that else leans on th ' affair . xxmaj pray you make haste . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern ] 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj england , if my love thou hold'st at aught,- 
▁ xxmaj as my great power thereof may give thee sense , 
▁ xxmaj since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red 
▁ xxmaj after the xxmaj danish sword , and thy free awe 
▁ xxmaj pays homage to us,- thou mayst not coldly set 
▁ xxmaj our sovereign process , which imports at full , 
▁ xxmaj by letters congruing to that effect ,