xxbos xxmaj the present death of xxmaj hamlet . xxmaj do it , xxmaj england ; 
▁ xxmaj for like the hectic in my blood he rages , 
▁ xxmaj and thou must cure me . xxmaj till i know ' tis done , 
▁ xxmaj howe'er my haps , my joys were ne'er begun . xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj near xxmaj elsinore . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj fortinbras with his xxmaj army over the stage . 

▁ xxmaj for . xxmaj go , xxmaj captain , from me greet the xxmaj danish king . 
▁ xxmaj tell him that by his license xxmaj fortinbras 
▁ xxmaj craves the conveyance of a promis'd march 
▁ xxmaj over his kingdom . xxmaj you know the rendezvous . 
▁ if that his xxmaj majesty would aught with us , 
▁ xxmaj we shall express our duty in his eye ; 
▁ xxmaj and let him know so . 
▁ xxmaj capt . i will do't , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj for . xxmaj go softly on . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but the xxmaj captain ] . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet , xxmaj rosencrantz , [ guildenstern , ] and others . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj good sir , whose powers are these ? 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj they are of xxmaj norway , sir . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how purpos'd , sir , i pray you ? 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj against some part of xxmaj poland . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj who commands them , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj the nephew to old xxmaj norway , xxmaj fortinbras . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj goes it against the main of xxmaj poland , sir , 
▁ xxmaj or for some frontier ? 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj truly to speak , and with no addition , 
▁ xxmaj we go to gain a little patch of ground 
▁ xxmaj that hath in it no profit but the name . 
▁ xxmaj to pay five ducats , five , i would not farm it ; 
▁ xxmaj nor will it yield to xxmaj norway or the xxmaj pole 
▁ a ranker rate , should it be sold in fee . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , then the xxmaj polack never will defend it . 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj yes , it is already garrison'd . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats 
▁ xxmaj will not debate the question of this straw . 
▁ xxmaj this is th ' imposthume of much wealth and peace , 
▁ xxmaj that inward breaks , and shows no cause without 
▁ xxmaj why the man dies.- i humbly thank you , sir . 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj god b ' wi ' you , sir . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj ros . xxmaj will't please you go , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj i 'll be with you straight . xxmaj go a little before . 
▁ [ exeunt all but xxmaj hamlet . ] 
▁ xxmaj how all occasions do inform against me 
▁ xxmaj and spur my dull revenge ! xxmaj what is a man , 
▁ xxmaj if his chief good and market of his time 
▁ xxmaj be but to sleep and feed ? a beast , no more . 
▁ xxmaj sure he that made us with such large discourse , 
▁ xxmaj looking before and after , gave us not 
▁ xxmaj that capability and godlike reason 
▁ xxmaj to fust in us unus'd . xxmaj now , whether it be 
▁ xxmaj bestial oblivion , or some craven scruple 
▁ xxmaj of thinking too precisely on th ' event,- 
▁ a thought which , quarter'd , hath but one part wisdom 
▁ xxmaj and ever three parts coward,- i do not know 
▁ xxmaj why yet i live to say ' this thing 's to do , ' 
▁ xxmaj sith i have cause , and will , and strength , and means 
▁ xxmaj to do't . xxmaj examples gross as earth exhort me . 
▁ xxmaj witness this army of such mass and charge , 
▁ xxmaj led by a delicate and tender prince , 
▁ xxmaj whose spirit , with divine ambition puff'd , 
▁ xxmaj makes mouths at the invisible event , 
▁ xxmaj exposing what is mortal and unsure 
▁ xxmaj to all that fortune , death , and danger dare , 
▁ xxmaj even for an eggshell . xxmaj rightly to be great 
▁ xxmaj is not to stir without great argument , 
▁ xxmaj but greatly to find quarrel in a straw 
▁ xxmaj when honour 's at the stake . xxmaj how stand i then , 
▁ xxmaj that have a father k xxrep 3 l 'd , a mother stain'd , 
▁ xxmaj excitements of my reason and my blood , 
▁ xxmaj and let all sleep , while to my shame i see 
▁ xxmaj the imminent death of twenty thousand men 
▁ xxmaj that for a fantasy and trick of fame 
▁ xxmaj go to their graves like beds , fight for a plot 
▁ xxmaj whereon the numbers can not try the cause , 
▁ xxmaj which is not tomb enough and continent 
▁ xxmaj to hide the slain ? xxup o , from this time forth , 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts be bloody , or be nothing worth ! xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj elsinore . a room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj horatio , xxmaj queen , and a xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj queen . i will not speak with her . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj she is importunate , indeed distract . 
▁ xxmaj her mood will needs be pitied . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj what would she have ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj she speaks much of her father ; says she hears 
▁ xxmaj there 's tricks i ' th ' world , and hems , and beats her heart ; 
▁ xxmaj spurns enviously at straws ; speaks things in doubt , 
▁ xxmaj that carry but half sense . xxmaj her speech is nothing , 
▁ xxmaj yet the unshaped use of it doth move 
▁ xxmaj the hearers to collection ; they aim at it , 
▁ xxmaj and botch the words up fit to their own thoughts ; 
▁ xxmaj which , as her winks and nods and gestures yield them , 
▁ xxmaj indeed would make one think there might be thought , 
▁ xxmaj though nothing sure , yet much unhappily . 
▁ xxmaj hor . ' twere good she were spoken with ; for she may strew 
▁ xxmaj dangerous conjectures in ill - breeding minds . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj let her come in . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj gentleman . ] 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj to my sick soul ( as sin 's true nature is ) 
▁ xxmaj each toy seems xxmaj prologue to some great amiss . 
▁ xxmaj so full of artless jealousy is guilt 
▁ xxmaj it spills itself in fearing to be spilt . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ophelia distracted . 

▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj where is the beauteous xxmaj majesty of xxmaj denmark ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj how now , xxmaj ophelia ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . ( sings ) 
▁ xxmaj how should i your true - love know 
▁ xxmaj from another one ? 
▁ xxmaj by his cockle bat and ' staff 
▁ xxmaj and his sandal shoon . 

▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj alas , sweet lady , what imports this song ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj say you ? xxmaj nay , pray xxmaj you mark . 

▁ ( sings ) xxmaj he is dead and gone , lady , 
▁ xxmaj he is dead and gone ; 
▁ xxmaj at his head a grass - green turf , 
▁ xxmaj at his heels a stone . 

▁ xxup o , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj nay , but xxmaj ophelia- 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj pray you mark . 

▁ ( sings ) xxmaj white his shroud as the mountain snow- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj alas , look here , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj oph . ( sings ) 
▁ xxmaj larded all with sweet flowers ; 
▁ xxmaj which bewept to the grave did not go 
▁ xxmaj with true - love showers . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj how do you , pretty lady ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj well , xxmaj god dild you ! xxmaj they say the owl was a baker 's daughter . 
▁ xxmaj lord , we know what we are , but know not what we may be . xxmaj god be at 
▁ your table ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj conceit upon her father . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj pray let 's have no words of this ; but when they ask , you what 
▁ it means , say you this : 

▁ ( sings ) xxmaj to - morrow is xxmaj saint xxmaj valentine 's day , 
▁ xxmaj all in the morning bedtime , 
▁ xxmaj and i a maid at your window , 
▁ xxmaj to be your xxmaj valentine . 

▁ xxmaj then up he rose and donn'd his clo'es 
▁ xxmaj and dupp'd the chamber door , 
▁ xxmaj let in the maid , that out a maid 
▁ xxmaj never departed more . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj pretty xxmaj ophelia ! 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj indeed , la , without an oath , xxmaj i 'll make an end on't ! 

▁ [ sings ] xxmaj by xxmaj gis and by xxmaj saint xxmaj charity , 
▁ xxmaj alack , and fie for shame ! 
▁ xxmaj young men will do't if they come to't 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj cock , they are to blame . 

▁ xxmaj quoth she , ' before you tumbled me , 
▁ xxmaj you promis'd me to we d. ' 

▁ xxmaj he answers : 

▁ ' so would i ' a ' done , by yonder sun , 
▁ xxmaj an thou hadst not come to my bed . ' 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj how long hath she been thus ? 
▁ xxmaj oph . i hope all will be well . xxmaj we must be patient ; but i can not 
▁ choose but weep to think they would lay him i ' th ' cold ground . 
▁ xxmaj my brother shall know of it ; and so i thank you for your good 
▁ counsel . xxmaj come , my coach ! xxmaj good night , ladies . xxmaj good night , sweet 
▁ ladies . xxmaj good night , good night . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj follow her close ; give her good watch , i pray you . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj horatio . ] 
▁ xxup o , this is the poison of deep grief ; it springs 
▁ xxmaj all from her father 's death . o xxmaj gertrude , xxmaj gertrude , 
▁ xxmaj when sorrows come , they come not single spies . 
▁ xxmaj but in battalions ! xxmaj first , her father slain ; 
▁ xxmaj next , xxmaj your son gone , and he most violent author 
▁ xxmaj of his own just remove ; the people muddied , 
▁ xxmaj thick and and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers 
▁ xxmaj for good xxmaj polonius ' death , and we have done but greenly 
▁ xxmaj in hugger - mugger to inter him ; xxmaj poor xxmaj ophelia 
▁ xxmaj divided from herself and her fair - judgment , 
▁ xxmaj without the which we are xxmaj pictures or mere beasts ; 
▁ xxmaj last , and as such containing as all these , 
▁ xxmaj her brother is in secret come from xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj and wants not buzzers to infect his ear 
▁ xxmaj feeds on his wonder , keep , himself in clouds , 
▁ xxmaj with pestilent speeches of his father 's death , 
▁ xxmaj wherein necessity , of matter beggar'd , 
▁ xxmaj will nothing stick xxmaj our person to arraign 
▁ xxmaj in ear and ear . o my dear xxmaj gertrude , this , 
▁ xxmaj like to a murd'ring piece , in many places 
▁ xxmaj give , me superfluous death . a noise within . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj alack , what noise is this ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj where are my xxmaj switzers ? xxmaj let them guard the door . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj what is the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj save xxmaj yourself , my lord : 
▁ xxmaj the ocean , overpeering of his list , 
▁ xxmaj eats not the flats with more impetuous haste 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj young xxmaj laertes , in a riotous head , 
▁ xxmaj o'erbears xxmaj your offices . xxmaj the rabble call him lord ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as the world were now but to begin , 
▁ xxmaj antiquity forgot , custom not known , 
▁ xxmaj the ratifiers and props of every word , 
▁ xxmaj they cry ' choose we ! xxmaj laertes shall be king ! ' 
▁ xxmaj caps , hands , and tongues applaud it to the clouds , 
▁ ' laertes shall be king ! xxmaj laertes king ! ' 
▁ a noise within . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj how cheerfully on the false trail they cry ! 
▁ xxup o , this is counter , you false xxmaj danish dogs ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj the doors are broke . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj laertes with others . 

▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj where is this king?- xxmaj sirs , staid you all without . 
▁ xxmaj all . xxmaj no , let 's come in ! 
▁ xxmaj laer . i pray you give me leave . 
▁ xxmaj all . xxmaj we will , we will ! 
▁ xxmaj laer . i thank you . xxmaj keep the door . [ exeunt his xxmaj followers . ] 
▁ o thou vile king , 
▁ xxmaj give me my father ! 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj calmly , good xxmaj laertes . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj that drop of blood that 's calm proclaims me bastard ; 
▁ xxmaj cries cuckold to my father ; brands the harlot 
▁ xxmaj even here between the chaste unsmirched brows 
▁ xxmaj of my true mother . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj what is the cause , xxmaj laertes , 
▁ xxmaj that thy rebellion looks so giantlike ? 
▁ xxmaj let him go , xxmaj gertrude . xxmaj do not fear our person . 
▁ xxmaj there 's such divinity doth hedge a king 
▁ xxmaj that treason can but peep to what it would , 
▁ xxmaj acts little of his will . xxmaj tell me , xxmaj laertes , 
▁ xxmaj why thou art thus incens'd . xxmaj let him go , xxmaj gertrude . 
▁ xxmaj speak , man . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj where is my father ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj dead . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj but not by him ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj let him demand his fill . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj how came he dead ? xxmaj i 'll not be juggled with : 
▁ xxmaj to hell , allegiance ! vows , to the blackest devil 
▁ xxmaj conscience and grace , to the profoundest pit ! 
▁ i dare damnation . xxmaj to this point i stand , 
▁ xxmaj that both the world , i give to negligence , 
▁ xxmaj let come what comes ; only xxmaj i 'll be reveng'd 
▁ xxmaj most throughly for my father . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj who shall stay you ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj my will , not all the world ! 
▁ xxmaj and for my means , xxmaj i 'll husband them so well 
▁ xxmaj they shall go far with little . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj good xxmaj laertes , 
▁ xxmaj if you desire to know the certainty 
▁ xxmaj of your dear father 's death , is't writ in xxmaj your revenge 
▁ xxmaj that swoopstake you will draw both friend and foe , 
▁ xxmaj winner and loser ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj none but his enemies . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj will you know them then ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj to his good friends thus wide xxmaj i 'll ope my arms 
▁ xxmaj and , like the kind life - rend'ring pelican , 
▁ xxmaj repast them with my blood . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj why , now xxmaj you speak 
▁ xxmaj like a good child and a true gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj that i am guiltless of your father 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and am most sensibly in grief for it , 
▁ xxmaj it shall as level to your judgment pierce 
▁ xxmaj as day does to your eye . 
▁ a noise within : ' let her come in . ' 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj how now ? xxmaj what noise is that ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ophelia . 

▁ o heat , dry up my brains ! xxmaj tears seven times salt 
▁ xxmaj burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye ! 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , thy madness shall be paid by weight 
▁ xxmaj till our scale turn the beam . o rose of xxmaj may ! 
▁ xxmaj dear maid , kind sister , sweet xxmaj ophelia ! 
▁ o heavens ! is't possible a young maid 's wits 
▁ xxmaj should be as mortal as an old man 's life ? 
▁ xxmaj nature is fine in love , and where ' tis fine , 
▁ xxmaj it sends some precious instance of itself 
▁ xxmaj after the thing it loves . 

▁ xxmaj oph . ( sings ) 
▁ xxmaj they bore him barefac'd on the bier 
▁ ( hey non nony , nony , hey nony ) 
▁ xxmaj and in his grave rain'd many a tear . 

▁ xxmaj fare you well , my dove ! 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj hadst thou thy wits , and didst persuade revenge , 
▁ xxmaj it could not move thus . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj you must sing ' a - down a - down , and you call him a - down - a. ' xxup o , 
▁ how the wheel becomes it ! xxmaj it is the false steward , that stole his 
▁ master 's daughter . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj this nothing 's more than matter . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj there 's rosemary , that 's for remembrance . xxmaj pray you , love , 
▁ remember . xxmaj and there is pansies , that 's for thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj laer . a document in madness ! xxmaj thoughts and remembrance fitted . 
▁ xxmaj oph . xxmaj there 's fennel for you , and columbines . xxmaj there 's rue for you , 
▁ and here 's some for me . xxmaj we may call it herb of grace o ' xxmaj sundays . 
▁ xxup o , you must wear your rue with a difference ! xxmaj there 's a daisy . i 
▁ would give you some violets , but they wither'd all when my father 
▁ died . xxmaj they say he made a good end . 

▁ [ sings ] xxmaj for bonny sweet xxmaj robin is all my joy . 

▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj thought and affliction , passion , hell itself , 
▁ xxmaj she turns to favour and to prettiness . 
▁ xxmaj oph . ( sings ) 
▁ xxmaj and will he not come again ? 
▁ xxmaj and will he not come again ? 
▁ xxmaj no , no , he is dead ; 
▁ xxmaj go to thy deathbed ; 
▁ xxmaj he never will come again . 

▁ xxmaj his beard was as white as snow , 
▁ xxmaj all flaxen was his poll . 
▁ xxmaj he is gone , he is gone , 
▁ xxmaj and we cast away moan . 
▁ xxmaj god ' a'mercy on his soul ! 

▁ xxmaj and of all xxmaj christian souls , i pray xxmaj god . xxmaj god b ' wi ' , you . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj do you see this , o xxmaj god ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj laertes , i must commune with your grief , 
▁ xxmaj or you deny me right . xxmaj go but apart , 
▁ xxmaj make choice of whom your wisest friends you will , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall hear and judge ' twixt you and me . 
▁ xxmaj if by direct or by collateral hand 
▁ xxmaj they find us touch'd , we will our kingdom give , 
▁ xxmaj our crown , our life , and all that we call ours , 
▁ xxmaj to you in satisfaction ; but if not , 
▁ xxmaj be you content to lend your patience to us , 
▁ xxmaj and we shall jointly labour with your soul 
▁ xxmaj to give it due content . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj let this be so . 
▁ xxmaj his means of death , his obscure funeral- 
▁ xxmaj no trophy , sword , nor hatchment o'er his bones , 
▁ xxmaj no noble rite nor formal ostentation,- 
▁ xxmaj cry to be heard , as ' twere from heaven to earth , 
▁ xxmaj that i must call't in question . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj so you shall ; 
▁ xxmaj and where th ' offence is let the great axe fall . 
▁ i pray you go with me . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj elsinore . xxmaj another room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj horatio with an xxmaj attendant . 

▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what are they that would speak with me ? 
▁ xxmaj servant . xxmaj seafaring men , sir . xxmaj they say they have letters for you . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj let them come in . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj attendant . ] 
▁ i do not know from what part of the world 
▁ i should be greeted , if not from xxmaj lord xxmaj hamlet . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj sailors . 

▁ xxmaj sailor . xxmaj god bless you , sir . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj let him bless thee too . 
▁ xxmaj sailor . ' a shall , sir , an't please him . xxmaj there 's a letter for you , 
▁ sir,- it comes from th ' ambassador that was bound for xxmaj england- if 
▁ your name be xxmaj horatio , as i am let to know it is . 
▁ xxmaj hor . ( reads the letter ) ' horatio , when thou shalt have overlook'd 
▁ this , give these fellows some means to the xxmaj king . xxmaj they have 
▁ letters for him . xxmaj ere we were two days old at sea , a pirate of 
▁ very warlike appointment gave us chase . xxmaj finding ourselves too 
▁ slow of sail , we put on a compelled valour , and in the grapple i 
▁ boarded them . xxmaj on the instant they got clear of our ship ; so i 
▁ alone became their prisoner . xxmaj they have dealt with me like thieves 
▁ of mercy ; but they knew what they did : i am to do a good turn for 
▁ them . xxmaj let the xxmaj king have the letters i have sent , and repair thou 
▁ to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death . i have words 
▁ to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb ; yet are they much too 
▁ light for the bore of the matter . xxmaj these good fellows will bring 
▁ thee where i am . xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern hold their course 
▁ for xxmaj england . xxmaj of them i have much to tell thee . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ ' he that thou knowest thine , xxup hamlet . ' 

▁ xxmaj come , i will give you way for these your letters , 
▁ xxmaj and do't the speedier that you may direct me 
▁ xxmaj to him from whom you brought them . xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj elsinore . xxmaj another room in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj king and xxmaj laertes . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj now must your conscience my acquittance seal , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj you must put me in your heart for friend , 
▁ xxmaj sith you have heard , and with a knowing ear , 
▁ xxmaj that he which hath your noble father slain 
▁ xxmaj pursued my life . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj it well appears . xxmaj but tell me 
▁ xxmaj why you proceeded not against these feats 
▁ xxmaj so crimeful and so capital in nature , 
▁ xxmaj as by your safety , wisdom , all things else , 
▁ xxmaj you mainly were stirr'd up . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxup o , for two special reasons , 
▁ xxmaj which may to you , perhaps , seein much unsinew'd , 
▁ xxmaj but yet to me they are strong . xxmaj the xxmaj queen his mother 
▁ xxmaj lives almost by his looks ; and for myself,- 
▁ xxmaj my virtue or my plague , be it either which,- 
▁ xxmaj she 's so conjunctive to my life and soul 
▁ xxmaj that , as the star moves not but in his sphere , 
▁ i could not but by her . xxmaj the other motive 
▁ xxmaj why to a public count i might not go 
▁ xxmaj is the great love the general gender bear him , 
▁ xxmaj who , dipping all his faults in their affection , 
▁ xxmaj would , like the spring that turneth wood to stone , 
▁ xxmaj convert his gives to graces ; so that my arrows , 
▁ xxmaj too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind , 
▁ xxmaj would have reverted to my bow again , 
▁ xxmaj and not where i had aim'd them . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj and so have i a noble father lost ; 
▁ a sister driven into desp'rate terms , 
▁ xxmaj whose worth , if praises may go back again , 
▁ xxmaj stood challenger on mount of all the age 
▁ xxmaj for her perfections . xxmaj but my revenge will come . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj break not your sleeps for that . xxmaj you must not think 
▁ xxmaj that we are made of stuff so flat and dull 
▁ xxmaj that we can let our beard be shook with danger , 
▁ xxmaj and think it pastime . xxmaj you shortly shall hear more . 
▁ i lov'd your father , and we love ourself , 
▁ xxmaj and that , i hope , will teach you to imagine- 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger with letters . 

▁ xxmaj how now ? xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj letters , my lord , from xxmaj hamlet : 
▁ xxmaj this to your xxmaj majesty ; this to the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj from xxmaj hamlet ? xxmaj who brought them ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj sailors , my lord , they say ; i saw them not . 
▁ xxmaj they were given me by xxmaj claudio ; he receiv'd them 
▁ xxmaj of him that brought them . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj laertes , you shall hear them . 
▁ xxmaj leave us . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj messenger . 
▁ [ reads]'high and mighty,-you shall know i am set naked on your 
▁ kingdom . xxmaj to - morrow shall i beg leave to see your kingly eyes ; 
▁ when i shall ( first asking your pardon thereunto ) recount the 
▁ occasion of my sudden and more strange return . 
▁ ' hamlet . ' 
▁ xxmaj what should this mean ? xxmaj are all the rest come back ? 
▁ xxmaj or is it some abuse , and no such thing ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj know you the hand ? 
▁ xxmaj king . ' tis xxmaj hamlet 's character . ' naked ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and in a postscript here , he says ' alone . ' 
▁ xxmaj can you advise me ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . i am lost in it , my lord . xxmaj but let him come ! 
▁ xxmaj it warms the very sickness in my heart 
▁ xxmaj that i shall live and tell him to his teeth , 
▁ ' thus didest thou . ' 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj if it be so , xxmaj laertes 
▁ ( as how should it be so ? how otherwise ? ) , 
▁ xxmaj will you be rul'd by me ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj ay my lord , 
▁ xxmaj so you will not o'errule me to a peace . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj to thine own peace . xxmaj if he be now return'd 
▁ xxmaj as checking at his voyage , and that he means 
▁ xxmaj no more to undertake it , i will work him 
▁ xxmaj to exploit now ripe in my device , 
▁ xxmaj under the which he shall not choose but fall ; 
▁ xxmaj and for his death no wind 
▁ xxmaj but even his mother shall uncharge the practice 
▁ xxmaj and call it accident . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj my lord , i will be rul'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the rather , if you could devise it so 
▁ xxmaj that i might be the organ . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj it falls right . 
▁ xxmaj you have been talk'd of since your travel much , 
▁ xxmaj and that in xxmaj hamlet 's hearing , for a quality 
▁ xxmaj wherein they say you shine , xxmaj your sun of parts 
▁ xxmaj did not together pluck such envy from him 
▁ xxmaj as did that one ; and that , in my regard , 
▁ xxmaj of the unworthiest siege . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj what part is that , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj king . a very riband in the cap of youth- 
▁ xxmaj yet needfull too ; for youth no less becomes 
▁ xxmaj the light and careless livery that it wears 
▁ xxmaj thin settled age his sables and his weeds , 
▁ xxmaj importing health and graveness . xxmaj two months since 
▁ xxmaj here was a gentleman of xxmaj normandy . 
▁ i have seen myself , and serv'd against , the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj and they can well on horseback ; but this gallant 
▁ xxmaj had witchcraft in't . xxmaj he grew unto his seat , 
▁ xxmaj and to such wondrous doing brought his horse 
▁ xxmaj as had he been incorps'd and demi - natur'd 
▁ xxmaj with the brave beast . xxmaj so far he topp'd my thought 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , in forgery of shapes and tricks , 
▁ xxmaj come short of what he did . 
▁ xxmaj laer . a xxmaj norman was't ? 
▁ xxmaj king . a xxmaj norman . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj upon my life , xxmaj lamound . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj the very same . 
▁ xxmaj laer . i know him well . xxmaj he is the broach indeed 
▁ xxmaj and gem of all the nation . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj he made confession of you ; 
▁ xxmaj and gave you such a masterly report 
▁ xxmaj for art and exercise in your defence , 
▁ xxmaj and for your rapier most especially , 
▁ xxmaj that he cried out ' twould be a sight indeed 
▁ xxmaj if one could match you . xxmaj the scrimers of their nation 
▁ xxmaj he swore had neither motion , guard , nor eye , 
▁ xxmaj if you oppos'd them . xxmaj sir , this report of his 
▁ xxmaj did xxmaj hamlet so envenom with his envy 
▁ xxmaj that he could nothing do but wish and beg 
▁ xxmaj your sudden coming o'er to play with you . 
▁ xxmaj now , out of this- 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj what out of this , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj laertes , was your father dear to you ? 
▁ xxmaj or are you like the painting of a sorrow , 
▁ a face without a heart , ' 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj why ask you this ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj not that i think you did not love your father ; 
▁ xxmaj but that i know love is begun by time , 
▁ xxmaj and that i see , in passages of proof , 
▁ xxmaj time qualifies the spark and fire of it . 
▁ xxmaj there lives within the very flame of love 
▁ a kind of wick or snuff that will abate it ; 
▁ xxmaj and nothing is at a like goodness still ; 
▁ xxmaj for goodness , growing to a plurisy , 
▁ xxmaj dies in his own too - much . xxmaj that we would do , 
▁ xxmaj we should do when we would ; for this ' would ' changes , 
▁ xxmaj and hath abatements and delays as many 
▁ xxmaj as there are tongues , are hands , are accidents ; 
▁ xxmaj and then this ' should ' is like a spendthrift sigh , 
▁ xxmaj that hurts by easing . xxmaj but to the quick o ' th ' ulcer ! 
▁ xxmaj hamlet comes back . xxmaj what would you undertake 
▁ xxmaj to show yourself your father 's son in deed 
▁ xxmaj more than in words ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj to cut his throat i ' th ' church ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj no place indeed should murther sanctuarize ; 
▁ xxmaj revenge should have no bounds . xxmaj but , good xxmaj laertes , 
▁ xxmaj will you do this ? xxmaj keep close within your chamber . 
▁ xxmaj will return'd shall know you are come home . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll put on those shall praise your excellence 
▁ xxmaj and set a double varnish on the fame 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj frenchman gave you ; bring you in fine together 
▁ xxmaj and wager on your heads . xxmaj he , being remiss , 
▁ xxmaj most generous , and free from all contriving , 
▁ xxmaj will not peruse the foils ; so that with ease , 
▁ xxmaj or with a little shuffling , you may choose 
▁ a sword unbated , and , in a pass of practice , 
▁ xxmaj requite him for your father . 
▁ xxmaj laer . i will do't ! 
▁ xxmaj and for that purpose xxmaj i 'll anoint my sword . 
▁ i bought an unction of a mountebank , 
▁ xxmaj so mortal that , but dip a knife in it , 
▁ xxmaj where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare , 
▁ xxmaj collected from all simples that have virtue 
▁ xxmaj under the moon , can save the thing from death 
▁ xxmaj this is but scratch'd withal . xxmaj i 'll touch my point 
▁ xxmaj with this contagion , that , if i gall him slightly , 
▁ xxmaj it may be death . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj let 's further think of this , 
▁ xxmaj weigh what convenience both of time and means 
▁ xxmaj may fit us to our shape . xxmaj if this should fall , 
▁ xxmaj and that our drift look through our bad performance . 
▁ ' twere better not assay'd . xxmaj therefore this project 
▁ xxmaj should have a back or second , that might hold 
▁ xxmaj if this did blast in proof . xxmaj soft ! let me see . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings- 
▁ i ha't ! 
▁ xxmaj when in your motion you are hot and dry- 
▁ xxmaj as make your bouts more violent to that end- 
▁ xxmaj and that he calls for drink , xxmaj i 'll have prepar'd him 
▁ a chalice for the nonce ; whereon but sipping , 
▁ xxmaj if he by chance escape your venom'd stuck , 
▁ xxmaj our purpose may hold there.- xxmaj but stay , what noise , 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj queen . 

▁ xxmaj how now , sweet queen ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj one woe doth tread upon another 's heel , 
▁ xxmaj so fast they follow . xxmaj your sister 's drown'd , xxmaj laertes . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj drown'd ! xxup o , where ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj there is a willow grows aslant a brook , 
▁ xxmaj that shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream . 
▁ xxmaj there with fantastic garlands did she come 
▁ xxmaj of crowflowers , nettles , daisies , and long purples , 
▁ xxmaj that liberal shepherds give a grosser name , 
▁ xxmaj but our cold maids do dead men 's fingers call them . 
▁ xxmaj there on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds 
▁ xxmaj clamb'ring to hang , an envious sliver broke , 
▁ xxmaj when down her weedy trophies and herself 
▁ xxmaj fell in the weeping brook . xxmaj her clothes spread wide 
▁ xxmaj and , mermaid - like , awhile they bore her up ; 
▁ xxmaj which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes , 
▁ xxmaj as one incapable of her own distress , 
▁ xxmaj or like a creature native and indued 
▁ xxmaj unto that element ; but long it could not be 
▁ xxmaj till that her garments , heavy with their drink , 
▁ xxmaj pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay 
▁ xxmaj to muddy death . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj alas , then she is drown'd ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj drown'd , drown'd . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj too much of water hast thou , poor xxmaj ophelia , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore i forbid my tears ; but yet 
▁ xxmaj it is our trick ; nature her custom holds , 
▁ xxmaj let shame say what it will . xxmaj when these are gone , 
▁ xxmaj the woman will be out . xxmaj adieu , my lord . 
▁ i have a speech of fire , that fain would blaze 
▁ xxmaj but that this folly douts it . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj let 's follow , xxmaj gertrude . 
▁ xxmaj how much i had to do to calm his rage i 
▁ xxmaj now fear i this will give it start again ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore let 's follow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj elsinore . a churchyard . 

 xxmaj enter two xxmaj clowns , [ with spades and pickaxes ] . 

▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj is she to be buried in xxmaj christian burial when she wilfully 
▁ seeks her own salvation ? 
▁ xxmaj other . i tell thee she is ; therefore make her grave straight . 
▁ xxmaj the crowner hath sate on her , and finds it xxmaj christian burial . 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj how can that be , unless she drown'd herself in her own 
▁ defence ? 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj why , ' tis found so . 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj it must be se offendendo ; it can not be else . xxmaj for here lies 
▁ the point : if i drown myself wittingly , it argues an act ; and an 
▁ act hath three branches - it is to act , to do , and to perform ; 
▁ argal , she drown'd herself wittingly . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj nay , but hear you , xxmaj goodman xxmaj delver ! 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj give me leave . xxmaj here lies the water ; good . xxmaj here stands the 
▁ man ; good . xxmaj if the man go to this water and drown himself , it is , 
▁ will he nill he , he goes- mark you that . xxmaj but if the water come to 
▁ him and drown him , he drowns not himself . xxmaj argal , he that is not 
▁ guilty of his own death shortens not his own life . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj but is this law ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj ay , marry , is't- crowner 's quest law . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj will you ha ' the truth an't ? xxmaj if this had not been a 
▁ gentlewoman , she should have been buried out o ' xxmaj christian burial . 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj why , there thou say'st ! xxmaj and the more pity that great folk 
▁ should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves 
▁ more than their even - christen . xxmaj come , my spade ! xxmaj there is no 
▁ ancient gentlemen but gard'ners , ditchers , and grave - makers . xxmaj they 
▁ hold up xxmaj adam 's profession . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj was he a gentleman ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . ' a was the first that ever bore arms . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj why , he had none . 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj what , art a heathen ? xxmaj how dost thou understand the xxmaj scripture ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj scripture says xxmaj adam digg'd . xxmaj could he dig without arms ? xxmaj i 'll 
▁ put another question to thee . xxmaj if thou answerest me not to the 
▁ purpose , confess thyself- 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj go to ! 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj what is he that builds stronger than either the mason , the 
▁ shipwright , or the carpenter ? 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj the gallows - maker ; for that frame outlives a thousand 
▁ tenants . 
▁ xxmaj clown . i like thy wit well , in good faith . xxmaj the gallows does well . 
▁ xxmaj but how does it well ? xxmaj it does well to those that do ill . xxmaj now , 
▁ thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the 
▁ church . xxmaj argal , the gallows may do well to thee . xxmaj to't again , come ! 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj who builds stronger than a mason , a shipwright , or a 
▁ carpenter ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj ay , tell me that , and unyoke . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj marry , now i can tell ! 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj to't . 
▁ xxmaj other . xxmaj mass , i can not tell . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet and xxmaj horatio afar off . 

▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj cudgel thy brains no more about it , for your dull ass will 
▁ not mend his pace with beating ; and when you are ask'd this 
▁ question next , say ' a grave - maker . ' xxmaj the houses he makes lasts 
▁ till doomsday . xxmaj go , get thee to xxmaj yaughan ; fetch me a stoup of 
▁ liquor . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj second xxmaj clown . ] 

▁ [ clown digs and ] sings . 

▁ xxmaj in youth when i did love , did love , 
▁ xxmaj methought it was very sweet ; 
▁ xxmaj to contract- xxup o- the time for- a- my behove , 
▁ xxup o , methought there- a- was nothing- a- meet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj has this fellow no feeling of his business , that he sings at 
▁ grave - making ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj custom hath made it in him a xxmaj property of easiness . 
▁ xxmaj ham . ' tis e'en so . xxmaj the hand of little employment hath the daintier 
▁ sense . 
▁ xxmaj clown . ( sings ) 
▁ xxmaj but age with his stealing steps 
▁ xxmaj hath clawed me in his clutch , 
▁ xxmaj and hath shipped me intil the land , 
▁ xxmaj as if i had never been such . 
▁ [ throws up a skull . ] 
▁
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that skull had a tongue in it , and could sing once . xxmaj how the 
▁ knave jowls it to the ground , as if ' twere xxmaj cain 's jawbone , that 
▁ did the first murther ! xxmaj this might be the pate of a xxmaj politician , 
▁ which this ass now o'erreaches ; one that would circumvent xxmaj god , 
▁ might it not ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj it might , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj or of a courtier , which could say ' good morrow , sweet lord ! 
▁ xxmaj how dost thou , good lord ? ' xxmaj this might be my xxmaj lord xxmaj such - a - one , that 
▁ prais'd my xxmaj lord xxmaj such - a - one 's horse when he meant to beg it- might 
▁ it not ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , e'en so ! and now my xxmaj lady xxmaj worm 's , chapless , and knock'd 
▁ about the mazzard with a sexton 's spade . xxmaj here 's fine revolution , 
▁ and we had the trick to see't . xxmaj did these bones cost no more the 
▁ breeding but to play at loggets with 'em ? xxmaj mine ache to think 
▁ on't . 
▁ xxmaj clown . ( sings ) 
▁ a pickaxe and a spade , a spade , 
▁ xxmaj for and a shrouding sheet ; 
▁ xxup o , a xxmaj pit of clay for to be made 
▁ xxmaj for such a guest is meet . 
▁ xxmaj throws up [ another skull ] . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj there 's another . xxmaj why may not that be the skull of a lawyer ? 
▁ xxmaj where be his quiddits now , his quillets , his cases , his tenures , 
▁ and his tricks ? xxmaj why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock 
▁ him about the sconce with a dirty shovel , and will not tell him 
▁ of his action of battery ? xxmaj hum ! xxmaj this fellow might be in 's time a 
▁ great buyer of land , with his statutes , his recognizances , his 
▁ fines , his double vouchers , his recoveries . xxmaj is this the fine of 
▁ his fines , and the recovery of his recoveries , to have his fine 
▁ pate full of fine dirt ? xxmaj will his vouchers vouch him no more of 
▁ his purchases , and double ones too , than the length and breadth 
▁ of a pair of indentures ? xxmaj the very conveyances of his lands will 
▁ scarcely lie in this box ; and must th ' inheritor himself have no 
▁ more , ha ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj not a jot more , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj is not parchment made of sheepskins ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj ay , my lord , xxmaj and of calveskins too . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj they are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that . i 
▁ will speak to this fellow . xxmaj whose grave 's this , sirrah ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj mine , sir . 

▁ [ sings ] xxup o , a pit of clay for to be made 
▁ xxmaj for such a guest is meet . 

▁ xxmaj ham . i think it be thine indeed , for thou liest in't . 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj you lie out on't , sir , and therefore ' tis not yours . 
▁ xxmaj for my part , i do not lie in't , yet it is mine . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj thou dost lie in't , to be in't and say it is thine . ' tis for 
▁ the dead , not for the quick ; therefore thou liest . 
▁ xxmaj clown . ' tis a quick lie , sir ; ' twill away again from me to you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what man dost thou dig it for ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj for no man , sir . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what woman then ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj for none neither . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj who is to be buried in't ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj one that was a woman , sir ; but , rest her soul , she 's dead . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how absolute the knave is ! xxmaj we must speak by the card , or 
▁ equivocation will undo us . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , xxmaj horatio , this three years 
▁ i have taken note of it , the age is grown so picked that the toe 
▁ of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls 
▁ his kibe.- xxmaj how long hast thou been a grave - maker ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj of all the days i ' th ' year , i came to't that day that our 
▁ last king xxmaj hamlet overcame xxmaj fortinbras . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how long is that since ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj can not you tell that ? xxmaj every fool can tell that . xxmaj it was the 
▁ very day that young xxmaj hamlet was born- he that is mad , and sent 
▁ into xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj ay , marry , why was be sent into xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj why , because ' a was mad . ' a shall recover his wits there ; 
▁ or , if ' a do not , ' tis no great matter there . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . ' twill not he seen in him there . xxmaj there the men are as mad as 
▁ he . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how came he mad ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj very strangely , they say . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how strangely ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj faith , e'en with losing his wits . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj upon what ground ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj why , here in xxmaj denmark . i have been sexton here , man and boy 
▁ thirty years . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how long will a man lie i ' th ' earth ere he rot ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj faith , if ' a be not rotten before ' a die ( as we have many 
▁ pocky corses now - a - days that will scarce hold the laying in , i 
▁ will last you some eight year or nine year . a tanner will last 
▁ you nine year . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why he more than another ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj why , sir , his hide is so tann'd with his trade that ' a will 
▁ keep out water a great while ; and your water is a sore decayer of 
▁ your whoreson dead body . xxmaj here 's a skull now . xxmaj this skull hath lien 
▁ you i ' th ' earth three - and - twenty years . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj whose was it ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . a whoreson , mad fellow 's it was . xxmaj whose do you think it was ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay , i know not . 
▁ xxmaj clown . a pestilence on him for a mad rogue ! ' a pour'd a flagon of 
▁ xxmaj rhenish on my head once . xxmaj this same skull , sir , was xxmaj yorick 's 
▁ skull , the xxmaj king 's jester . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj this ? 
▁ xxmaj clown . xxmaj e'en that . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj let me see . [ takes the skull . ] xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj yorick ! i knew him , 
▁ xxmaj horatio . a fellow of infinite jest , of most excellent fancy . xxmaj he 
▁ hath borne me on his back a thousand tunes . xxmaj and now how abhorred 
▁ in my imagination it is ! xxmaj my gorge rises at it . xxmaj here hung those 
▁ lips that i have kiss'd i know not how oft . xxmaj where be your gibes 
▁ now ? your gambols ? your songs ? your flashes of merriment that 
▁ were wo nt to set the table on a roar ? xxmaj not one now , to mock your 
▁ own grinning ? xxmaj quite chap- fall'n ? xxmaj now get you to my lady 's 
▁ chamber , and tell her , let her paint an inch thick , to this 
▁ favour she must come . xxmaj make her laugh at that . xxmaj prithee , xxmaj horatio , 
▁ tell me one thing . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what 's that , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj dost thou think xxmaj alexander look'd o ' this fashion i ' th ' earth ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj e'en so . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj and smelt so ? xxmaj pah ! 
▁ [ puts down the skull . ] 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj e'en so , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj to what base uses we may return , xxmaj horatio ! xxmaj why may not 
▁ imagination trace the noble dust of xxmaj alexander till he find it 
▁ stopping a bunghole ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . ' twere to consider too curiously , to consider so . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , faith , not a jot ; but to follow him thither with modesty 
▁ enough , and likelihood to lead it ; as thus : xxmaj alexander died , 
▁ xxmaj alexander was buried , xxmaj alexander returneth into dust ; the dust is 
▁ earth ; of earth we make loam ; and why of that loam ( whereto he 
▁ was converted ) might they not stop a beer barrel ? 
▁ xxmaj imperious xxmaj caesar , dead and turn'd to clay , 
▁ xxmaj might stop a hole to keep the wind away . 
▁ xxup o , that that earth which kept the world in awe 
▁ xxmaj should patch a wall t ' expel the winter 's flaw ! 
▁ xxmaj but soft ! but soft ! aside ! xxmaj here comes the xxmaj king- 

▁ xxmaj enter [ priests with ] a coffin [ in funeral procession ] , xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj queen , xxmaj laertes , with xxmaj lords attendant . ] 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen , the courtiers . xxmaj who is this they follow ? 
▁ xxmaj and with such maimed rites ? xxmaj this doth betoken 
▁ xxmaj the corse they follow did with desp'rate hand 
▁ xxmaj fordo it own life . ' twas of some estate . 
▁ xxmaj couch we awhile , and mark . 
▁ [ retires with xxmaj horatio . ] 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj what ceremony else ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that is xxmaj laertes , 
▁ a very noble youth . xxmaj mark . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj what ceremony else ? 
▁ xxmaj priest . xxmaj her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd 
▁ xxmaj as we have warranty . xxmaj her death was doubtful ; 
▁ xxmaj and , but that great command o'ersways the order , 
▁ xxmaj she should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd 
▁ xxmaj till the last trumpet . xxmaj for charitable prayers , 
▁ xxmaj shards , flints , and pebbles should be thrown on her . 
▁ xxmaj yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants , 
▁ xxmaj her maiden strewments , and the bringing home 
▁ xxmaj of bell and burial . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj must there no more be done ? 
▁ xxmaj priest . xxmaj no more be done . 
▁ xxmaj we should profane the service of the dead 
▁ xxmaj to sing a requiem and such rest to her 
▁ xxmaj as to peace - parted souls . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj lay her i ' th ' earth ; 
▁ xxmaj and from her fair and unpolluted flesh 
▁ xxmaj may violets spring ! i tell thee , churlish priest , 
▁ a minist'ring angel shall my sister be 
▁ xxmaj when thou liest howling . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what , the fair xxmaj ophelia ? 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj sweets to the sweet ! xxmaj farewell . 
▁ [ scatters flowers . ] 
▁ i hop'd thou shouldst have been my xxmaj hamlet 's wife ; 
▁ i thought thy bride - bed to have deck'd , sweet maid , 
▁ xxmaj and not have strew'd thy grave . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxup o , treble woe 
▁ xxmaj fall ten times treble on that cursed head 
▁ xxmaj whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense 
▁ xxmaj depriv'd thee of ! xxmaj hold off the earth awhile , 
▁ xxmaj till i have caught her once more in mine arms . 
▁ xxmaj leaps in the grave . 
▁ xxmaj now pile your dust upon the quick and dead 
▁ xxmaj till of this flat a mountain you have made 
▁ xxup t ' o'ertop old xxmaj pelion or the skyish head 
▁ xxmaj of blue xxmaj olympus . 
▁ xxmaj ham . [ comes forward ] xxmaj what is he whose grief 
▁ xxmaj bears such an emphasis ? whose phrase of sorrow 
▁ xxmaj conjures the wand'ring stars , and makes them stand 
▁ xxmaj like wonder - wounded hearers ? xxmaj this is xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj hamlet the xxmaj dane . [ leaps in after xxmaj laertes . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj the devil take thy soul ! 
▁ [ grapples with him ] . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj thou pray'st not well . 
▁ i prithee take thy fingers from my throat ; 
▁ xxmaj for , though i am not splenitive and rash , 
▁ xxmaj yet have i in me something dangerous , 
▁ xxmaj which let thy wisdom fear . xxmaj hold off thy hand ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj pluck thein asunder . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj hamlet , xxmaj hamlet ! 
▁ xxmaj all . xxmaj gentlemen ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj good my lord , be quiet . 
▁ [ the xxmaj attendants part them , and they come out of the 
▁ grave . ] 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , i will fight with him upon this theme 
▁ xxmaj until my eyelids will no longer wag . 
▁ xxmaj queen . o my son , what theme ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . i lov'd xxmaj ophelia . xxmaj forty thousand brothers 
▁ xxmaj could not ( with all their quantity of love ) 
▁ xxmaj make up my sum . xxmaj what wilt thou do for her ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxup o , he is mad , xxmaj laertes . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj for love of xxmaj god , forbear him ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . ' swounds , show me what thou't do . 
▁ xxmaj woo't weep ? woo't fight ? woo't fast ? woo't tear thyself ? 
▁ xxmaj woo't drink up esill ? eat a crocodile ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do't . xxmaj dost thou come here to whine ? 
▁ xxmaj to outface me with leaping in her grave ? 
▁ xxmaj be buried quick with her , and so will xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj and if thou prate of mountains , let them throw 
▁ xxmaj millions of acres on us , till our ground , 
▁ xxmaj singeing his pate against the burning zone , 
▁ xxmaj make xxmaj ossa like a wart ! xxmaj nay , an thou'lt mouth , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll rant as well as thou . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj this is mere madness ; 
▁ xxmaj and thus a while the fit will work on him . 
▁ xxmaj anon , as patient as the female dove 
▁ xxmaj when that her golden couplets are disclos'd ,