xxbos xxmaj his silence will sit drooping . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj hear you , sir ! 
▁ xxmaj what is the reason that you use me thus ? 
▁ i lov'd you ever . xxmaj but it is no matter . 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj hercules himself do what he may , 
▁ xxmaj the cat will mew , and dog will have his day . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj king . i pray thee , good xxmaj horatio , wait upon him . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj horatio . 
▁ [ to xxmaj laertes ] xxmaj strengthen your patience in our last night 's speech . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll put the matter to the present push.- 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj gertrude , set some watch over your son.- 
▁ xxmaj this grave shall have a living monument . 
▁ xxmaj an hour of quiet shortly shall we see ; 
▁ xxmaj till then in patience our proceeding be . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj elsinore . a hall in the xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hamlet and xxmaj horatio . 

▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj so much for this , sir ; now shall you see the other . 
▁ xxmaj you do remember all the circumstance ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj remember it , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , in my heart there was a kind of fighting 
▁ xxmaj that would not let me sleep . xxmaj methought i lay 
▁ xxmaj worse than the mutinies in the bilboes . xxmaj rashly- 
▁ xxmaj and prais'd be rashness for it ; let us know , 
▁ xxmaj our indiscretion sometime serves us well 
▁ xxmaj when our deep plots do pall ; and that should learn us 
▁ xxmaj there 's a divinity that shapes our ends , 
▁ xxmaj rough - hew them how we will- 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj that is most certain . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj up from my cabin , 
▁ xxmaj my sea - gown scarf'd about me , in the dark 
▁ xxmaj grop'd i to find out them ; had my desire , 
▁ xxmaj finger'd their packet , and in fine withdrew 
▁ xxmaj to mine own room again ; making so bold 
▁ ( my fears forgetting manners ) to unseal 
▁ xxmaj their grand commission ; where i found , xxmaj horatio 
▁ ( o royal knavery ! ) , an exact command , 
▁ xxmaj larded with many several sorts of reasons , 
▁ xxmaj importing xxmaj denmark 's health , and xxmaj england 's too , 
▁ xxmaj with , hoo ! such bugs and goblins in my life- 
▁ xxmaj that , on the supervise , no leisure bated , 
▁ xxmaj no , not to stay the finding of the axe , 
▁ xxmaj my head should be struck off . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj here 's the commission ; read it at more leisure . 
▁ xxmaj but wilt thou bear me how i did proceed ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . i beseech you . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj being thus benetted round with villanies , 
▁ xxmaj or i could make a prologue to my brains , 
▁ xxmaj they had begun the play . i sat me down ; 
▁ xxmaj devis'd a new commission ; wrote it fair . 
▁ i once did hold it , as our statists do , 
▁ a baseness to write fair , and labour'd much 
▁ xxmaj how to forget that learning ; but , sir , now 
▁ xxmaj it did me yeoman 's service . xxmaj wilt thou know 
▁ xxmaj th ' effect of what i wrote ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj ay , good my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj an earnest conjuration from the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj england was his faithful tributary , 
▁ xxmaj as love between them like the palm might flourish , 
▁ xxmaj as peace should still her wheaten garland wear 
▁ xxmaj and stand a comma ' tween their amities , 
▁ xxmaj and many such - like as 's of great charge , 
▁ xxmaj that , on the view and knowing of these contents , 
▁ xxmaj without debatement further , more or less , 
▁ xxmaj he should the bearers put to sudden death , 
▁ xxmaj not shriving time allow'd . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj how was this seal'd ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , even in that was heaven ordinant . 
▁ i had my father 's signet in my purse , 
▁ which was the model of that xxmaj danish seal ; 
▁ xxmaj folded the writ up in the form of th ' other , 
▁ xxmaj subscrib'd it , gave't th ' impression , plac'd it safely , 
▁ xxmaj the changeling never known . xxmaj now , the next day 
▁ xxmaj was our sea - fight ; and what to this was sequent 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st already . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj so xxmaj guildenstern and xxmaj rosencrantz go to't . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj why , man , they did make love to this employment ! 
▁ xxmaj they are not near my conscience ; their defeat 
▁ xxmaj does by their own insinuation grow . 
▁ ' tis dangerous when the baser nature comes 
▁ xxmaj between the pass and fell incensed points 
▁ xxmaj of mighty opposites . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj why , what a king is this ! 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj does it not , thinks't thee , stand me now upon- 
▁ xxmaj he that hath kill'd my king , and whor'd my mother ; 
▁ xxmaj popp'd in between th ' election and my hopes ; 
▁ xxmaj thrown out his angle for my xxmaj proper life , 
▁ xxmaj and with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience 
▁ xxmaj to quit him with this arm ? xxmaj and is't not to be damn'd 
▁ xxmaj to let this canker of our nature come 
▁ xxmaj in further evil ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj it must be shortly known to him from xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj what is the issue of the business there . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it will be short ; the interim is mine , 
▁ xxmaj and a man 's life is no more than to say ' one . ' 
▁ xxmaj but i am very sorry , good xxmaj horatio , 
▁ xxmaj that to xxmaj laertes i forgot myself , 
▁ xxmaj for by the image of my cause i see 
▁ xxmaj the portraiture of his . xxmaj i 'll court his favours . 
▁ xxmaj but sure the bravery of his grief did put me 
▁ xxmaj into a tow'ring passion . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj peace ! xxmaj who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter young xxmaj osric , a courtier . 

▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj your lordship is right welcome back to xxmaj denmark . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i humbly thank you , sir . [ aside to xxmaj horatio ] xxmaj dost know this 
▁ waterfly ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . [ aside to xxmaj hamlet ] xxmaj no , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . [ aside to xxmaj horatio ] xxmaj thy state is the more gracious ; for ' tis a 
▁ vice to know him . xxmaj he hath much land , and fertile . xxmaj let a beast be 
▁ lord of beasts , and his crib shall stand at the king 's mess . ' tis 
▁ a chough ; but , as i say , spacious in the possession of dirt . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj sweet lord , if your lordship were at leisure , i should impart 
▁ a thing to you from his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i will receive it , sir , with all diligence of spirit . xxmaj put your 
▁ bonnet to his right use . ' tis for the head . 
▁ xxmaj osr . i thank your lordship , it is very hot . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , believe me , ' tis very cold ; the wind is northerly . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj it is indifferent cold , my lord , indeed . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj but yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj exceedingly , my lord ; it is very sultry , as ' twere- i can not 
▁ tell how . xxmaj but , my lord , his xxmaj majesty bade me signify to you that 
▁ he has laid a great wager on your head . xxmaj sir , this is the matter- 
▁ xxmaj ham . i beseech you remember . 
▁ [ hamlet moves him to put on his hat . ] 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj nay , good my lord ; for mine ease , in good faith . xxmaj sir , here is 
▁ newly come to court xxmaj laertes ; believe me , an absolute gentleman , 
▁ full of most excellent differences , of very soft society and 
▁ great showing . xxmaj indeed , to speak feelingly of him , he is the card 
▁ or calendar of gentry ; for you shall find in him the continent of 
▁ what part a gentleman would see . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , his definement suffers no perdition in you ; though , i 
▁ know , to divide him inventorially would dozy th ' arithmetic of 
▁ memory , and yet but yaw neither in respect of his quick sail . 
▁ xxmaj but , in the verity of extolment , i take him to be a soul of great 
▁ article , and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as , to make 
▁ true diction of him , his semblable is his mirror , and who else 
▁ would trace him , his umbrage , nothing more . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj your lordship speaks most infallibly of him . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the concernancy , sir ? xxmaj why do we wrap the gentleman in our more 
▁ rawer breath 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxmaj hor [ aside to xxmaj hamlet ] xxmaj is't not possible to understand in another 
▁ tongue ? xxmaj you will do't , sir , really . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what imports the nomination of this gentleman 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj of xxmaj laertes ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . [ aside ] xxmaj his purse is empty already . xxmaj all 's golden words are 
▁ spent . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj of him , sir . 
▁ xxmaj osr . i know you are not ignorant- 
▁ xxmaj ham . i would you did , sir ; yet , in faith , if you did , it would not 
▁ much approve me . xxmaj well , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj you are not ignorant of what excellence xxmaj laertes is- 
▁ xxmaj ham . i dare not confess that , lest i should compare with him in 
▁ excellence ; but to know a man well were to know himself . 
▁ xxmaj osr . i mean , sir , for his weapon ; but in the imputation laid on him 
▁ by them , in his meed he 's unfellowed . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what 's his weapon ? 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj rapier and dagger . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj that 's two of his weapons- but well . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj the xxmaj king , sir , hath wager'd with him six xxmaj barbary horses ; 
▁ against the which he has impon'd , as i take it , six xxmaj french 
▁ rapiers and poniards , with their assigns , as girdle , hangers , and 
▁ so . xxmaj three of the carriages , in faith , are very dear to fancy , 
▁ very responsive to the hilts , most delicate carriages , and of 
▁ very liberal conceit . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj what call you the carriages ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . [ aside to xxmaj hamlet ] i knew you must be edified by the margent 
▁ ere you had done . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj the carriages , sir , are the hangers . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could 
▁ carry cannon by our sides . i would it might be hangers till then . 
▁ xxmaj but on ! xxmaj six xxmaj barbary horses against six xxmaj french swords , their 
▁ assigns , and three liberal - conceited carriages : that 's the xxmaj french 
▁ bet against the xxmaj danish . xxmaj why is this all impon'd , as you call it ? 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj the xxmaj king , sir , hath laid that , in a dozen passes between 
▁ yourself and him , he shall not exceed you three hits ; he hath 
▁ laid on twelve for nine , and it would come to immediate trial 
▁ if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how if i answer no ? 
▁ xxmaj osr . i mean , my lord , the opposition of your person in trial . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj sir , i will walk here in the hall . xxmaj if it please his xxmaj majesty , 
▁ it is the breathing time of day with me . xxmaj let the foils be 
▁ brought , the gentleman willing , and the xxmaj king hold his purpose , 
▁ i will win for him if i can ; if not , i will gain nothing but my 
▁ shame and the odd hits . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj shall i redeliver you e'en so ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj to this effect , sir , after what flourish your nature will . 
▁ xxmaj osr . i commend my duty to your lordship . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj yours , yours . [ exit xxmaj osric . ] xxmaj he does well to commend it 
▁ himself ; there are no tongues else for 's turn . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj this lapwing runs away with the shell on his head . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj he did comply with his dug before he suck'd it . xxmaj thus has he , 
▁ and many more of the same bevy that i know the drossy age dotes 
▁ on , only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter- 
▁ a kind of yesty collection , which carries them through and 
▁ through the most fann'd and winnowed opinions ; and do but blow 
▁ them to their trial - the bubbles are out , 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj lord . 

▁ xxmaj lord . xxmaj my lord , his xxmaj majesty commended him to you by young xxmaj osric , who 
▁ brings back to him , that you attend him in the hall . xxmaj he sends to 
▁ know if your pleasure hold to play with xxmaj laertes , or that you will 
▁ take longer time . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i am constant to my purposes ; they follow the xxmaj king 's pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj if his fitness speaks , mine is ready ; now or whensoever , provided 
▁ i be so able as now . 
▁ xxmaj lord . xxmaj the xxmaj king and xxmaj queen and all are coming down . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj in happy time . 
▁ xxmaj lord . xxmaj the xxmaj queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to 
▁ xxmaj laertes before you fall to play . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj she well instructs me . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj lord . ] 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj you will lose this wager , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i do not think so . xxmaj since he went into xxmaj france i have been in 
▁ continual practice . i shall win at the odds . xxmaj but thou wouldst not 
▁ think how ill all 's here about my heart . xxmaj but it is no matter . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj nay , good my lord - 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj it is but foolery ; but it is such a kind of gaingiving as 
▁ would perhaps trouble a woman . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj if your mind dislike anything , obey it . i will forestall their 
▁ repair hither and say you are not fit . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj not a whit , we defy augury ; there 's a special providence in 
▁ the fall of a sparrow . xxmaj if it be now , ' tis not to come ' , if it be 
▁ not to come , it will be now ; if it be not now , yet it will come : 
▁ the readiness is all . xxmaj since no man knows aught of what he leaves , 
▁ what is't to leave betimes ? xxmaj let be . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj king , xxmaj queen , xxmaj laertes , xxmaj osric , and xxmaj lords , with other 
▁ xxmaj attendants with foils and gauntlets . 
▁ a table and flagons of wine on it . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj come , xxmaj hamlet , come , and take this hand from me . 
▁ [ the xxmaj king puts xxmaj laertes ' hand into xxmaj hamlet 's . ] 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj give me your pardon , sir . i have done you wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj but pardon't , as you are a gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj this presence knows , 
▁ xxmaj and you must needs have heard , how i am punish'd 
▁ xxmaj with sore distraction . xxmaj what i have done 
▁ xxmaj that might your nature , honour , and exception 
▁ xxmaj roughly awake , i here proclaim was madness . 
▁ xxmaj was't xxmaj hamlet wrong'd xxmaj laertes ? xxmaj never xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj hamlet from himself be taken away , 
▁ xxmaj and when he 's not himself does wrong xxmaj laertes , 
▁ xxmaj then xxmaj hamlet does it not , xxmaj hamlet denies it . 
▁ xxmaj who does it , then ? xxmaj his madness . xxmaj if't be so , 
▁ xxmaj hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd ; 
▁ xxmaj his madness is poor xxmaj hamlet 's enemy . 
▁ xxmaj sir , in this audience , 
▁ xxmaj let my disclaiming from a purpos'd evil 
▁ xxmaj free me so far in your most generous thoughts 
▁ xxmaj that i have shot my arrow o'er the house 
▁ xxmaj and hurt my brother . 
▁ xxmaj laer . i am satisfied in nature , 
▁ xxmaj whose motive in this case should stir me most 
▁ xxmaj to my revenge . xxmaj but in my terms of honour 
▁ i stand aloof , and will no reconcilement 
▁ xxmaj till by some elder masters of known honour 
▁ i have a voice and precedent of peace 
▁ xxmaj to keep my name ungor'd . xxmaj but till that time 
▁ i do receive your offer'd love like love , 
▁ xxmaj and will not wrong it . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i embrace it freely , 
▁ xxmaj and will this brother 's wager frankly play . 
▁ xxmaj give us the foils . xxmaj come on . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj come , one for me . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj i 'll be your foil , xxmaj laertes . xxmaj in mine ignorance 
▁ xxmaj your skill shall , like a star i ' th ' darkest night , 
▁ xxmaj stick fiery off indeed . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj you mock me , sir . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj no , by this bad . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj give them the foils , young xxmaj osric . xxmaj cousin xxmaj hamlet , 
▁ xxmaj you know the wager ? 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj very well , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace has laid the odds o ' th ' weaker side . 
▁ xxmaj king . i do not fear it , i have seen you both ; 
▁ xxmaj but since he is better'd , we have therefore odds . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj this is too heavy ; let me see another . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj this likes me well . xxmaj these foils have all a length ? 
▁ xxmaj prepare to play . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj set me the stoups of wine upon that table . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj hamlet give the first or second hit , 
▁ xxmaj or quit in answer of the third exchange , 
▁ xxmaj let all the battlements their ordnance fire ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king shall drink to xxmaj hamlet 's better breath , 
▁ xxmaj and in the cup an union shall he throw 
▁ xxmaj richer than that which four successive kings 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj denmark 's crown have worn . xxmaj give me the cups ; 
▁ xxmaj and let the kettle to the trumpet speak , 
▁ xxmaj the trumpet to the cannoneer without , 
▁ xxmaj the cannons to the heavens , the heaven to earth , 
▁ ' now the xxmaj king drinks to xxmaj hamlet . ' xxmaj come , begin . 
▁ xxmaj and you the judges , bear a wary eye . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj come on , sir . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj come , my lord . xxmaj they play . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj one . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj judgment ! 
▁ xxmaj osr . a hit , a very palpable hit . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj well , again ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj stay , give me drink . xxmaj hamlet , this pearl is thine ; 
▁ xxmaj here 's to thy health . 
▁ [ drum ; trumpets sound ; a piece goes off [ within ] . 
▁ xxmaj give him the cup . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj i 'll play this bout first ; set it by awhile . 
▁ xxmaj come . ( they play . ) xxmaj another hit . xxmaj what say you ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . a touch , a touch ; i do confess't . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj our son shall win . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj he 's fat , and scant of breath . 
▁ xxmaj here , xxmaj hamlet , take my napkin , rub thy brows . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen carouses to thy fortune , xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj good madam ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj gertrude , do not drink . 
▁ xxmaj queen . i will , my lord ; i pray you pardon me . xxmaj drinks . 
▁ xxmaj king . [ aside ] xxmaj it is the poison'd cup ; it is too late . 
▁ xxmaj ham . i dare not drink yet , madam ; by - and - by . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj come , let me wipe thy face . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj my lord , xxmaj i 'll hit him now . 
▁ xxmaj king . i do not think't . 
▁ xxmaj laer . [ aside ] xxmaj and yet it is almost against my conscience . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj come for the third , xxmaj laertes ! xxmaj you but dally . 
▁ pray xxmaj you xxmaj pass with your best violence ; 
▁ i am afeard xxmaj you make a wanton of me . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj say you so ? xxmaj come on . xxmaj play . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj nothing neither way . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj have at you now ! 
▁ [ laertes wounds xxmaj hamlet ; then ] in scuffling , they 
▁ change rapiers , [ and xxmaj hamlet wounds xxmaj laertes ] . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj part them ! xxmaj they are incens'd . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj nay come ! again ! xxmaj the xxmaj queen falls . 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj look to the xxmaj queen there , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj they bleed on both sides . xxmaj how is it , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj how is't , xxmaj laertes ? 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj why , as a woodcock to mine own springe , xxmaj osric . 
▁ i am justly kill'd with mine own treachery . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj how does the xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj she sounds to see them bleed . 
▁ xxmaj queen . xxmaj no , no ! the drink , the drink ! o my dear xxmaj hamlet ! 
▁ xxmaj the drink , the drink ! i am poison'd . [ dies . ] 
▁ xxmaj ham . o villany ! xxmaj ho ! let the door be lock'd . 
▁ xxmaj treachery ! xxmaj seek it out . 
▁ [ laertes falls . ] 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj it is here , xxmaj hamlet . xxmaj hamlet , thou art slain ; 
▁ xxmaj no medicine in the world can do thee good . 
▁ xxmaj in thee there is not half an hour of life . 
▁ xxmaj the treacherous instrument is in thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj unbated and envenom'd . xxmaj the foul practice 
▁ xxmaj hath turn'd itself on me . xxmaj lo , here i lie , 
▁ xxmaj never to rise again . xxmaj thy mother 's poison'd . 
▁ i can no more . xxmaj the xxmaj king , the xxmaj king 's to blame . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj the point envenom'd too ? 
▁ xxmaj then , venom , to thy work . xxmaj hurts the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj all . xxmaj treason ! treason ! 
▁ xxmaj king . xxup o , yet defend me , friends ! i am but hurt . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj here , thou incestuous , murd'rous , damned xxmaj dane , 
▁ xxmaj drink off this potion ! xxmaj is thy union here ? 
▁ xxmaj follow my mother . xxmaj king dies . 
▁ xxmaj laer . xxmaj he is justly serv'd . 
▁ xxmaj it is a poison temper'd by himself . 
▁ xxmaj exchange forgiveness with me , noble xxmaj hamlet . 
▁ xxmaj mine and my father 's death come not upon thee , 
▁ xxmaj nor thine on me ! xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj heaven make thee free of it ! i follow thee . 
▁ i am dead , xxmaj horatio . xxmaj wretched queen , adieu ! 
▁ xxmaj you that look pale and tremble at this chance , 
▁ xxmaj that are but mutes or audience to this act , 
▁ xxmaj had i but time ( as this fell sergeant , xxmaj death , 
▁ xxmaj is strict in his arrest ) xxup o , i could tell you- 
▁ xxmaj but let it be . xxmaj horatio , i am dead ; 
▁ xxmaj thou liv'st ; report me and my cause aright 
▁ xxmaj to the unsatisfied . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj never believe it . 
▁ i am more an antique xxmaj roman than a xxmaj dane . 
▁ xxmaj here 's yet some liquor left . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxmaj as th'art a man , 
▁ xxmaj give me the cup . xxmaj let go ! xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj i 'll ha't . 
▁ o good xxmaj horatio , what a wounded name 
▁ ( things standing thus unknown ) shall live behind me ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou didst ever hold me in thy heart , 
▁ xxmaj absent thee from felicity awhile , 
▁ xxmaj and in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain , 
▁ xxmaj to tell my story . [ march afar off , and shot within . ] 
▁ xxmaj what warlike noise is this ? 
▁ xxmaj osr . xxmaj young xxmaj fortinbras , with conquest come from xxmaj poland , 
▁ xxmaj to the ambassadors of xxmaj england gives 
▁ xxmaj this warlike volley . 
▁ xxmaj ham . xxup o , i die , xxmaj horatio ! 
▁ xxmaj the potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit . 
▁ i can not live to hear the news from xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj but i do prophesy th ' election lights 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj fortinbras . xxmaj he has my dying voice . 
▁ xxmaj so tell him , with th ' occurrents , more and less , 
▁ xxmaj which have solicited- the rest is silence . xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj now cracks a noble heart . xxmaj good night , sweet prince , 
▁ xxmaj and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest ! 
▁ [ march within . ] 
▁ xxmaj why does the drum come hither ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj fortinbras and xxmaj english xxmaj ambassadors , with xxmaj drum , 
▁ xxmaj colours , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxmaj fort . xxmaj where is this sight ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj what is it you will see ? 
▁ xxmaj if aught of woe or wonder , cease your search . 
▁ xxmaj fort . xxmaj this quarry cries on havoc . o proud xxmaj death , 
▁ xxmaj what feast is toward in thine eternal cell 
▁ xxmaj that thou so many princes at a shot 
▁ xxmaj so bloodily hast struck . 
▁ xxmaj ambassador . xxmaj the sight is dismal ; 
▁ xxmaj and our affairs from xxmaj england come too late . 
▁ xxmaj the ears are senseless that should give us bearing 
▁ xxmaj to tell him his commandment is fulfill'd 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj rosencrantz and xxmaj guildenstern are dead . 
▁ xxmaj where should xxmaj we have our thanks ? 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj not from his mouth , 
▁ xxmaj had it th ' ability of life to thank you . 
▁ xxmaj he never gave commandment for their death . 
▁ xxmaj but since , so jump upon this bloody question , 
▁ xxmaj you from the xxmaj polack wars , and you from xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj are here arriv'd , give order that these bodies 
▁ xxmaj high on a stage be placed to the view ; 
▁ xxmaj and let me speak to the yet unknowing world 
▁ xxmaj how these things came about . xxmaj so shall xxmaj you hear 
▁ xxmaj of carnal , bloody and unnatural acts ; 
▁ xxmaj of accidental judgments , casual slaughters ; 
▁ xxmaj of deaths put on by cunning and forc'd cause ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in this upshot , purposes mistook 
▁ xxmaj fall'n on th ' inventors ' heads . xxmaj all this can i 
▁ xxmaj truly deliver . 
▁ xxmaj fort . xxmaj let us haste to hear it , 
▁ xxmaj and call the noblest to the audience . 
▁ xxmaj for me , with sorrow i embrace my fortune . 
▁ i have some rights of memory in this kingdom 
▁ xxmaj which now , to claim my vantage doth invite me . 
▁ xxmaj hor . xxmaj of that i shall have also cause to speak , 
▁ xxmaj and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more . 
▁ xxmaj but let this same be presently perform'd , 
▁ xxmaj even while men 's minds are wild , lest more mischance 
▁ xxmaj on plots and errors happen . 
▁ xxmaj fort . xxmaj let four captains 
▁ xxmaj bear xxmaj hamlet like a soldier to the stage ; 
▁ xxmaj for he was likely , had he been put on , 
▁ xxmaj to have prov'd most royally ; and for his passage 
▁ xxmaj the soldiers ' music and the rites of war 
▁ xxmaj speak loudly for him . 
▁ xxmaj take up the bodies . xxmaj such a sight as this 
▁ xxmaj becomes the field but here shows much amiss . 
▁ xxmaj go , bid the soldiers shoot . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt marching ; after the which a peal of ordnance 
▁ are shot off . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1598 

 xxup the xxup first xxup part xxup of xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup fourth 


 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry the xxmaj fourth . 
▁ xxmaj henry , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , son to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , son to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj earl of xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt . 
▁ xxmaj thomas xxmaj percy , xxmaj earl of xxmaj worcester . 
▁ xxmaj henry xxmaj percy , xxmaj earl of xxmaj northumberland . 
▁ xxmaj henry xxmaj percy , surnamed xxmaj hotspur , his son . 
▁ xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer , xxmaj earl of xxmaj march . 
▁ xxmaj richard xxmaj scroop , xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj archibald , xxmaj earl of xxmaj douglas . 
▁ xxmaj owen xxmaj glendower . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj richard xxmaj vernon . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj michael , a friend to the xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj poins . 
▁ xxmaj gadshill 
▁ xxmaj peto . 
▁ xxmaj bardolph . 
▁
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj percy , wife to xxmaj hotspur , and sister to xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj mortimer , daughter to xxmaj glendower , and wife to xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj quickly , hostess of the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head in xxmaj eastcheap . 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj officers , xxmaj sheriff , xxmaj vintner , xxmaj chamberlain , xxmaj drawers , two 
▁ xxmaj carriers , xxmaj travellers , and xxmaj attendants . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 scene.--england and xxmaj wales . 


 xxup act xxup i. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter the xxmaj king , xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , xxmaj earl of xxmaj westmoreland , 
 [ sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt , ] with others . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj so shaken as we are , so wan with care , 
▁ xxmaj find we a time for frighted peace to pant 
▁ xxmaj and breathe short - winded accents of new broils 
▁ xxmaj to be commenc'd in stronds afar remote . 
▁ xxmaj no more the thirsty entrance of this soil 
▁ xxmaj shall daub her lips with her own children 's blood . 
▁ xxmaj no more shall trenching war channel her fields , 
▁ xxmaj nor xxmaj bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs 
▁ xxmaj of hostile paces . xxmaj those opposed eyes 
▁ xxmaj which , like the meteors of a troubled heaven , 
▁ xxmaj all of one nature , of one substance bred , 
▁ xxmaj did lately meet in the intestine shock 
▁ xxmaj and furious close of civil butchery , 
▁ xxmaj shall now in mutual well - beseeming ranks 
▁ xxmaj march all one way and be no more oppos'd 
▁ xxmaj against acquaintance , kindred , and allies . 
▁ xxmaj the edge of war , like an ill - sheathed knife , 
▁ xxmaj no more shall cut his master . xxmaj therefore , friends , 
▁ xxmaj as far as to the sepulchre of xxmaj christ- 
▁ xxmaj whose soldier now , under whose blessed cross 
▁ xxmaj we are impressed and engag'd to fight- 
▁ xxmaj forthwith a power of xxmaj english shall we levy , 
▁ xxmaj whose arms were moulded in their mother 's womb 
▁ xxmaj to chase these pagans in those holy fields 
▁ xxmaj over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet 
▁ xxmaj which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd 
▁ xxmaj for our advantage on the bitter cross . 
▁ xxmaj but this our purpose now is twelvemonth old , 
▁ xxmaj and bootless ' tis to tell you we will go . 
▁ xxmaj therefore we meet not now . xxmaj then let me hear 
▁ xxmaj of you , my gentle cousin xxmaj westmoreland , 
▁ xxmaj what yesternight our xxmaj council did decree 
▁ xxmaj in forwarding this dear expedience . 
▁ xxmaj west . xxmaj my liege , this haste was hot in question 
▁ xxmaj and many limits of the charge set down 
▁ xxmaj but yesternight ; when all athwart there came 
▁ a post from xxmaj wales , loaden with heavy news ; 
▁ xxmaj whose worst was that the noble xxmaj mortimer , 
▁ xxmaj leading the men of xxmaj herefordshire to fight 
▁ xxmaj against the irregular and wild xxmaj glendower , 
▁ xxmaj was by the rude hands of that xxmaj welshman taken , 
▁ a thousand of his people butchered ; 
▁ xxmaj upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse , 
▁ xxmaj such beastly shameless transformation , 
▁ xxmaj by those xxmaj welshwomen done as may not be 
▁ xxmaj without much shame retold or spoken of . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj it seems then that the tidings of this broil 
▁ xxmaj brake off our business for the xxmaj holy xxmaj land . 
▁ xxmaj west . xxmaj this , match'd with other , did , my gracious lord ; 
▁ xxmaj for more uneven and unwelcome news 
▁ xxmaj came from the xxmaj north , and thus it did import : 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj holy - rood xxmaj day the gallant xxmaj hotspur there , 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj harry xxmaj percy , and brave xxmaj archibald , 
▁ xxmaj that ever - valiant and approved xxmaj scot , 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj holmedon met , 
▁ xxmaj where they did spend a sad and bloody hour ; 
▁ xxmaj as by discharge of their artillery 
▁ xxmaj and shape of likelihood the news was told ; 
▁ xxmaj for he that brought them , in the very heat 
▁ xxmaj and pride of their contention did take horse , 
▁ xxmaj uncertain of the issue any way . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj here is a dear , a true - industrious friend , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt , new lighted from his horse , 
▁ xxmaj stain'd with the variation of each soil 
▁ xxmaj betwixt that xxmaj holmedon and this seat of ours , 
▁ xxmaj and he hath brought us smooth and welcome news . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj douglas is discomfited ; 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand bold xxmaj scots , two - and - twenty knights , 
▁ xxmaj balk'd in their own blood did xxmaj sir xxmaj walter see 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj holmedon 's plains . xxmaj of prisoners , xxmaj hotspur took 
▁ xxmaj mordake xxmaj earl of xxmaj fife and eldest son 
▁ xxmaj to beaten xxmaj douglas , and the xxmaj earl of xxmaj athol , 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj murray , xxmaj angus , and xxmaj menteith . 
▁ xxmaj and is not this an honourable spoil ? 
▁ a gallant prize ? xxmaj ha , cousin , is it not ? 
▁ xxmaj west . xxmaj in faith , 
▁ xxmaj it is a conquest for a prince to boast of . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj yea , there thou mak'st me sad , and mak'st me sin 
▁ xxmaj in envy that my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland 
▁ xxmaj should be the father to so blest a son- 
▁ a son who is the theme of honour 's tongue , 
▁ xxmaj amongst a grove the very straightest plant ; 
▁ xxmaj who is sweet xxmaj fortune 's minion and her pride ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst xxup i , by looking on the praise of him , 
▁ xxmaj see riot and dishonour stain the brow 
▁ xxmaj of my young xxmaj harry . o that it could be prov'd 
▁ xxmaj that some night - tripping fairy had exchang'd 
▁ xxmaj in cradle clothes our children where they lay , 
▁ xxmaj and call'd mine xxmaj percy , his xxmaj plantagenet ! 
▁ xxmaj then would i have his xxmaj harry , and he mine . 
▁ xxmaj but let him from my thoughts . xxmaj what think you , coz , 
▁ xxmaj of this young xxmaj percy 's pride ? xxmaj the prisoners 
▁ xxmaj which he in this adventure hath surpris'd 
▁ xxmaj to his own use he keeps , and sends me word 
▁ i shall have none but xxmaj mordake xxmaj earl of xxmaj fife . 
▁ xxmaj west . xxmaj this is his uncle 's teaching , this xxmaj worcester , 
▁ xxmaj malevolent to you xxmaj in all aspects , 
▁ xxmaj which makes him prune himself and bristle up 
▁ xxmaj the crest of youth against your dignity . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj but i have sent for him to answer this ; 
▁ xxmaj and for this cause awhile we must neglect 
▁ xxmaj our holy purpose to xxmaj jerusalem . 
▁ xxmaj cousin , on xxmaj wednesday next our council we 
▁ xxmaj will hold at xxmaj windsor . xxmaj so inform the lords ; 
▁ xxmaj but come yourself with speed to us again ; 
▁ xxmaj for more is to be said and to be done 
▁ xxmaj than out of anger can be uttered . 
▁ xxmaj west . i will my liege . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj an apartment of the xxmaj prince 's . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales and xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff . 

▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj now , xxmaj hal , what time of day is it , lad ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou art so fat - witted with drinking of old sack , and 
▁ unbuttoning thee after supper , and sleeping upon benches after 
▁ noon , that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly which thou 
▁ wouldest truly know . xxmaj what a devil hast thou to do with the time 
▁ of the day , xxmaj unless hours were cups of sack , and minutes capons , 
▁ and clocks the tongues of bawds , and dials the signs of leaping 
▁ houses , and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in 
▁ flame - coloured taffeta , i see no reason why thou shouldst be so 
▁ superfluous to demand the time of the day . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj indeed you come near me now , xxmaj hal ; for we that take purses go 
▁ by the moon xxmaj and the seven stars , and not by xxmaj phoebus , he , that 
▁ wand'ring knight so fair . xxmaj and i prithee , sweet wag , when thou art 
▁ king , as , xxmaj god save thy grace - majesty i should say , for grace thou 
▁ wilt have none- 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what , none ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj no , by my troth ; not so much as will serve to be prologue to 
▁ an egg and butter . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , how then ? xxmaj come , roundly , roundly . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj marry , then , sweet wag , when thou art king , let not us that 
▁ are squires of the night 's body be called thieves of the day 's 
▁ beauty . xxmaj let us be xxmaj diana 's xxmaj foresters , xxmaj gentlemen of the xxmaj shade , 
▁ xxmaj minions of the xxmaj moon ; and let men say we be men of good 
▁ government , being governed as the sea is , by our noble and chaste 
▁ mistress the moon , under whose countenance we steal . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou sayest well , and it holds well too ; for the fortune of 
▁ us that are the moon 's men doth ebb and flow like the sea , being 
▁ governed , as the sea is , by the moon . xxmaj as , for proof now : a purse 
▁ of gold most resolutely snatch'd on xxmaj monday night and most 
▁ dissolutely spent on xxmaj tuesday morning ; got with swearing ' lay by , ' 
▁ and spent with crying ' bring in ' ; now ill as low an ebb as the 
▁ foot of the ladder , and by - and - by in as high a flow as the ridge 
▁ of the gallows . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , thou say'st true , lad- and is not my hostess of 
▁ the tavern a most sweet wench ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj as the honey of xxmaj hybla , my old lad of the castle- and is not 
▁ a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj how now , how now , mad wag ? xxmaj what , in thy quips and thy 
▁ quiddities ? xxmaj what a plague have i to do with a buff jerkin ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , what a pox have i to do with my hostess of the tavern ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , thou hast call'd her to a reckoning many a time and oft . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj did i ever call for thee to pay thy part ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj no ; xxmaj i 'll give thee thy due , thou hast paid all there . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj yea , and elsewhere , so far as my coin would stretch ; and 
▁ where it would not , i have used my credit . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj yea , and so us'd it that , were it not here apparent that thou 
▁ art heir apparent- xxmaj but i prithee , sweet wag , shall there be 
▁ gallows standing in xxmaj england when thou art king ? and resolution 
▁ thus fubb'd as it is with the rusty curb of old father antic the 
▁ law ? xxmaj do not thou , when thou art king , hang a thief . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj no ; thou shalt . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj shall xxup i ? o rare ! xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , xxmaj i 'll be a brave judge . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou judgest false already . i mean , thou shalt have the 
▁ hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , xxmaj hal , well ; and in some sort it jumps with my humour as 
▁ well as waiting in the court , i can tell you . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj for obtaining of suits ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj yea , for obtaining of suits , whereof the hangman hath no lean 
▁ wardrobe . ' sblood , i am as melancholy as a gib - cat or a lugg'd 
▁ bear . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj or an old lion , or a lover 's lute . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj yea , or the drone of a xxmaj lincolnshire bagpipe . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what sayest thou to a hare , or the melancholy of xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj ditch ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj thou hast the most unsavoury similes , and art indeed the most 
▁ comparative , rascalliest , sweet young prince . xxmaj but , xxmaj hal , i prithee 
▁ trouble me no more with vanity . i would to xxmaj god thou and i knew 
▁ where a commodity of good names were to be bought . xxmaj an old lord of 
▁ the xxmaj council rated me the other day in the street about you , sir , 
▁ but i mark'd him not ; and yet he talked very wisely , but i 
▁ regarded him not ; and yet he talk'd wisely , and in the street 
▁ too . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou didst well ; for wisdom cries out in the streets , and 
▁ no man regards it . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxup o , thou hast damnable iteration , and art indeed able to 
▁ corrupt a saint . xxmaj thou hast done much harm upon me , xxmaj hal- xxmaj god 
▁ forgive thee for it ! xxmaj before i knew thee , xxmaj hal , i knew nothing ; and 
▁ now am xxup i , if a man should speak truly , little better than one of 
▁ the wicked . i must give over this life , and i will give it over ! 
▁ xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , an i do not , i am a villain ! xxmaj i 'll be damn'd for 
▁ never a king 's son in xxmaj christendom . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj where shall we take a purse tomorrow , xxmaj jack ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj zounds , where thou wilt , lad ! xxmaj i 'll make one . xxmaj an i do not , call 
▁ me villain and baffle me . 
▁ xxmaj prince . i see a good amendment of life in thee- from praying to 
▁ purse - taking . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj why , xxmaj hal , ' tis my vocation , xxmaj hal . ' tis no sin for a man to 
▁ labour in his vocation . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj poins . 

▁ xxmaj poins ! xxmaj now shall we know if xxmaj gadshill have set a match . xxup o , if men 
▁ were to be saved by merit , what hole in hell were hot enough for 
▁ him ? xxmaj this is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried ' stand ! ' 
▁ to a true man . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj ned . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj good morrow , sweet xxmaj hal . xxmaj what says xxmaj monsieur xxmaj remorse ? xxmaj what 
▁ says xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj sack and xxmaj sugar ? xxmaj jack , how agrees the devil and thee 
▁ about thy soul , that thou soldest him on xxmaj good xxmaj friday last for a 
▁ cup of xxmaj madeira and a cold capon 's leg ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj sir xxmaj john stands to his word , the devil shall have his 
▁ bargain ; for he was never yet a breaker of proverbs . xxmaj he will give 
▁ the devil his due . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj then art thou damn'd for keeping thy word with the devil . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj else he had been damn'd for cozening the devil . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj but , my lads , my lads , to - morrow morning , by four o'clock 
▁ early , at xxmaj gadshill ! xxmaj there are pilgrims gong to xxmaj canterbury with 
▁ rich offerings , and traders riding to xxmaj london with fat purses . i 
▁ have vizards for you all ; you have horses for yourselves . 
▁ xxmaj gadshill lies to - night in xxmaj rochester . i have bespoke supper 
▁ to - morrow night in xxmaj eastcheap . xxmaj we may do it as secure as sleep . xxmaj if 
▁ you will go , i will stuff your purses full of crowns ; if you will 
▁ not , tarry at home and be hang'd ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj hear ye , xxmaj yedward : if i tarry at home and go not , xxmaj i 'll hang you 
▁ for going . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj you will , chops ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj hal , wilt thou make one ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj who , i rob ? i a thief ? xxmaj not xxup i , by my faith . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj there 's neither honesty , manhood , nor good fellowship in thee , 
▁ nor thou cam'st not of the blood royal if thou darest not stand 
▁ for ten shillings . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well then , once in my days xxmaj i 'll be a madcap . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj why , that 's well said . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , come what will , xxmaj i 'll tarry at home . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , xxmaj i 'll be a traitor then , when thou art king . 
▁ xxmaj prince . i care not . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , i prithee , leave the xxmaj prince and me alone . i will 
▁ lay him down such reasons for this adventure that he shall go . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , xxmaj god give thee the spirit of persuasion and him the ears 
▁ of profiting , that what thou speakest may move and what he hears 
▁ may be believed , that the true prince may ( for recreation sake ) 
▁ prove a false thief ; for the poor abuses of the time want 
▁ countenance . xxmaj farewell ; you shall find me in xxmaj eastcheap . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj farewell , thou latter spring ! farewell , xxmaj all - hallown summer ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj now , my good sweet honey lord , ride with us to - morrow . i 
▁ have a jest to execute that i can not manage alone . xxmaj falstaff , 
▁ xxmaj bardolph , xxmaj peto , and xxmaj gadshill shall rob those men that we have 
▁ already waylaid ; yourself and i will not be there ; and when they 
▁ have the booty , if you and i do not rob them , cut this head off 
▁ from my shoulders . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj how shall we part with them in setting forth ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj why , we will set forth before or after them and appoint them 
▁ a place of meeting , wherein it is at our pleasure to fail ; and 
▁ then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves ; which they 
▁ shall have no sooner achieved , but we 'll set upon them . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj yea , but ' tis like that they will know us by our horses , by 
▁ our habits , and by every other appointment , to be ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj tut ! our horses they shall not see- xxmaj i 'll tie them in the 
▁ wood ; our wizards we will change after we leave them ; and , 
▁ sirrah , i have cases of buckram for the nonce , to immask our 
▁ noted outward garments . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj yea , but i doubt they will be too hard for us . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj well , for two of them , i know them to be as true - bred 
▁ cowards as ever turn'd back ; and for the third , if he fight 
▁ longer than he sees reason , xxmaj i 'll forswear arms . xxmaj the virtue of 
▁ this jest will lie the incomprehensible lies that this same fat 
▁ rogue will tell us when we meet at supper : how thirty , at least , 
▁ he fought with ; what wards , what blows , what extremities he 
▁ endured ; and in the reproof of this lies the jest . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll go with thee . xxmaj provide us all things necessary 
▁ and meet me to - night in xxmaj eastcheap . xxmaj there xxmaj i 'll sup . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj farewell , my lord . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj prince . i know you all , and will awhile uphold 
▁ xxmaj the unyok'd humour of your idleness . 
▁ xxmaj yet herein will i imitate the sun , 
▁ xxmaj who doth permit the base contagious clouds 
▁ xxmaj to smother up his beauty from the world , 
▁ xxmaj that , when he please again to lie himself , 
▁ xxmaj being wanted , he may be more wond'red at 
▁ xxmaj by breaking through the foul and ugly mists 
▁ xxmaj of vapours that did seem to strangle him . 
▁ xxmaj if all the year were playing holidays , 
▁ xxmaj to sport would be as tedious as to work ; 
▁ xxmaj but when they seldom come , they wish'd - for come , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing pleaseth but rare accidents . 
▁ xxmaj so , when this loose behaviour i throw off 
▁ xxmaj and pay the debt i never promised , 
▁ xxmaj by how much better than my word i am , 
▁ xxmaj by so much shall i falsify men 's hopes ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like bright metal on a sullen ground , 
▁ xxmaj my reformation , glitt'ring o'er my fault , 
▁ xxmaj shall show more goodly and attract more eyes 
▁ xxmaj than that which hath no foil to set it off . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll so offend to make offence a skill , 
▁ xxmaj redeeming time when men think least i will . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter the xxmaj king , xxmaj northumberland , xxmaj worcester , xxmaj hotspur , xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt , 
 with others . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj my blood hath been too cold and temperate , 
▁ xxmaj unapt to stir at these indignities , 
▁ xxmaj and you have found me , for accordingly 
▁ xxmaj you tread upon my patience ; but be sure 
▁ i will from henceforth rather be myself , 
▁ xxmaj mighty and to be fear'd , than my condition , 
▁ xxmaj which hath been smooth as oil , soft as young down , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore lost that title of respect 
▁ xxmaj which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj our house , my sovereign liege , little deserves 
▁ xxmaj the scourge of greatness to be us'd on it- 
▁ xxmaj and that same greatness too which our own hands 
▁ xxmaj have holp to make so portly . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj worcester , get thee gone ; for i do see 
▁ xxmaj danger and disobedience in thine eye . 
▁ xxup o , sir , your presence is too bold and peremptory , 
▁ xxmaj and majesty might never yet endure 
▁ xxmaj the moody frontier of a servant brow . 
▁ xxmaj tou have good leave to leave us . xxmaj when we need 
▁ ' your use and counsel , we shall send for you . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj worcester . 
▁ xxmaj you were about to speak . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj yea , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj those prisoners in your xxmaj highness ' name demanded 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj harry xxmaj percy here at xxmaj holmedon took , 
▁ xxmaj were , as he says , not with such strength denied 
▁ xxmaj as is delivered to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj either envy , therefore , or misprision 
▁ xxmaj is guilty of this fault , and not my son . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj my liege , i did deny no prisoners . 
▁ xxmaj but i remember , when the fight was done , 
▁ xxmaj when i was dry with rage and extreme toll , 
▁ xxmaj breathless and faint , leaning upon my sword , 
▁ xxmaj came there a certain lord , neat and trimly dress'd , 
▁ xxmaj fresh as a bridegroom ; and his chin new reap'd 
▁ xxmaj show'd like a stubble land at harvest home . 
▁ xxmaj he was perfumed like a milliner , 
▁ xxmaj and ' twixt his finger and his thumb he held 
▁ a pouncet box , which ever and anon 
▁ xxmaj he gave his nose , and took't away again ; 
▁ xxmaj who therewith angry , when it next came there , 
▁ xxmaj took it in snuff ; and still he smil'd and talk'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and as the soldiers bore dead bodies by , 
▁ xxmaj he call'd them untaught knaves , unmannerly , 
▁ xxmaj to bring a slovenly unhandsome corse 
▁ xxmaj betwixt the wind and his nobility . 
▁ xxmaj with many holiday and lady terms 
▁ xxmaj he questioned me , amongst the rest demanded 
▁ xxmaj my prisoners in your xxmaj majesty 's behalf . 
▁ i then , all smarting with my wounds being cold , 
▁ xxmaj to be so pest'red with a popingay , 
▁ xxmaj out of my grief and my impatience 
▁ xxmaj answer'd neglectingly , i know not what- 
▁ xxmaj he should , or he should not ; for he made me mad 
▁ xxmaj to see him shine so brisk , and smell so sweet , 
▁ xxmaj and talk so like a waiting gentlewoman 
▁ xxmaj of guns and drums and wounds- xxmaj god save the mark!- 
▁ xxmaj and telling me the sovereignest thing on earth 
▁ xxmaj was parmacity for an inward bruise ; 
▁ xxmaj and that it was great pity , so it was , 
▁ xxmaj this villanous saltpetre should be digg'd 
▁ xxmaj out of the bowels of the harmless earth , 
▁ xxmaj which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd 
▁ xxmaj so cowardly ; and but for these vile ' guns , 
▁ xxmaj he would himself have been a soldier . 
▁ xxmaj this bald unjointed chat of his , my lord , 
▁ i answered indirectly , as i said , 
▁ xxmaj and i beseech you , let not his report 
▁ xxmaj come current for an accusation 
▁ xxmaj betwixt my love and your high majesty . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . xxmaj the circumstance considered , good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj whate'er xxmaj lord xxmaj harry xxmaj percy then had said 
▁ xxmaj to such a person , and in such a place , 
▁ xxmaj at such a time , with all the rest retold , 
▁ xxmaj may reasonably die , and never rise 
▁ xxmaj to do him wrong , or any way impeach 
▁ xxmaj what then he said , so he unsay it now . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj why , yet he doth deny his prisoners , 
▁ xxmaj but with proviso and exception , 
▁ xxmaj that we at our own charge shall ransom straight 
▁ xxmaj his brother - in - law , the foolish xxmaj mortimer ; 
▁ xxmaj who , on my soul , hath wilfully betray'd 
▁ xxmaj the lives of those that he did lead to fight 
▁ xxmaj against that great magician , damn'd xxmaj glendower , 
▁ xxmaj whose daughter , as we hear , the xxmaj earl of xxmaj march 
▁ xxmaj hath lately married . xxmaj shall our coffers , then , 
▁ xxmaj be emptied to redeem a traitor home ? 
▁ xxmaj shall we buy treason ? and indent with fears 
▁ xxmaj when they have lost and forfeited themselves ? 
▁ xxmaj no , on the barren mountains let him starve ! 
▁ xxmaj for i shall never hold that man my friend 
▁ xxmaj whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost 
▁ xxmaj to ransom home revolted xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj revolted xxmaj mortimer ? 
▁ xxmaj he never did fall off , my sovereign liege , 
▁ xxmaj but by the chance of war . xxmaj to prove that true 
▁ xxmaj needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds , 
▁ xxmaj those mouthed wounds , which valiantly he took 
▁ xxmaj when on the gentle xxmaj severn 's sedgy bank , 
▁ xxmaj in single opposition hand to hand , 
▁ xxmaj he did confound the best part of an hour 
▁ xxmaj in changing hardiment with great xxmaj glendower . 
▁ xxmaj three times they breath'd , and three times did they drink , 
▁ xxmaj upon agreement , of swift xxmaj severn 's flood ; 
▁ xxmaj who then , affrighted with their bloody looks , 
▁ xxmaj ran fearfully among the trembling reeds 
▁ xxmaj and hid his crisp head in the hollow bank , 
▁ xxmaj bloodstained with these valiant cohabitants . 
▁ xxmaj never did base and rotten policy 
▁ xxmaj colour her working with such deadly wounds ; 
▁ xxmaj nor never could the noble xxmaj mortimer 
▁ xxmaj receive so many , and all willingly . 
▁ xxmaj then let not him be slandered with revolt . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thou dost belie him , xxmaj percy , thou dost belie him ! 
▁ xxmaj he never did encounter with xxmaj glendower . 
▁ i tell thee 
▁ xxmaj he durst as well have met the devil alone 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj owen xxmaj glendower for an enemy . 
▁ xxmaj art thou not asham'd ? xxmaj but , sirrah , henceforth 
▁ xxmaj let me not hear you speak of xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj send me your prisoners with the speediest means , 
▁ xxmaj or you shall hear in such a kind from me 
▁ xxmaj as will displease you . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj we license your departure with your son.- 
▁ xxmaj send us your prisoners , or you will hear of it . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj king , [ blunt , and xxmaj train ] 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj an if the devil come and roar for them , 
▁ i will not send them . i will after straight 
▁ xxmaj and tell him so ; for i will else my heart , 
▁ xxmaj albeit i make a hazard of my head . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj what , drunk with choler ? xxmaj stay , and pause awhile . 
▁ xxmaj here comes your uncle . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj worcester . 
▁
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj speak of xxmaj mortimer ? 
▁ xxmaj zounds , i will speak of him , and let my soul 
▁ xxmaj want mercy if i do not join with him ! 
▁ xxmaj yea , on his part xxmaj i 'll empty all these veins , 
▁ xxmaj and shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust , 
▁ xxmaj but i will lift the downtrod xxmaj mortimer 
▁ xxmaj as high in the air as this unthankful king , 
▁ xxmaj as this ingrate and cank'red xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj brother , the xxmaj king hath made your nephew mad .