xxbos xxmaj wor . xxmaj who struck this heat up after i was gone ? 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj he will ( forsooth ) have all my prisoners ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i urg'd the ransom once again 
▁ xxmaj of my wive 's brother , then his cheek look'd pale , 
▁ xxmaj and on my face he turn'd an eye of death , 
▁ xxmaj trembling even at the name of xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj wor . i can not blame him . xxmaj was not he proclaim'd 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj richard that dead is , the next of blood ? 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj he was ; i heard the proclamation . 
▁ xxmaj and then it was when the unhappy xxmaj king 
▁ ( whose wrongs in us xxmaj god pardon ! ) did set forth 
▁ xxmaj upon his xxmaj irish expedition ; 
▁ xxmaj from whence he intercepted did return 
▁ xxmaj to be depos'd , and shortly murdered . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj and for whose death we in the world 's wide mouth 
▁ xxmaj live scandaliz'd and foully spoken of . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj but soft , i pray you . xxmaj did xxmaj king xxmaj richard then 
▁ xxmaj proclaim my brother xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer 
▁ xxmaj heir to the crown ? 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj he did ; myself did hear it . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj nay , then i can not blame his cousin king , 
▁ xxmaj that wish'd him on the barren mountains starve . 
▁ xxmaj but shall it be that you , that set the crown 
▁ xxmaj upon the head of this forgetful man , 
▁ xxmaj and for his sake wear the detested blot 
▁ xxmaj of murtherous subornation- shall it be 
▁ xxmaj that you a world of curses undergo , 
▁ xxmaj being the agents or base second means , 
▁ xxmaj the cords , the ladder , or the hangman rather ? 
▁ xxup o , pardon me that i descend so low 
▁ xxmaj to show the line and the predicament 
▁ xxmaj wherein you range under this subtile king ! 
▁ xxmaj shall it for shame be spoken in these days , 
▁ xxmaj or fill up chronicles in time to come , 
▁ xxmaj that men of your nobility and power 
▁ xxmaj did gage them both in an unjust behalf 
▁ ( as both of you , xxmaj god pardon it ! have done ) 
▁ xxmaj to put down xxmaj richard , that sweet lovely rose , 
▁ xxmaj and plant this thorn , this canker , xxmaj bolingbroke ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall it in more shame be further spoken 
▁ xxmaj that you are fool'd , discarded , and shook off 
▁ xxmaj by him for whom these shames ye underwent ? 
▁ xxmaj no ! yet time serves wherein you may redeem 
▁ xxmaj your banish'd honours and restore yourselves 
▁ xxmaj into the good thoughts of the world again ; 
▁ xxmaj revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt 
▁ xxmaj of this proud king , who studies day and night 
▁ xxmaj to answer all the debt he owes to you 
▁ xxmaj even with the bloody payment of your deaths . 
▁ xxmaj therefore i say- 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj peace , cousin , say no more ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , i will unclasp a secret book , 
▁ xxmaj and to your quick - conceiving discontents 
▁ xxmaj i 'll read you matter deep and dangerous , 
▁ xxmaj as full of peril and adventurous spirit 
▁ xxmaj as to o'erwalk a current roaring loud 
▁ xxmaj on the unsteadfast footing of a spear . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj if he fall in , good night , or sink or swim ! 
▁ xxmaj send danger from the east unto the west , 
▁ xxmaj so honour cross it from the north to south , 
▁ xxmaj and let them grapple . xxup o , the blood more stirs 
▁ xxmaj to rouse a lion than to start a hare ! 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj imagination of some great exploit 
▁ xxmaj drives him beyond the bounds of patience . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj by heaven , methinks it were an easy leap 
▁ xxmaj to pluck bright honour from the pale - fac'd moon , 
▁ xxmaj or dive into the bottom of the deep , 
▁ xxmaj where fadom line could never touch the ground , 
▁ xxmaj and pluck up drowned honour by the locks , 
▁ xxmaj so he that doth redeem her thence might wear 
▁ xxmaj without corrival all her dignities ; 
▁ xxmaj but out upon this half - fac'd fellowship ! 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj he apprehends a world of figures here , 
▁ xxmaj but not the form of what he should attend . 
▁ xxmaj good cousin , give me audience for a while . 
▁ xxmaj hot . i cry you mercy . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj those same noble xxmaj scots 
▁ xxmaj that are your prisoners- 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj i 'll keep them all . 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj god , he shall not have a xxmaj scot of them ! 
▁ xxmaj no , if a xxmaj scot would save his soul , he shall not . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll keep them , by this hand ! 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj you start away . 
▁ xxmaj and lend no ear unto my purposes . 
▁ xxmaj those prisoners you shall keep . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj nay , i will ! xxmaj that is flat ! 
▁ xxmaj he said he would not ransom xxmaj mortimer , 
▁ xxmaj forbade my tongue to speak of xxmaj mortimer , 
▁ xxmaj but i will find him when he lies asleep , 
▁ xxmaj and in his ear xxmaj i 'll holloa ' mortimer . ' 
▁ xxmaj nay ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have a starling shall be taught to speak 
▁ xxmaj nothing but ' mortimer , ' and give it him 
▁ xxmaj to keep his anger still in motion . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj hear you , cousin , a word . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj all studies here i solemnly defy 
▁ xxmaj save how to gall and pinch this xxmaj bolingbroke ; 
▁ xxmaj and that same sword - and - buckler xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales- 
▁ xxmaj but that i think his father loves him not 
▁ xxmaj and would be glad he met with some mischance , 
▁ i would have him poisoned with a pot of ale . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj farewell , kinsman . i will talk to you 
▁ xxmaj when you are better temper'd to attend . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj why , what a wasp - stung and impatient fool 
▁ xxmaj art thou to break into this woman 's mood , 
▁ xxmaj tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own ! 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj why , look you , i am whipp'd and scourg'd with rods , 
▁ xxmaj nettled , and stung with pismires when i hear 
▁ xxmaj of this vile politician , xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj richard 's time- what do you call the place- 
▁ a plague upon it ! it is in gioucestershire- 
▁ ' twas where the madcap xxmaj duke his uncle kept- 
▁ xxmaj his uncle xxmaj york- where i first bow'd my knee 
▁ xxmaj unto this king of smiles , this xxmaj bolingbroke- 
▁ 's blood ! 
▁ xxmaj when you and he came back from xxmaj ravenspurgh- 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj at xxmaj berkeley xxmaj castle . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj you say true . 
▁ xxmaj why , what a candy deal of courtesy 
▁ xxmaj this fawning greyhound then did proffer me ! 
▁ xxmaj look , ' when his infant fortune came to age , ' 
▁ xxmaj and ' gentle xxmaj harry xxmaj percy , ' and ' kind cousin'- 
▁ xxup o , the devil take such cozeners!- xxmaj god forgive me ! 
▁ xxmaj good uncle , tell your tale , for i have done . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj nay , if you have not , to it again . 
▁ xxmaj we will stay your leisure . 
▁ xxmaj hot . i have done , i ' faith . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj then once more to your xxmaj scottish prisoners . 
▁ xxmaj deliver them up without their ransom straight , 
▁ xxmaj and make the xxmaj douglas ' son your only mean 
▁ xxmaj for powers xxmaj in xxmaj scotland ; which , for divers reasons 
▁ xxmaj which i shall send you written , be assur'd 
▁ xxmaj will easily be granted . [ to xxmaj northumberland ] xxmaj you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj your son in xxmaj scotland being thus employ'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall secretly into the bosom creep 
▁ xxmaj of that same noble prelate well - belov'd , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj archbishop . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj of xxmaj york , is it not ? 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj true ; who bears hard 
▁ xxmaj his brother 's death at xxmaj bristow , the xxmaj lord xxmaj scroop . 
▁ i speak not this in estimation , 
▁ xxmaj as what i think might be , but what i know 
▁ xxmaj is ruminated , plotted , and set down , 
▁ xxmaj and only stays but to behold the face 
▁ xxmaj of that occasion that shall bring it on . 
▁ xxmaj hot . i smell it . xxmaj upon my life , it will do well . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj why , it can not choose but be a noble plot . 
▁ xxmaj and then the power of xxmaj scotland and of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj to join with xxmaj mortimer , ha ? 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj and so they shall . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj in faith , it is exceedingly well aim'd . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj and ' tis no little reason bids us speed , 
▁ xxmaj to save our heads by raising of a head ; 
▁ xxmaj for , bear ourselves as even as we can , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king will always think him in our debt , 
▁ xxmaj and think we think ourselves unsatisfied , 
▁ xxmaj till he hath found a time to pay us home . 
▁ xxmaj and see already how he doth begin 
▁ xxmaj to make us strangers to his looks of love . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj he does , he does ! xxmaj we 'll be reveng'd on him . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj cousin , farewell . xxmaj no further go in this 
▁ xxmaj than i by letters shall direct your course . 
▁ xxmaj when time is ripe , which will be suddenly , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll steal to xxmaj glendower and xxmaj lord xxmaj mortimer , 
▁ xxmaj where you and xxmaj douglas , and our pow'rs at once , 
▁ xxmaj as i will fashion it , shall happily meet , 
▁ xxmaj to bear our fortunes in our own strong arms , 
▁ xxmaj which now we hold at much uncertainty . 
▁ xxmaj north . xxmaj farewell , good brother . xxmaj we shall thrive , i trust . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj uncle , adieu . xxup o , let the hours be short 
▁ xxmaj till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rochester . xxmaj an inn yard . 

 xxmaj enter a xxmaj carrier with a lantern in his hand . 

▁ 1 . xxmaj car . xxmaj heigh - ho ! an it be not four by the day , xxmaj i 'll be hang'd . 
▁ xxmaj charles ' wain is over the new chimney , and yet our horse not 
▁ pack'd.- xxmaj what , ostler ! 
▁ xxmaj ost . [ within ] xxmaj anon , anon . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . i prithee , xxmaj tom , beat xxmaj cut 's saddle , put a few flocks in the 
▁ point . xxmaj poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxmaj carrier . 

▁ 2 . xxmaj car . xxmaj peas and beans are as dank here as a dog , and that is the 
▁ next way to give poor jades the bots . xxmaj this house is turned upside 
▁ down since xxmaj robin xxmaj ostler died . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . xxmaj poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose . xxmaj it 
▁ was the death of him . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj car . i think this be the most villanous house in all xxmaj london road 
▁ for fleas . i am stung like a tench . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . xxmaj like a tench i xxmaj by the mass , there is ne'er a king christen 
▁ could be better bit than i have been since the first cock . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj car . xxmaj why , they will allow us ne'er a jordan , and then we leak in 
▁ your chimney , and your chamber - lye breeds fleas like a loach . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . xxmaj what , ostler ! come away and be hang'd ! come away ! 
▁ 2 . xxmaj car . i have a gammon of bacon and two razes of ginger , to be 
▁ delivered as far as xxmaj charing xxmaj cross . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . xxmaj god 's body ! the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved . 
▁ xxmaj what , ostler ! a plague on thee ! hast thou never an eye in thy 
▁ head ? xxmaj canst not hear ? xxmaj an ' twere not as good deed as drink to 
▁ break the pate on thee , i am a very villain . xxmaj come , and be hang'd ! 
▁ xxmaj hast no faith in thee ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gadshill . 

▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj good morrow , carriers . xxmaj what 's o'clock ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . i think it be two o'clock . 
▁ xxmaj gads . i prithee lend me this lantern to see my gelding in the 
▁ stable . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj car . xxmaj nay , by xxmaj god , soft ! i know a trick worth two of that , 
▁ i ' faith . 
▁ xxmaj gads . i pray thee lend me thine . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj car . xxmaj ay , when ? canst tell ? xxmaj lend me thy lantern , quoth he ? xxmaj marry , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll see thee hang'd first ! 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj sirrah carrier , what time do you mean to come to xxmaj london ? 
▁ 2 . xxmaj car . xxmaj time enough to go to bed with a candle , i warrant thee . 
▁ xxmaj come , neighbour xxmaj mugs , we 'll call up the gentlemen . xxmaj they will 
▁ along with company , for they have great charge . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ carriers ] . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj what , ho ! chamberlain ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj chamberlain . 

▁ xxmaj cham . xxmaj at hand , quoth pickpurse . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj that 's even as fair as- ' at hand , quoth the chamberlain ' ; for 
▁ thou variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction 
▁ doth from labouring : thou layest the plot how . 
▁ xxmaj cham . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj master xxmaj gadshill . xxmaj it holds current that i told 
▁ you yesternight . xxmaj there 's a franklin in the xxmaj wild of xxmaj kent hath 
▁ brought three hundred marks with him in gold . i heard him tell it 
▁ to one of his company last night at supper- a kind of auditor ; 
▁ one that hath abundance of charge too , xxmaj god knows what . xxmaj they are 
▁ up already and call for eggs and butter . xxmaj they will away 
▁ presently . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj sirrah , if they meet not with xxmaj saint xxmaj nicholas ' clerks , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ give thee this neck . 
▁ xxmaj cham . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll none of it . i pray thee keep that for the hangman ; 
▁ for i know thou worshippest xxmaj saint xxmaj nicholas as truly as a man of 
▁ falsehood may . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj what talkest thou to me of the hangman ? xxmaj if i hang , xxmaj i 'll make 
▁ a fat pair of gallows ; for if i hang , old xxmaj sir xxmaj john hangs with me , 
▁ and thou knowest he is no starveling . xxmaj tut ! there are other 
▁ xxmaj troyans that thou dream'st not of , the which for sport sake are 
▁ content to do the profession some grace ; that would ( if matters 
▁ should be look'd into ) for their own credit sake make all whole . 
▁ i am joined with no foot land - rakers , no long - staff sixpenny 
▁ strikers , none of these mad mustachio purple - hued maltworms ; but 
▁ with nobility , and tranquillity , burgomasters and great oneyers , 
▁ such as can hold in , such as will strike sooner than speak , and 
▁ speak sooner than drink , and drink sooner than pray ; and yet , 
▁ zounds , i lie ; for they pray continually to their saint , the 
▁ commonwealth , or rather , not pray to her , but prey on her , for 
▁ they ride up and down on her and make her their boots . 
▁ xxmaj cham . xxmaj what , the commonwealth their boots ? xxmaj will she hold out water 
▁ in foul way ? 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj she will , she will ! xxmaj justice hath liquor'd her . xxmaj we steal as in 
▁ a castle , cocksure . xxmaj we have the receipt of fernseed , we walk 
▁ invisible . 
▁ xxmaj cham . xxmaj nay , by my faith , i think you are more beholding to the night 
▁ than to fernseed for your walking invisible . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj give me thy hand . xxmaj thou shalt have a share in our purchase , as 
▁ i and a true man . 
▁ xxmaj cham . xxmaj nay , rather let me have it , as you are a false thief . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj go to ; ' homo ' is a common name to all men . xxmaj bid the ostler 
▁ bring my gelding out of the stable . xxmaj farewell , you muddy knave . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the highway near xxmaj gadshill . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj prince and xxmaj poins . 

▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj come , shelter , shelter ! i have remov'd xxmaj falstaff 's horse , and 
▁ he frets like a gumm'd velvet . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj stand close . [ they step aside . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj falstaff . 

▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj poins ! xxmaj poins , and be hang'd ! xxmaj poins ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . i comes forward i xxmaj peace , ye fat - kidney'd rascal ! xxmaj what a 
▁ brawling dost thou keep ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj where 's xxmaj poins , xxmaj hal ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj he is walk'd up to the top of the hill . xxmaj i 'll go seek him . 
▁ [ steps aside . ] 
▁ xxmaj fal . i am accurs'd to rob in that thief 's company . xxmaj the rascal hath 
▁ removed my horse and tied him i know not where . xxmaj if i travel but 
▁ four foot by the squire further afoot , i shall break my wind . 
▁ xxmaj well , i doubt not but to die a fair death for all this , if i 
▁ scape hanging for killing that rogue . i have forsworn his company 
▁ hourly any time this two - and - twenty years , and yet i am bewitch'd 
▁ with the rogue 's company . xxmaj if the rascal have not given me 
▁ medicines to make me love him , xxmaj i 'll be hang'd . xxmaj it could not be 
▁ else . i have drunk medicines . xxmaj poins ! xxmaj hal ! a plague upon you both ! 
▁ xxmaj bardolph ! xxmaj peto ! xxmaj i 'll starve ere xxmaj i 'll rob a foot further . xxmaj an 
▁ ' twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true man and to leave 
▁ these rogues , i am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a 
▁ tooth . xxmaj eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles 
▁ afoot with me , and the stony - hearted villains know it well 
▁ enough . a plague upon it when thieves can not be true one to 
▁ another ! ( they whistle . ) xxmaj whew ! a plague upon you all ! xxmaj give me my 
▁ horse , you rogues ! give me my horse and be hang'd ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . [ comes forward ] xxmaj peace , ye fat - guts ! xxmaj lie down , lay thine ear 
▁ close to the ground , and list if thou canst hear the tread of 
▁ travellers . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj have you any levers to lift me up again , being down ? ' sblood , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin 
▁ in thy father 's exchequer . xxmaj what a plague mean ye to colt me thus ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou liest ; thou art not colted , thou art uncolted . 
▁ xxmaj fal . i prithee , good xxmaj prince xxmaj hal , help me to my horse , good king 's 
▁ son . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj out , ye rogue ! xxmaj shall i be your ostler ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj go hang thyself in thine own heir - apparent garters ! xxmaj if i be 
▁ ta'en , xxmaj i 'll peach for this . xxmaj an i have not ballads made on you 
▁ all , and sung to filthy tunes , let a cup of sack be my poison . 
▁ xxmaj when a jest is so forward- and afoot too- i hate it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gadshill , [ bardolph and xxmaj peto with him ] . 

▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj stand ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj so i do , against my will . 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ comes fortward ] xxup o , ' tis our setter . i know his voice . 
▁ xxmaj bardolph , what news ? 
▁ xxmaj bar . xxmaj case ye , case ye ! xxmaj on with your vizards ! xxmaj there 's money of the 
▁ xxmaj king 's coming down the hill ; ' tis going to the xxmaj king 's exchequer . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj you lie , ye rogue ! ' tis going to the xxmaj king 's tavern . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj there 's enough to make us all . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj to be hang'd . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj sirs , you four shall front them in the narrow lane ; xxmaj ned 
▁ xxmaj poins and i will walk lower . xxmaj if they scape from your encounter , 
▁ then they light on us . 
▁ xxmaj peto . xxmaj how many be there of them ? 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj some eight or ten . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj zounds , will they not rob us ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what , a coward , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj paunch ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj indeed , i am not xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , your grandfather ; but yet no 
▁ coward , xxmaj hal . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , we leave that to the proof . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj sirrah xxmaj jack , thy horse stands behind the hedge . xxmaj when thou 
▁ need'st him , there thou shalt find him . xxmaj farewell and stand fast . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj now can not i strike him , if i should be hang'd . 
▁ xxmaj prince . [ aside to xxmaj poins ] xxmaj ned , where are our disguises ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ aside to xxmaj prince ] xxmaj here , hard by . xxmaj stand close . 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj prince and xxmaj poins . ] 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj now , my masters , happy man be his dole , say xxup i. xxmaj every man to 
▁ his business . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj travellers . 

▁ xxmaj traveller . xxmaj come , neighbour . 
▁ xxmaj the boy shall lead our horses down the hill ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll walk afoot awhile and ease our legs . 
▁ xxmaj thieves . xxmaj stand ! 
▁ xxmaj traveller . xxmaj jesus bless us ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj strike ! down with them ! cut the villains ' throats ! xxmaj ah , 
▁ whoreson caterpillars ! bacon - fed knaves ! they hate us youth . xxmaj down 
▁ with them ! fleece them ! 
▁ xxmaj traveller . xxup o , we are undone , both we and ours for ever ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj hang ye , gorbellied knaves , are ye undone ? xxmaj no , ye fat chuffs ; 
▁ i would your store were here ! xxmaj on , bacons on ! xxmaj what , ye knaves ! 
▁ young men must live . xxmaj you are grandjurors , are ye ? xxmaj we 'll jure ye , 
▁ faith ! 
▁ xxmaj here they rob and bind them . xxmaj exeunt . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj prince and xxmaj poins [ in buckram suits ] . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj the thieves have bound the true men . xxmaj now could thou and i 
▁ rob the thieves and go merrily to xxmaj london , it would be argument 
▁ for a week , laughter for a month , and a good jest for ever . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj stand close ! i hear them coming . 
▁ [ they stand aside . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj thieves again . 

▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj come , my masters , let us share , and then to horse before day . 
▁ xxmaj an the xxmaj prince and xxmaj poins be not two arrant cowards , there 's no 
▁ equity stirring . xxmaj there 's no more valour in that xxmaj poins than in a 
▁ wild duck . 

▁ [ as they are sharing , the xxmaj prince and xxmaj poins set upon 
▁ them . they all run away , and xxmaj falstaff , after a blow or 
▁ two , runs awasy too , leaving the booty behind them . ] 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj your money ! 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj villains ! 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj got with much ease . xxmaj now merrily to horse . 
▁ xxmaj the thieves are scattered , and possess'd with fear 
▁ xxmaj so strongly that they dare not meet each other . 
▁ xxmaj each takes his fellow for an officer . 
▁ xxmaj away , good xxmaj ned . xxmaj falstaff sweats to death 
▁ xxmaj and lards the lean earth as he walks along . 
▁ xxmaj were't not for laughing , i should pity him . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj how the rogue roar'd ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj warkworth xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hotspur solus , reading a letter . 

▁ xxmaj hot . ' but , for mine own part , my lord , i could be well contented to 
▁ be there , in respect of the love i bear your house . ' xxmaj he could be 
▁ contented- why is he not then ? xxmaj in respect of the love he bears 
▁ our house ! xxmaj he shows in this he loves his own barn better than he 
▁ loves our house . xxmaj let me see some more . ' the purpose you undertake 
▁ is dangerous'- xxmaj why , that 's certain ! ' tis dangerous to take a 
▁ cold , to sleep , to drink ; but i tell you , my lord fool , out of 
▁ this nettle , danger , we pluck this flower , safety . ' the purpose 
▁ you undertake is dangerous , the friends you have named uncertain , 
▁ the time itself unsorted , and your whole plot too light for the 
▁ counterpoise of so great an opposition . ' xxmaj say you so , say you so ? 
▁ i say unto you again , you are a shallow , cowardly hind , and you 
▁ lie . xxmaj what a lack - brain is this ! xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , our plot is a good 
▁ plot as ever was laid ; our friends true and constant : a good 
▁ plot , good friends , and full of expectation ; an excellent plot , 
▁ very good friends . xxmaj what a frosty - spirited rogue is this ! xxmaj why , my 
▁ xxmaj lord of xxmaj york commends the plot and the general course of the 
▁ action . xxmaj zounds , an i were now by this rascal , i could brain him 
▁ with his lady 's fan . xxmaj is there not my father , my uncle , and 
▁ myself ; xxmaj lord xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , and xxmaj owen 
▁ xxmaj glendower ? xxmaj is there not , besides , the xxmaj douglas ? xxmaj have i not all 
▁ their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month , 
▁ and are they not some of them set forward already ? xxmaj what a pagan 
▁ rascal is this ! an infidel ! xxmaj ha ! you shall see now , in very 
▁ sincerity of fear and cold heart will he to the xxmaj king and lay open 
▁ all our proceedings . xxup o , i could divide myself and go to buffets 
▁ for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honourable an action ! 
▁ xxmaj hang him , let him tell the xxmaj king ! we are prepared . i will set 
▁ forward to - night . 

▁ xxmaj enter his xxmaj lady . 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj kate ? i must leave you within these two hours . 
▁ xxmaj lady . o my good lord , why are you thus alone ? 
▁ xxmaj for what offence have i this fortnight been 
▁ a banish'd woman from my xxmaj harry 's bed , 
▁ xxmaj tell me , sweet lord , what is't that takes from thee 
▁ xxmaj thy stomach , pleasure , and thy golden sleep ? 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth , 
▁ xxmaj and start so often when thou sit'st alone ? 
▁ xxmaj why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks 
▁ xxmaj and given my treasures and my rights of thee 
▁ xxmaj to thick - ey'd musing and curs'd melancholy ? 
▁ xxmaj in thy faint slumbers i by thee have watch'd , 
▁ xxmaj and heard thee murmur tales of iron wars , 
▁ xxmaj speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed , 
▁ xxmaj cry ' courage ! to the field ! ' xxmaj and thou hast talk'd 
▁ xxmaj of sallies and retires , of trenches , tent , 
▁ xxmaj of palisadoes , frontiers , parapets , 
▁ xxmaj of basilisks , of cannon , culverin , 
▁ xxmaj of prisoners ' ransom , and of soldiers slain , 
▁ xxmaj and all the currents of a heady fight . 
▁ xxmaj thy spirit within thee hath been so at war , 
▁ xxmaj and thus hath so bestirr'd thee in thy sleep , 
▁ xxmaj that beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow 
▁ xxmaj like bubbles ill a late - disturbed stream , 
▁ xxmaj and in thy face strange motions have appear'd , 
▁ xxmaj such as we see when men restrain their breath 
▁ xxmaj on some great sudden hest . xxup o , what portents are these ? 
▁ xxmaj some heavy business hath my lord in hand , 
▁ xxmaj and i must know it , else he loves me not . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj what , ho ! 

▁ [ enter a xxmaj servant . ] 

▁ xxmaj is xxmaj gilliams with the packet gone ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj he is , my lord , an hour ago . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj hath xxmaj butler brought those horses from the sheriff ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj one horse , my lord , he brought even now . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj what horse ? a roan , a crop - ear , is it not ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj it is , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj that roan shall be my throne . 
▁ xxmaj well , i will back him straight . o esperance ! 
▁ xxmaj bid xxmaj butler lead him forth into the park . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj servant . ] 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj but hear you , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj what say'st thou , my lady ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj what is it carries you away ? 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj why , my horse , my love- my horse ! 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj out , you mad - headed ape ! 
▁ a weasel hath not such a deal of spleen 
▁ xxmaj as you are toss'd with . xxmaj in faith , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll know your business , xxmaj harry ; that i will ! 
▁ i fear my brother xxmaj mortimer doth stir 
▁ xxmaj about his title and hath sent for you 
▁ xxmaj to line his enterprise ; but if you go- 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj so far afoot , i shall be weary , love . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj come , come , you paraquito , answer me 
▁ xxmaj directly unto this question that i ask . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll break thy little finger , xxmaj harry , 
▁ xxmaj an if thou wilt not tell my all things true . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj away . 
▁ xxmaj away , you trifler ! xxmaj love ? i love thee not ; 
▁ i care not for thee , xxmaj kate . xxmaj this is no world 
▁ xxmaj to play with mammets and to tilt with lips . 
▁ xxmaj we must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns , 
▁ xxmaj and pass them current too . xxmaj gods me , my horse ! 
▁ xxmaj what say'st thou , xxmaj kate ? xxmaj what wouldst thou have with me ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj do you not love me ? do you not indeed ? 
▁ xxmaj well , do not then ; for since you love me not , 
▁ i will not love myself . xxmaj do you not love me ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , tell me if you speak in jest or no . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj come , wilt thou see me ride ? 
▁ xxmaj and when i am a - horseback , i will swear 
▁ i love thee infinitely . xxmaj but hark you . xxmaj kate : 
▁ i must not have you henceforth question me 
▁ xxmaj whither i go , nor reason whereabout . 
▁ xxmaj whither i must , i must ; and to conclude , 
▁ xxmaj this evening must i leave you , gentle xxmaj kate . 
▁ i know you wise ; but yet no farther wise 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj harry xxmaj percy 's wife ; constant you are , 
▁ xxmaj but yet a woman ; and for secrecy , 
▁ xxmaj no lady closer , for i well believe 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know , 
▁ xxmaj and so far will i trust thee , gentle xxmaj kate . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj how ? so far ? 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj not an inch further . xxmaj but hark you , xxmaj kate : 
▁ xxmaj whither i go , thither shall you go too ; 
▁ xxmaj to - day will i set forth , to - morrow you . 
▁ xxmaj will this content you , xxmaj kate , ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj it must of force . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj eastcheap . xxmaj the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head xxmaj tavern . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj prince and xxmaj poins . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj ned , prithee come out of that fat - room and lend me thy hand 
▁ to laugh a little . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj where hast been , xxmaj hal ? 
▁ xxmaj prince , . xxmaj with three or four loggerheads amongst three or 
▁ fourscore hogsheads . i have sounded the very bass - string of 
▁ humility . xxmaj sirrah , i am sworn brother to a leash of drawers and 
▁ can call them all by their christen names , as xxmaj tom , xxmaj dick , and 
▁ xxmaj francis . xxmaj they take it already upon their salvation that , though 
▁ i be but xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , yet i am the king of courtesy ; and tell 
▁ me flatly i am no proud xxmaj jack like xxmaj falstaff , but a xxmaj corinthian , a 
▁ lad of mettle , a good boy ( by the xxmaj lord , so they call me ! ) , and 
▁ when i am xxmaj king of xxmaj england i shall command all the good lads 
▁ xxmaj eastcheap . xxmaj they call drinking deep , dying scarlet ; and when 
▁ you breathe in your watering , they cry ' hem ! ' and bid you play it 
▁ off . xxmaj to conclude , i am so good a proficient in one quarter of an 
▁ hour that i can drink with any tinker in his own language during 
▁ my life . i tell thee , xxmaj ned , thou hast lost much honour that thou 
▁ wert not with me in this action . xxmaj but , sweet xxmaj ned- to sweeten which 
▁ name of xxmaj ned , i give thee this pennyworth of sugar , clapp'd even 
▁ now into my hand by an under - skinker , one that never spake other 
▁ xxmaj english in his life than ' eight shillings and sixpence , ' and ' you 
▁ are welcome , ' with this shrill addition , ' anon , anon , sir ! xxmaj score 
▁ a pint of bastard in the xxmaj half - moon , ' or so- but , xxmaj ned , to drive 
▁ away the time till xxmaj falstaff come , i prithee do thou stand in some 
▁ by - room while i question my puny drawer to what end be gave me 
▁ the sugar ; and do thou never leave calling ' francis ! ' that his 
▁ tale to me may be nothing but ' anon ! ' xxmaj step aside , and xxmaj i 'll show 
▁ thee a precedent . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj francis ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou art perfect . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj francis ! [ exit xxmaj poins . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter [ francis , a ] xxmaj drawer . 

▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj anon , anon , sir.- xxmaj look down into the xxmaj pomgarnet , xxmaj ralph . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj francis . 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj how long hast thou to serve , xxmaj francis ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj forsooth , five years , and as much as to- 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ within ] xxmaj francis ! 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj anon , anon , sir . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj five year ! by'r xxmaj lady , a long lease for the clinking of 
▁ xxmaj pewter . xxmaj but , xxmaj francis , darest thou be so valiant as to play the 
▁ coward with thy indenture and show it a fair pair of heels and 
▁ run from it ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . o xxmaj lord , sir , xxmaj i 'll be sworn upon all the books in xxmaj england i 
▁ could find in my heart- 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ within ] xxmaj francis ! 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj anon , sir . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj how old art thou , xxmaj francis ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj let me see . xxmaj about xxmaj michaelmas next i shall be- 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ within ] xxmaj francis ! 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj anon , sir . xxmaj pray stay a little , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj nay , but hark you , xxmaj francis . xxmaj for the sugar thou gavest me- 
▁ ' twas a pennyworth , wast not ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . o xxmaj lord ! i would it had been two ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . i will give thee for it a thousand pound . xxmaj ask me when thou 
▁ wilt , and , thou shalt have it . 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ within ] xxmaj francis ! 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj anon , anon . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj anon , xxmaj francis ? xxmaj no , xxmaj francis ; but to - morrow , xxmaj francis ; or , 
▁ xxmaj francis , a xxmaj thursday ; or indeed , xxmaj francis , when thou wilt . xxmaj but 
▁ xxmaj francis- 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj wilt thou rob this leathern - jerkin , crystal - button , 
▁ not - pated , agate - ring , puke - stocking , caddis - garter , 
▁ smooth - tongue , xxmaj spanish - pouch- 
▁ xxmaj fran . o xxmaj lord , sir , who do you mean ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why then , your brown bastard is your only drink ; for look 
▁ you , xxmaj francis , your white canvas doublet will sully . xxmaj in xxmaj barbary , 
▁ sir , it can not come to so much . 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj what , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ within ] xxmaj francis ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj away , you rogue ! xxmaj dost thou not hear them call ? 
▁ xxmaj here they both call him . xxmaj the xxmaj drawer stands amazed , 
▁ not knowing which way to go . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj vintner . 

▁ xxmaj vint . xxmaj what , stand'st thou still , and hear'st such a calling ? xxmaj look 
▁ to the guests within . [ exit xxmaj francis . ] xxmaj my lord , old xxmaj sir xxmaj john , with 
▁ half - a - dozen more , are at the door . xxmaj shall i let them in ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj let them alone awhile , and then open the door . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj vintner . ] 
▁ xxmaj poins ! 
▁ xxmaj poins . [ within ] xxmaj anon , anon , sir . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj poins . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj sirrah , xxmaj falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the 
▁ door . xxmaj shall we be merry ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj as merry as crickets , my lad . xxmaj but hark ye ; what cunning 
▁ match have you made with this jest of the drawer ? xxmaj come , what 's 
▁ the issue ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . i am now of all humours that have showed themselves humours 
▁ since the old days of goodman xxmaj adam to the pupil age of this 
▁ present this twelve o'clock at midnight . 
▁
▁ [ enter xxmaj francis . ] 

▁ xxmaj what 's o'clock , xxmaj francis ? 
▁ xxmaj fran . xxmaj anon , anon , sir . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj that ever this fellow should have fewer words than a 
▁ parrot , and yet the son of a woman ! xxmaj his industry is upstairs and 
▁ downstairs , his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning . i am not yet 
▁ of xxmaj percy 's mind , the xxmaj hotspur of the xxmaj north ; he that kills me some 
▁ six or seven dozen of xxmaj scots at a breakfast , washes his hands , and 
▁ says to his wife , ' fie upon this quiet life ! i want work . ' ' o my 
▁ sweet xxmaj harry , ' says she , ' how many hast thou kill'd to - day ? ' 
▁ ' give my roan horse a drench , ' says he , and answers ' some 
▁ fourteen , ' an hour after , ' a trifle , a trifle . ' i prithee call in 
▁ xxmaj falstaff . xxmaj i 'll play xxmaj percy , and that damn'd brawn shall play xxmaj dame 
▁ xxmaj mortimer his wife . ' rivo ! ' says the drunkard . xxmaj call in ribs , call 
▁ in tallow . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj falstaff , [ gadshill , xxmaj bardolph , and xxmaj peto ; 
▁ xxmaj francis follows with wine ] . 
▁
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj jack . xxmaj where hast thou been ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . a plague of all cowards , i say , and a vengeance too ! xxmaj marry and 
▁ amen ! xxmaj give me a cup of sack , boy . xxmaj ere i lead this life long , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ sew nether - stocks , and mend them and foot them too . a plague of 
▁ all cowards ! xxmaj give me a cup of sack , rogue . xxmaj is there no virtue 
▁ extant ? 
▁ xxmaj he drinketh . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj didst thou never see xxmaj titan kiss a dish of butter ? 
▁ xxmaj pitiful - hearted butter , that melted at the sweet tale of the sun ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou didst , then behold that compound . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj you rogue , here 's lime in this sack too ! xxmaj there is nothing but 
▁ roguery to be found in villanous man . xxmaj yet a coward is worse than 
▁ a cup of sack with lime in it- a villanous coward ! xxmaj go thy ways , 
▁ old xxmaj jack , die when thou wilt ; if manhood , good manhood , be not 
▁ forgot upon the face of the earth , then am i a shotten herring . 
▁ xxmaj there lives not three good men unhang'd in xxmaj england ; and one of 
▁ them is fat , and grows old . xxmaj god help the while ! a bad world , i 
▁ say . i would i were a weaver ; i could sing psalms or anything . a 
▁ plague of all cowards i say still ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj how now , woolsack ? xxmaj what mutter you ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . a king 's son ! xxmaj if i do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a 
▁ dagger of lath and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock 
▁ of wild geese , xxmaj i 'll never wear hair on my face more . xxmaj you xxmaj prince 
▁ of xxmaj wales ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , you whoreson round man , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj are not you a coward ? xxmaj answer me to that- and xxmaj poins there ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj zounds , ye fat paunch , an ye call me coward , by the 
▁ xxmaj lord , xxmaj i 'll stab thee . 
▁ xxmaj fal . i call thee coward ? xxmaj i 'll see thee damn'd ere i call thee 
▁ coward , but i would give a thousand pound i could run as fast as 
▁ thou canst . xxmaj you are straight enough in the shoulders ; you care 
▁ not who sees xxmaj your back . xxmaj call you that backing of your friends ? a 
▁ plague upon such backing ! xxmaj give me them that will face me . xxmaj give me 
▁ a cup of sack . i am a rogue if i drunk to - day . 
▁ xxmaj prince . o villain ! thy lips are scarce wip'd since thou drunk'st 
▁ last . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj all is one for that . ( he drinketh . ) a plague of all cowards 
▁ still say xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj there be four of us here have ta'en a 
▁ thousand pound this day morning . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj where is it , xxmaj jack ? xxmaj where is it ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj where is it , xxmaj taken from us it is . a hundred upon poor four of 
▁ us ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what , a hundred , man ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . i am a rogue if i were not at half - sword with a dozen of them 
▁ two hours together . i have scap'd by miracle . i am eight times 
▁ thrust through the doublet , four through the hose ; my buckler cut 
▁ through and through ; my sword hack'd like a handsaw- ecce signum ! 
▁ i never dealt better since i was a man . xxmaj all would not do . a 
▁ plague of all cowards ! xxmaj let them speak , xxmaj if they speak more or less 
▁ than truth , they are villains and the sons of darkness . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj speak , sirs . xxmaj how was it ? 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj we four set upon some dozen- 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj sixteen at least , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj and bound them . 
▁ xxmaj peto . xxmaj no , no , they were not bound . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj you rogue , they were bound , every man of them , or i am a xxmaj jew 
▁ else- an xxmaj ebrew xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxmaj gads . xxmaj as we were sharing , some six or seven fresh men sea upon us- 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj and unbound the rest , and then come in the other . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what , fought you with them all ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj all ? i know not what you call all , but if i fought not with 
▁ fifty of them , i am a bunch of radish ! xxmaj if there were not two or 
▁ three and fifty upon poor old xxmaj jack , then am i no two - legg'd 
▁ creature . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj pray xxmaj god you have not murd'red some of them . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj nay , that 's past praying for . i have pepper'd two of them . xxmaj two 
▁ i am sure i have paid , two rogues in buckram suits . i tell thee 
▁ what , xxmaj hal- if i tell thee a lie , spit in my face , call me horse . 
▁ xxmaj thou knowest my old ward . xxmaj here i lay , and thus i bore my point . 
▁ xxmaj four rogues in buckram let drive at me . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what , four ? xxmaj thou saidst but two even now . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj four , xxmaj hal . i told thee four . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj ay , ay , he said four . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj these four came all afront and mainly thrust at me . i made me 
▁ no more ado but took all their seven points in my target , thus . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj seven ? xxmaj why , there were but four even now . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj in buckram ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj ay , four , in buckram suits . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj seven , by these hilts , or i am a villain else . 
▁ xxmaj prince . [ aside to xxmaj poins ] xxmaj prithee let him alone . xxmaj we shall have more 
▁ anon . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj dost thou hear me , xxmaj hal ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj ay , and mark thee too , xxmaj jack . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj do so , for it is worth the list'ning to . xxmaj these nine in buckram 
▁ that i told thee of- 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj so , two more already . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj their points being broken- 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj down fell their hose . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj began to give me ground ; but i followed me close , came in , 
▁ foot and hand , and with a thought seven of the eleven i paid . 
▁ xxmaj prince . o monstrous ! xxmaj eleven buckram men grown out of two ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj but , as the devil would have it , three misbegotten knaves in 
▁ xxmaj kendal green came at my back and let drive at me ; for it was so 
▁ dark , xxmaj hal , that thou couldst not see thy hand . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj these lies are like their father that begets them- gross as 
▁ a mountain , open , palpable . xxmaj why , thou clay - brain'd guts , thou 
▁ knotty - pated fool , thou whoreson obscene greasy tallow - catch- 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj what , art thou mad ? art thou mad ? xxmaj is not the truth the truth ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , how couldst thou know these men in xxmaj kendal green when 
▁ it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand ? xxmaj come , tell us your 
▁ reason . xxmaj what sayest thou to this ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj come , your reason , xxmaj jack , your reason . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj what , upon compulsion ? xxmaj zounds , an i were at the strappado or 
▁ all the racks in the world , i would not tell you on compulsion . 
▁ xxmaj give you a reason on compulsion ? xxmaj if reasons were as plentiful as 
▁ blackberries , i would give no man a reason upon compulsion , xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj i 'll be no longer guilty , of this sin ; this sanguine 
▁ coward , this bed - presser , this horseback - breaker , this huge hill 
▁ of flesh- 
▁ xxmaj fal . ' sblood , you starveling , you elf - skin , you dried 
▁ neat's - tongue , you bull 's sizzle , you stockfish- o for breath to 
▁ utter what is like thee!- you tailor 's yard , you sheath , you 
▁ bowcase , you vile standing tuck ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , breathe awhile , and then to it again ; and when thou 
▁ hast tired thyself in base comparisons , hear me speak but this . 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj mark , xxmaj jack . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj we two saw you four set on four , and bound them and were 
▁ masters of their wealth . xxmaj mark now how a plain tale shall put you 
▁ down . xxmaj then did we two set on you four and , with a word , outfac'd 
▁ you from your prize , and have it ; yea , and can show it you here 
▁ in the house . xxmaj and , xxmaj falstaff , you carried your guts away as 
▁ nimbly , with as quick dexterity , and roar'd for mercy , and still 
▁ run and roar'd , as ever i heard bullcalf . xxmaj what a slave art thou 
▁ to hack thy sword as thou hast done , and then say it was in 
▁ fight ! xxmaj what trick , what device , what starting hole canst thou now 
▁ find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxmaj come , let 's hear , xxmaj jack . xxmaj what trick hast thou now ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , i knew ye as well as he that made ye . xxmaj why , hear 
▁ you , my masters . xxmaj was it for me to kill the heir apparent ? xxmaj should 
▁ i turn upon the true prince ? xxmaj why , thou knowest i am as valiant as 
▁ xxmaj hercules ; but beware instinct . xxmaj the lion will not touch the true 
▁ prince . xxmaj instinct is a great matter . i was now a coward on 
▁ instinct . i shall think the better of myself , and thee , during my 
▁ life- i for a valiant lion , and thou for a true prince . xxmaj but , by 
▁ the xxmaj lord , lads , i am glad you have the money . xxmaj hostess , clap to 
▁ the doors . xxmaj watch to - night , pray to - morrow . xxmaj gallants , lads , boys , 
▁ hearts of gold , all the titles of good fellowship come to you ! 
▁ xxmaj what , shall we be merry ? xxmaj shall we have a play extempore ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj content- and the argument shall be thy running away . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj ah , no more of that , xxmaj hal , an thou lovest me ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hostess . 

▁ xxmaj host . o xxmaj jesu , my lord the xxmaj prince ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj how now , my lady the hostess ? xxmaj what say'st thou to me ? 
▁ xxmaj host . xxmaj marry , my lord , there is a nobleman of the court at door 
▁ would speak with you . xxmaj he says he comes from your father . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj give him as much as will make him a royal man , and send him 
▁ back again to my mother . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj what manner of man is he ? 
▁ xxmaj host . xxmaj an old man . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj what doth gravity out of his bed at midnight ? xxmaj shall i give him 
▁ his answer ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj prithee do , xxmaj jack . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj faith , and xxmaj i 'll send him packing . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj now , sirs . xxmaj by'r xxmaj lady , you fought fair ; so did you , xxmaj peto ; so 
▁ did you , xxmaj bardolph . xxmaj you are lions too , you ran away upon instinct , 
▁ you will not touch the true prince ; no- fie ! 
▁ xxmaj bard . xxmaj faith , i ran when i saw others run . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj tell me now in earnest , how came xxmaj falstaff 's sword so 
▁ hack'd ? 
▁ xxmaj peto . xxmaj why , he hack'd it with his dagger , and said he would swear 
▁ truth out of xxmaj england but he would make you believe it was done in 
▁ fight , and persuaded us to do the like . 
▁ xxmaj bard . xxmaj yea , and to tickle our noses with speargrass to make them 
▁ bleed , and then to beslubber our garments with it and swear it 
▁ was the blood of true men . i did that i did not this seven year 
▁ before- i blush'd to hear his monstrous devices . 
▁ xxmaj prince . o villain ! thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago 
▁ and wert taken with the manner , and ever since thou hast blush'd 
▁ extempore . xxmaj thou hadst fire and sword on thy side , and yet thou 
▁ ran'st away . xxmaj what instinct hadst thou for it ? 
▁ xxmaj bard . xxmaj my lord , do you see these meteors ? xxmaj do you behold these 
▁ exhalations ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . i do . 
▁ xxmaj bard . xxmaj what think you they portend ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj hot livers and cold purses . 
▁ xxmaj bard . xxmaj choler , my lord , if rightly taken . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj no , if rightly taken , halter . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj falstaff . 

▁ xxmaj here comes lean xxmaj jack ; here comes bare - bone . xxmaj how now , my sweet 
▁ creature of bombast ? xxmaj how long is't ago , xxmaj jack , since thou sawest 
▁ thine own knee ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj my own knee ? xxmaj when i was about thy years , xxmaj hal , i was not an 
▁ eagle 's talent in the waist ; i could have crept into any 
▁ alderman 's thumb - ring . a plague of sighing and grief ! xxmaj it blows a 
▁ man up like a bladder . xxmaj there 's villanous news abroad . xxmaj here was 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj bracy from your father . xxmaj you must to the court in the 
▁ morning . xxmaj that same mad fellow of the xxmaj north , xxmaj percy , and he of 
▁ xxmaj wales that gave xxmaj amamon the bastinado , and made xxmaj lucifer cuckold , 
▁ and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a xxmaj welsh 
▁ hook- what a plague call you him ? 
▁ xxmaj poins . xxup o , xxmaj glendower . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj owen , xxmaj owen- the same ; and his son - in - law xxmaj mortimer , and old 
▁ xxmaj northumberland , and that sprightly xxmaj scot of xxmaj scots , xxmaj douglas , that 
▁ runs a - horseback up a hill perpendicular- 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj he that rides at high speed and with his pistol kills a 
▁ sparrow flying . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj you have hit it . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj so did he never the sparrow . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , that rascal hath good metal in him ; he will not run . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , what a rascal art thou then , to praise him so for 
▁ running ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj a - horseback , ye cuckoo ! but afoot he will not budge a foot . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj yes , xxmaj jack , upon instinct . 
▁ xxmaj fal . i grant ye , upon instinct . xxmaj well , he is there too , and one 
▁ xxmaj mordake , and a thousand bluecaps more . xxmaj worcester is stol'n away 
▁ to - night ; thy father 's beard is turn'd white with the news ; you 
▁ may buy land now as cheap as stinking mack'rel . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why then , it is like , if there come a hot xxmaj june , and this 
▁ civil buffeting hold , we shall buy maidenheads as they buy 
▁ hobnails , by the hundreds . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj by the mass , lad , thou sayest true ; it is like we shall have 
▁ good trading that way . xxmaj but tell me , xxmaj hal , art not thou horrible 
▁ afeard ? xxmaj thou being heir apparent , could the world pick thee out 
▁ three such enemies again as that fiend xxmaj douglas , that spirit 
▁ xxmaj percy , and that devil xxmaj glendower ? xxmaj art thou not horribly afraid ? 
▁ xxmaj doth not thy blood thrill at it ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj not a whit , i ' faith . i lack some of thy instinct . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , thou wilt be horribly chid to - morrow when thou comest to 
▁ thy father . xxmaj if thou love file , practise an answer . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the 
▁ particulars of my life . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj shall xxup i ? xxmaj content . xxmaj this chair shall be my state , this dagger my 
▁ sceptre , and this cushion my , crown . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thy state is taken for a join'd - stool , thy golden sceptre 
▁ for a leaden dagger , and thy precious rich crown for a pitiful 
▁ bald crown . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee , now shalt 
▁ thou be moved . xxmaj give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red , 
▁ that it may be thought i have wept ; for i must speak in passion , 
▁ and i will do it in xxmaj king xxmaj cambyses ' vein . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , here is my leg . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj and here is my speech . xxmaj stand aside , nobility . 
▁ xxmaj host . o xxmaj jesu , this is excellent sport , i ' faith ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj weep not , sweet queen , for trickling tears are vain . 
▁ xxmaj host . xxup o , the xxmaj father , how he holds his countenance ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , lords , convey my tristful queen ! 
▁ xxmaj for tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes . 
▁ xxmaj host . o xxmaj jesu , he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as 
▁ ever i see ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj peace , good pintpot . xxmaj peace , good tickle - brain.- xxmaj harry , i do 
▁ not only marvel where thou spendest thy time , but also how thou 
▁ art accompanied . xxmaj for though the camomile , the more it is trodden 
▁ on , the faster it grows , yet youth , the more it is wasted , the 
▁ sooner it wears . xxmaj that thou art my son i have partly thy mother 's 
▁ word , partly my own opinion , but chiefly a villanous trick of 
▁ thine eye and a foolish hanging of thy nether lip that doth 
▁ warrant me . xxmaj if then thou be son to me , here lies the point : why , 
▁ being son to me , art thou so pointed at ? xxmaj shall the blessed sun of 
▁ heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries ? a question not to be 
▁ ask'd . xxmaj shall the son of xxmaj england prove a thief and take purses ? a 
▁ question to be ask'd . xxmaj there is a thing , xxmaj harry , which thou hast 
▁ often heard of , and it is known to many in our land by the name 
▁ of pitch . xxmaj this pitch , as ancient writers do report , doth defile ; 
▁ so doth the company thou keepest . xxmaj for , xxmaj harry , now i do not speak 
▁ to thee in drink , but in tears ; not in pleasure , but in passion ; 
▁ not in words only , but in woes also : and yet there is a virtuous 
▁ man whom i have often noted in thy company , but i know not his 
▁ name . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what manner of man , an it like your xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . a goodly portly man , i ' faith , and a corpulent ; of a cheerful 
▁ look , a pleasing eye , and a most noble carriage ; and , as i think , 
▁ his age some fifty , or , by'r xxmaj lady , inclining to threescore ; and 
▁ now i remember me , his name is xxmaj falstaff . xxmaj if that man should be 
▁ lewdly , given , he deceiveth me ; for , xxmaj harry , i see virtue in his 
▁ looks . xxmaj if then the tree may be known by the fruit , as the fruit 
▁ by the tree , then , peremptorily i speak it , there is virtue in 
▁ that xxmaj falstaff . xxmaj him keep with , the rest banish . xxmaj and tell me now , 
▁ thou naughty varlet , tell me where hast thou been this month ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj dost thou speak like a king ? xxmaj do thou stand for me , and xxmaj i 'll 
▁ play my father . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj depose me ? xxmaj if thou dost it half so gravely , so majestically , 
▁ both in word and matter , hang me up by the heels for a 
▁ rabbit - sucker or a poulter 's hare . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj well , here i am set . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj and here i stand . xxmaj judge , my masters . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj now , xxmaj harry , whence come you ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj my noble lord , from xxmaj eastcheap . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj the complaints i hear of thee are grievous . 
▁ xxmaj fal . ' sblood , my lord , they are false ! xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll tickle ye for a 
▁ young prince , i ' faith . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj swearest thou , ungracious boy ? xxmaj henceforth ne'er look on me . 
▁ xxmaj thou art violently carried away from grace . xxmaj there is a devil 
▁ haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man ; a tun of man is 
▁ thy companion . xxmaj why dost thou converse with that trunk of humours , 
▁ that bolting hutch of beastliness , that swoll'n parcel of 
▁ dropsies , that huge bombard of sack , that stuff'd cloakbag of 
▁ guts , that roasted xxmaj manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly , 
▁ that reverend vice , that grey iniquity , that father ruffian , that 
▁ vanity in years ? xxmaj wherein is he good , but to taste sack and drink 
▁ it ? wherein neat and cleanly , but to carve a capon and eat it ? 
▁ wherein cunning , but in craft ? wherein crafty , but in villany ? 
▁ wherein villanous , but in all things ? wherein worthy , but in 
▁ nothing ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . i would your xxmaj grace would take me with you . xxmaj whom means your 
▁ xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj that villanous abominable misleader of youth , xxmaj falstaff , 
▁ that old white - bearded xxmaj satan . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj my lord , the man i know . 
▁ xxmaj prince . i know thou dost . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj but to say i know more harm in him than in myself were to say 
▁ more than i know . xxmaj that he is old ( the more the pity ) his white 
▁ hairs do witness it ; but that he is ( saving your reverence ) a 
▁ whoremaster , that i utterly deny . xxmaj if sack and sugar be a fault , 
▁ xxmaj god help the wicked ! xxmaj if to be old and merry be a sin , then many 
▁ an old host that i know is damn'd . xxmaj if to be fat be to be hated , 
▁ then xxmaj pharaoh 's lean kine are to be loved . xxmaj no , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj banish xxmaj peto , banish xxmaj bardolph , banish xxmaj poins ; but for sweet xxmaj jack 
▁ xxmaj falstaff , kind xxmaj jack xxmaj falstaff , true xxmaj jack xxmaj falstaff , valiant xxmaj jack 
▁ xxmaj falstaff , and therefore more valiant being , as he is , old xxmaj jack 
▁ xxmaj falstaff , banish not him thy xxmaj harry 's company , banish not him thy 
▁ xxmaj harry 's company . xxmaj banish plump xxmaj jack , and banish all the world ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . i do , i will . [ a knocking heard . ] 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj hostess , xxmaj francis , and xxmaj bardolph . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj bardolph , running . 

▁ xxmaj bard . xxup o , my lord , my lord ! the sheriff with a most monstrous watch 
▁ is at the door . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj out , ye rogue ! xxmaj play out the play . i have much to say in the 
▁ behalf of that xxmaj falstaff . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj hostess .