xxbos for their bareness , i am surd they never learn'd that of me . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll be sworn , unless you call three fingers on the 
▁ ribs bare . xxmaj but , sirrah , make haste . xxmaj percy 's already in the 
▁ field . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj what , is the xxmaj king encamp'd ? 
▁ xxmaj west . xxmaj he is , xxmaj sir xxmaj john . i fear we shall stay too long . 
▁ [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , 
▁ xxmaj to the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast 
▁ xxmaj fits a dull fighter and a keen guest . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the rebel camp near xxmaj shrewsbury . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hotspur , xxmaj worcester , xxmaj douglas , xxmaj vernon . 

▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj we 'll fight with him to - night . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj it may not be . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj you give him then advantage . 
▁ xxmaj ver . xxmaj not a whit . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj why say you so ? xxmaj looks he no for supply ? 
▁ xxmaj ver . xxmaj so do we . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj his is certain , ours 's doubtful . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj good cousin , be advis'd ; stir not to - night . 
▁ xxmaj ver . xxmaj do not , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj you do not counsel well . 
▁ xxmaj you speak it out of fear and cold heart . 
▁ xxmaj ver . xxmaj do me no slander , xxmaj douglas . xxmaj by my life- 
▁ xxmaj and i dare well maintain it with my life- 
▁ xxmaj if well - respected honour bid me on 
▁ i hold as little counsel with weak fear 
▁ xxmaj as you , my lord , or any xxmaj scot that this day lives . 
▁ xxmaj let it be seen to - morrow in the battle 
▁ xxmaj which of us fears . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj yea , or to - night . 
▁ xxmaj ver . xxmaj content . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj to - night , say xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj come , come , it may not be . i wonder much , 
▁ xxmaj being men of such great leading as you are , 
▁ xxmaj that you foresee not what impediments 
▁ xxmaj drag back our expedition . xxmaj certain horse 
▁ xxmaj of my cousin xxmaj vernon 's are not yet come up . 
▁ xxmaj your uncle xxmaj worcester 's horse came but to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj and now their pride and mettle is asleep , 
▁ xxmaj their courage with hard labour tame and dull , 
▁ xxmaj that not a horse is half the half of himself . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj so are the horses of the enemy , 
▁ xxmaj in general journey - bated and brought low . 
▁ xxmaj the better part of ours are full of rest . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj the number of the xxmaj king exceedeth ours . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , cousin , stay till all come in . 

▁ xxmaj the trumpet sounds a parley . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt . 

▁ xxmaj blunt . i come with gracious offers from the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt , and would to xxmaj god 
▁ xxmaj you were of our determination ! 
▁ xxmaj some of us love you well ; and even those some 
▁ xxmaj envy your great deservings and good name , 
▁ xxmaj because you are not of our quality , 
▁ xxmaj but stand against us like an enemy . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . xxmaj and xxmaj god defend but still i should stand so , 
▁ xxmaj so long as out of limit and true rule 
▁ xxmaj you stand against anointed majesty ! 
▁ xxmaj but to my charge . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath sent to know 
▁ xxmaj the nature of your griefs ; and whereupon 
▁ xxmaj you conjure from the breast of civil peace 
▁ xxmaj such bold hostility , teaching his duteous land 
▁ xxmaj audacious cruelty . xxmaj if that the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj have any way your good deserts forgot , 
▁ xxmaj which he confesseth to be manifold , 
▁ xxmaj he bids you name your griefs , and with all speed 
▁ xxmaj you shall have your desires with interest , 
▁ xxmaj and pardon absolute for yourself and these 
▁ xxmaj herein misled by your suggestion . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj the xxmaj king is kind ; and well we know the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj knows at what time to promise , when to pay . 
▁ xxmaj my father and my uncle and myself 
▁ xxmaj did give him that same royalty he wears ; 
▁ xxmaj and when he was not six - and - twenty strong , 
▁ xxmaj sick in the world 's regard , wretched and low , 
▁ a poor unminded outlaw sneaking home , 
▁ xxmaj my father gave him welcome to the shore ; 
▁ xxmaj and when he heard him swear and vow to xxmaj god 
▁ xxmaj he came but to be xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj to sue his livery and beg his peace , 
▁ xxmaj with tears of innocency and terms of zeal , 
▁ xxmaj my father , in kind heart and pity mov'd , 
▁ xxmaj swore him assistance , and performed it too . 
▁ xxmaj now , when the lords and barons of the realm 
▁ xxmaj perceiv'd xxmaj northumberland did lean to him , 
▁ xxmaj the more and less came in with cap and knee ; 
▁ xxmaj met him on boroughs , cities , villages , 
▁ xxmaj attended him on bridges , stood in lanes , 
▁ xxmaj laid gifts before him , proffer'd him their oaths , 
▁ xxmaj give him their heirs as pages , followed him 
▁ xxmaj even at the heels in golden multitudes . 
▁ xxmaj he presently , as greatness knows itself , 
▁ xxmaj steps me a little higher than his vow 
▁ xxmaj made to my father , while his blood was poor , 
▁ xxmaj upon the naked shore at xxmaj ravenspurgh ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , forsooth , takes on him to reform 
▁ xxmaj some certain edicts and some strait decrees 
▁ xxmaj that lie too heavy on the commonwealth ; 
▁ xxmaj cries out upon abuses , seems to weep 
▁ xxmaj over his country 's wrongs ; and by this face , 
▁ xxmaj this seeming brow of justice , did he win 
▁ xxmaj the hearts of all that he did angle for ; 
▁ xxmaj proceeded further- cut me off the heads 
▁ xxmaj of all the favourites that the absent xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj in deputation left behind him here 
▁ xxmaj when he was personal in the xxmaj irish war . 
▁ xxmaj but . xxmaj tut ! i came not to hear this . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj then to the point . 
▁ xxmaj in short time after lie depos'd the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj soon after that depriv'd him of his life ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the neck of that task'd the whole state ; 
▁ xxmaj to make that worse , suff'red his kinsman xxmaj march 
▁ ( who is , if every owner were well placid , 
▁ xxmaj indeed his king ) to be engag'd in xxmaj wales , 
▁ xxmaj there without ransom to lie forfeited ; 
▁ xxmaj disgrac'd me in my happy victories , 
▁ xxmaj sought to entrap me by intelligence ; 
▁ xxmaj rated mine uncle from the xxmaj council board ; 
▁ xxmaj in rage dismiss'd my father from the court ; 
▁ xxmaj broke an oath on oath , committed wrong on wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj and in conclusion drove us to seek out 
▁ xxmaj this head of safety , and withal to pry 
▁ xxmaj into his title , the which we find 
▁ xxmaj too indirect for long continuance . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . xxmaj shall i return this answer to the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj not so , xxmaj sir xxmaj walter . xxmaj we 'll withdraw awhile . 
▁ xxmaj go to the xxmaj king ; and let there be impawn'd 
▁ xxmaj some surety for a safe return again , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj in the morning early shall mine uncle 
▁ xxmaj bring him our purposes ; and so farewell . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . i would you would accept of grace and love . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj and may be so we shall . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . xxmaj pray xxmaj god you do . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj york . xxmaj the xxmaj archbishop 's xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter the xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj york and xxmaj sir xxmaj michael . 

▁ xxmaj arch . xxmaj hie , good xxmaj sir xxmaj michael ; bear this sealed brief 
▁ xxmaj with winged haste to the xxmaj lord xxmaj marshal ; 
▁ xxmaj this to my cousin xxmaj scroop ; and all the rest 
▁ xxmaj to whom they are directed . xxmaj if you knew 
▁ xxmaj how much they do import , you would make haste . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxup m. xxmaj my good lord , 
▁ i guess their tenour . 
▁ xxmaj arch . xxmaj like enough you do . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow , good xxmaj sir xxmaj michael , is a day 
▁ xxmaj wherein the fortune of ten thousand men 
▁ xxmaj must bide the touch ; for , sir , at xxmaj shrewsbury , 
▁ xxmaj as i am truly given to understand , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king with mighty and quick - raised power 
▁ xxmaj meets with xxmaj lord xxmaj harry ; and i fear , xxmaj sir xxmaj michael , 
▁ xxmaj what with the sickness of xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj whose power was in the first proportion , 
▁ xxmaj and what with xxmaj owen xxmaj glendower 's absence thence , 
▁ xxmaj who with them was a rated sinew too 
▁ xxmaj and comes not in , overrul'd by prophecies- 
▁ i fear the power of xxmaj percy is too weak 
▁ xxmaj to wage an instant trial with the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxup m. xxmaj why , my good lord , you need not fear ; 
▁ xxmaj there is xxmaj douglas and xxmaj lord xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj arch . xxmaj no , xxmaj mortimer is not there . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxup m. xxmaj but there is xxmaj mordake , xxmaj vernon , xxmaj lord xxmaj harry xxmaj percy , 
▁ xxmaj and there is my xxmaj lord of xxmaj worcester , and a head 
▁ xxmaj of gallant warriors , noble gentlemen . 
▁ xxmaj arch . xxmaj and so there is ; but yet the xxmaj king hath drawn 
▁ xxmaj the special head of all the land together- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj westmoreland and warlike xxmaj blunt , 
▁ xxmaj and many moe corrivals and dear men 
▁ xxmaj of estimation and command in arms . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxup m. xxmaj doubt not , my lord , they shall be well oppos'd . 
▁ xxmaj arch . i hope no less , yet needful ' tis to fear ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to prevent the worst , xxmaj sir xxmaj michael , speed . 
▁ xxmaj for if xxmaj lord xxmaj percy thrive not , ere the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj dismiss his power , he means to visit us , 
▁ xxmaj for he hath heard of our confederacy , 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis but wisdom to make strong against him . 
▁ xxmaj therefore make haste . i must go write again 
▁ xxmaj to other friends ; and so farewell , xxmaj sir xxmaj michael . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the xxmaj king 's camp near xxmaj shrewsbury . 

 xxmaj enter the xxmaj king , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt , 
 xxmaj falstaff . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj how bloodily the sun begins to peer 
▁ xxmaj above yon busky hill ! xxmaj the day looks pale 
▁ xxmaj at his distemp'rature . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj the southern wind 
▁ xxmaj doth play the trumpet to his purposes 
▁ xxmaj and by his hollow whistling in the leaves 
▁ xxmaj foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj theft with the losers let it sympathize , 
▁ xxmaj for nothing can seem foul to those that win . 

▁ xxmaj the trumpet sounds . xxmaj enter xxmaj worcester [ and xxmaj vernon ] . 

▁ xxmaj how , now , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj worcester ? ' tis not well 
▁ xxmaj that you and i should meet upon such terms 
▁ xxmaj as now we meet . xxmaj you have deceiv'd our trust 
▁ xxmaj and made us doff our easy robes of peace 
▁ xxmaj to crush our old limbs in ungentle steel . 
▁ xxmaj this is not well , my lord ; this is not well . 
▁ xxmaj what say you to it ? xxmaj will you again unknit 
▁ xxmaj this churlish knot of all - abhorred war , 
▁ xxmaj and move in that obedient orb again 
▁ xxmaj where you did give a fair and natural light , 
▁ xxmaj and be no more an exhal'd meteor , 
▁ a prodigy of fear , and a portent 
▁ xxmaj of broached mischief to the unborn times ? 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj hear me , my liege . 
▁ xxmaj for mine own part , i could be well content 
▁ xxmaj to entertain the lag - end of my life 
▁ xxmaj with quiet hours ; for i do protest 
▁ i have not sought the day of this dislike . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj you have not sought it ! xxmaj how comes it then , 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj rebellion lay in his way , and he found it . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj peace , chewet , peace ! 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj it pleas'd your xxmaj majesty to turn your looks 
▁ xxmaj of favour from myself and all our house ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i must remember you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj we were the first and dearest of your friends . 
▁ xxmaj for you my staff of office did i break 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj richard 's time , and posted day and night 
▁ xxmaj to meet you on the way and kiss your hand 
▁ xxmaj when yet you were in place and in account 
▁ xxmaj nothing so strong and fortunate as xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj it was myself , my brother , and his son 
▁ xxmaj that brought you home and boldly did outdare 
▁ xxmaj the dangers of the time . xxmaj you swore to us , 
▁ xxmaj and you did swear that oath at xxmaj doncaster , 
▁ xxmaj that you did nothing purpose ' gainst the state , 
▁ xxmaj nor claim no further than your new - fall'n right , 
▁ xxmaj the seat of xxmaj gaunt , dukedom of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxmaj to this we swore our aid . xxmaj but in short space 
▁ xxmaj it it rain'd down fortune show'ring on your head , 
▁ xxmaj and such a flood of greatness fell on you- 
▁ xxmaj what with our help , what with the absent xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj what with the injuries of a wanton time , 
▁ xxmaj the seeming sufferances that you had borne , 
▁ xxmaj and the contrarious winds that held the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj so long in his unlucky xxmaj irish wars 
▁ xxmaj that all in xxmaj england did repute him dead- 
▁ xxmaj and from this swarm of fair advantages 
▁ xxmaj you took occasion to be quickly woo'd 
▁ xxmaj to gripe the general sway into your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj forgot your oath to us at xxmaj doncaster ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being fed by us , you us'd us so 
▁ xxmaj as that ungentle gull , the cuckoo 's bird , 
▁ xxmaj useth the sparrow- did oppress our nest ; 
▁ xxmaj grew , by our feeding to so great a bulk 
▁ xxmaj that even our love thirst not come near your sight 
▁ xxmaj for fear of swallowing ; but with nimble wing 
▁ xxmaj we were enforc'd for safety sake to fly 
▁ xxmaj out of your sight and raise this present head ; 
▁ xxmaj whereby we stand opposed by such means 
▁ xxmaj as you yourself have forg'd against yourself 
▁ xxmaj by unkind usage , dangerous countenance , 
▁ xxmaj and violation of all faith and troth 
▁ xxmaj sworn to tis in your younger enterprise . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj these things , indeed , you have articulate , 
▁ xxmaj proclaim'd at market crosses , read in churches , 
▁ xxmaj to face the garment of rebellion 
▁ xxmaj with some fine colour that may please the eye 
▁ xxmaj of fickle changelings and poor discontents , 
▁ xxmaj which gape and rub the elbow at the news 
▁ xxmaj of hurlyburly innovation . 
▁ xxmaj and never yet did insurrection want 
▁ xxmaj such water colours to impaint his cause , 
▁ xxmaj nor moody beggars , starving for a time 
▁ xxmaj of pell - mell havoc and confusion . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj in both our armies there is many a soul 
▁ xxmaj shall pay full dearly for this encounter , 
▁ xxmaj if once they join in trial . xxmaj tell your nephew 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales doth join with all the world 
▁ xxmaj in praise of xxmaj henry xxmaj percy . xxmaj by my hopes , 
▁ xxmaj this present enterprise set off his head , 
▁ i do not think a braver gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj more active - valiant or more valiant - young , 
▁ xxmaj more daring or more bold , is now alive 
▁ xxmaj to grace this latter age with noble deeds . 
▁ xxmaj for my part , i may speak it to my shame , 
▁ i have a truant been to chivalry ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i hear he doth account me too . 
▁ xxmaj yet this before my father 's xxmaj majesty- 
▁ i am content that he shall take the odds 
▁ xxmaj of his great name and estimation , 
▁ xxmaj and will to save the blood on either side , 
▁ xxmaj try fortune with him in a single fight . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj and , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , so dare we venture thee , 
▁ xxmaj albeit considerations infinite 
▁ xxmaj do make against it . xxmaj no , good xxmaj worcester , no ! 
▁ xxmaj we love our people well ; even those we love 
▁ xxmaj that are misled upon your cousin 's part ; 
▁ xxmaj and , will they take the offer of our grace , 
▁ xxmaj both he , and they , and you , yea , every man 
▁ xxmaj shall be my friend again , and xxmaj i 'll be his . 
▁ xxmaj so tell your cousin , and bring me word 
▁ xxmaj what he will do . xxmaj but if he will not yield , 
▁ xxmaj rebuke and dread correction wait on us , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall do their office . xxmaj so be gone . 
▁ xxmaj we will not now be troubled with reply . 
▁ xxmaj we offer fair ; take it advisedly . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj worcester [ with xxmaj vernon ] 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj it will not be accepted , on my life . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj douglas and the xxmaj hotspur both together 
▁ xxmaj are confident against the world in arms . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj hence , therefore , every leader to his charge ; 
▁ xxmaj for , on their answer , will we set on them , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj god befriend us as our cause is just ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj manent xxmaj prince , xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj hal , if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me , so ! 
▁ ' tis a point of friendship . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj nothing but a xxmaj colossus can do thee that friendship . 
▁ xxmaj say thy prayers , and farewell . 
▁ xxmaj fal . i would ' twere bedtime , xxmaj hal , and all well . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , thou owest xxmaj god a death . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj fal . ' tis not due yet . i would be loath to pay him before his day . 
▁ xxmaj what need i be so forward with him that calls not on me ? xxmaj well , 
▁ ' tis no matter ; honour pricks me on . xxmaj yea , but how if honour prick 
▁ me off when i come on ? xxmaj how then ? xxmaj can honor set to a leg ? xxmaj no . xxmaj or 
▁ an arm ? xxmaj no . xxmaj or take away the grief of a wound ? xxmaj no . xxmaj honour hath no 
▁ skill in surgery then ? xxmaj no . xxmaj what is honour ? a word . xxmaj what is that 
▁ word honour ? xxmaj air . a trim reckoning ! xxmaj who hath it ? xxmaj he that died a 
▁ xxmaj wednesday . xxmaj doth he feel it ? xxmaj no . xxmaj doth be bear it ? xxmaj no . ' tis 
▁ insensible then ? xxmaj yea , to the dead . xxmaj but will it not live with the 
▁ living ? xxmaj no . xxmaj why ? xxmaj detraction will not suffer it . xxmaj therefore xxmaj i 'll 
▁ none of it . xxmaj honour is a mere scutcheon- and so ends my catechism . 
 xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the rebel camp . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj worcester and xxmaj sir xxmaj richard xxmaj vernon . 

▁ xxmaj wor . o no , my nephew must not know , xxmaj sir xxmaj richard , 
▁ xxmaj the liberal and kind offer of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj ver . ' twere best he did . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj then are we all undone . 
▁ xxmaj it is not possible , it can not be 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king should keep his word in loving us . 
▁ xxmaj he will suspect us still and find a time 
▁ xxmaj to punish this offence in other faults . 
▁ xxmaj suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj for treason is but trusted like the fox 
▁ xxmaj who , ne'er so tame , so cherish'd and lock'd up , 
▁ xxmaj will have a wild trick of his ancestors . 
▁ xxmaj look how we can , or sad or merrily , 
▁ xxmaj interpretation will misquote our looks , 
▁ xxmaj and we shall feed like oxen at a stall , 
▁ xxmaj the better cherish'd , still the nearer death . 
▁ xxmaj my nephew 's trespass may be well forgot ; 
▁ xxmaj it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood , 
▁ xxmaj and an adopted name of privilege- 
▁ a hare - brained xxmaj hotspur govern'd by a spleen . 
▁ xxmaj all his offences live upon my head 
▁ xxmaj and on his father 's . xxmaj we did train him on ; 
▁ xxmaj and , his corruption being taken from us , 
▁ xxmaj we , as the spring of all , shall pay for all . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , good cousin , let not xxmaj harry know , 
▁ xxmaj in any case , the offer of the xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hotspur [ and xxmaj douglas ] . 

▁ xxmaj ver . xxmaj deliver what you will , xxmaj i 'll say ' tis so . 
▁ xxmaj here comes your cousin . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj my uncle is return'd . 
▁ xxmaj deliver up my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxmaj uncle , what news ? 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj the xxmaj king will bid you battle presently . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj defy him by the xxmaj lord xxmaj of xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj lord xxmaj douglas , go you and tell him so . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj marry , and shall , and very willingly . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj there is no seeming mercy in the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj did you beg any , xxmaj god forbid ! 
▁ xxmaj wor . i told him gently of our grievances , 
▁ xxmaj of his oath - breaking ; which he mended thus , 
▁ xxmaj by now forswearing that he is forsworn . 
▁ xxmaj he calls us rebels , traitors , aid will scourge 
▁ xxmaj with haughty arms this hateful name in us . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj douglas . 

▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj arm , gentlemen ! to arms ! for i have thrown 
▁ a brave defiance in xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's teeth , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj westmoreland , that was engag'd , did bear it ; 
▁ xxmaj which can not choose but bring him quickly on . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales stepp'd forth before the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj and , nephew , challeng'd you to single fight . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxup o , would the quarrel lay upon our heads , 
▁ xxmaj and that no man might draw short breath to - day 
▁ xxmaj but i and xxmaj harry xxmaj monmouth ! xxmaj tell me , tell me , 
▁ xxmaj how show'd his tasking ? xxmaj seem'd it in contempt ? 
▁ xxmaj no , by my soul . i never in my life 
▁ xxmaj did hear a challenge urg'd more modestly , 
▁ xxmaj unless a brother should a brother dare 
▁ xxmaj to gentle exercise and proof of arms . 
▁ xxmaj he gave you all the duties of a man ; 
▁ xxmaj trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj spoke your deservings like a chronicle ; 
▁ xxmaj making you ever better than his praise 
▁ xxmaj by still dispraising praise valued with you ; 
▁ xxmaj and , which became him like a prince indeed , 
▁ xxmaj he made a blushing cital of himself , 
▁ xxmaj and chid his truant youth with such a grace 
▁ xxmaj as if lie mast'red there a double spirit 
▁ xxmaj of teaching and of learning instantly . 
▁ xxmaj there did he pause ; but let me tell the world , 
▁ xxmaj if he outlive the envy of this day , 
▁ xxmaj england did never owe so sweet a hope , 
▁ xxmaj so much misconstrued in his wantonness . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj cousin , i think thou art enamoured 
▁ xxmaj upon his follies . xxmaj never did i hear 
▁ xxmaj of any prince so wild a libertine . 
▁ xxmaj but be he as he will , yet once ere night 
▁ i will embrace him with a soldier 's arm , 
▁ xxmaj that he shall shrink under my courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj arm , arm with speed ! and , fellows , soldiers , friends , 
▁ xxmaj better consider what you have to do 
▁ xxmaj than xxup i , that have not well the gift of tongue , 
▁ xxmaj can lift your blood up with persuasion . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj my lord , here are letters for you . 
▁ xxmaj hot . i can not read them now.- 
▁ o gentlemen , the time of life is short ! 
▁ xxmaj to spend that shortness basely were too long 
▁ xxmaj if life did ride upon a dial 's point , 
▁ xxmaj still ending at the arrival of an hour . 
▁ xxmaj an if we live , we live to tread on kings ; 
▁ xxmaj if die , brave death , when princes die with us ! 
▁ xxmaj now for our consciences , the arms are fair , 
▁ xxmaj when the intent of bearing them is just . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj my lord , prepare . xxmaj the xxmaj king comes on apace . 
▁ xxmaj hot . i thank him that he cuts me from my tale , 
▁ xxmaj for i profess not talking . xxmaj only this- 
▁ xxmaj let each man do his best ; and here draw i 
▁ a sword whose temper i intend to stain 
▁ xxmaj with the best blood that i can meet withal 
▁ xxmaj in the adventure of this perilous day . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj esperance ! xxmaj percy ! and set on . 
▁ xxmaj sound all the lofty instruments of war , 
▁ xxmaj and by that music let us all embrace ; 
▁ xxmaj for , heaven to earth , some of us never shall 
▁ a second time do such a courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj here they embrace . xxmaj the trumpets sound . 
▁ [ exeunt . ] 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj plain between the camps . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj king enters with his xxmaj power . xxmaj alarum to the battle . xxmaj then enter xxmaj douglas 
 and xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt . 

▁ xxmaj blunt . xxmaj what is thy name , that in the battle thus 
▁ xxmaj thou crossest me ? xxmaj what honour dost thou seek 
▁ xxmaj upon my head ? 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj know then my name is xxmaj douglas , 
▁ xxmaj and i do haunt thee in the battle thus 
▁ xxmaj because some tell me that thou art a king . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . xxmaj they tell thee true . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj the xxmaj lord of xxmaj stafford dear to - day hath bought 
▁ xxmaj thy likeness ; for instead of thee , xxmaj king xxmaj harry , 
▁ xxmaj this sword hath ended him . xxmaj so shall it thee , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou yield thee as my prisoner . 
▁ xxmaj blunt . i was not born a yielder , thou proud xxmaj scot ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt find a king that will revenge 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj stafford 's death . 

▁ xxmaj they fight . xxmaj douglas kills xxmaj blunt . xxmaj then enter xxmaj hotspur . 

▁ xxmaj hot . o xxmaj douglas , hadst thou fought at xxmaj holmedon thus , 
▁ i never had triumph'd upon a xxmaj scot . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj all 's done , all 's won . xxmaj here breathless lies the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj here . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj this , xxmaj douglas ? xxmaj no . i know this face full well . 
▁ a gallant knight he was , his name was xxmaj blunt ; 
▁ xxmaj semblably furnish'd like the xxmaj king himself . 
▁ xxmaj doug . a fool go with thy soul , whither it goes ! 
▁ a borrowed title hast thou bought too dear : 
▁ xxmaj why didst thou tell me that thou wert a king ? 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath many marching in his coats . 
▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj now , by my sword , i will kill all his coats ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll murder all his wardrop , piece by piece , 
▁ xxmaj until i meet the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj up and away ! 
▁ xxmaj our soldiers stand full fairly for the day . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 
▁
▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxmaj falstaff solus . 

▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj though i could scape shot - free at xxmaj london , i fear the shot 
▁ here . xxmaj here 's no scoring but upon the pate . xxmaj soft ! who are you ? 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj blunt . xxmaj there 's honour for you ! xxmaj here 's no vanity ! i am 
▁ as hot as molten lead , and as heavy too . xxmaj god keep lead out of me ! 
▁ i need no more weight than mine own bowels . i have led my 
▁ rag - of - muffins where they are pepper'd . xxmaj there 's not three of my 
▁ hundred and fifty left alive ; and they are for the town 's end , to 
▁ beg during life . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj prince . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what , stand'st thou idle here ? xxmaj lend me thy sword . 
▁ xxmaj many a nobleman lies stark and stiff 
▁ xxmaj under the hoofs of vaunting enemies , 
▁ xxmaj whose deaths are yet unreveng'd . i prithee 
▁ xxmaj rend me thy sword . 
▁ xxmaj fal . o xxmaj hal , i prithee give me leave to breathe awhile . xxmaj turk xxmaj gregory 
▁ never did such deeds in arms as i have done this day . i have paid 
▁ xxmaj percy ; i have made him sure . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj he is indeed , and living to kill thee . 
▁ i prithee lend me thy sword . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj nay , before xxmaj god , xxmaj hal , if xxmaj percy be alive , thou get'st not my 
▁ sword ; but take my pistol , if thou wilt . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj give it me . xxmaj what , is it in the case ? 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj ay , xxmaj hal . ' tis hot , ' tis hot . xxmaj there 's that will sack a city . 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince draws it out and finds it to he a bottle of sack . 

▁ xxmaj what , is it a time to jest and dally now ? 
▁ xxmaj he throws the bottle at him . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well , if xxmaj percy be alive , xxmaj i 'll pierce him . xxmaj if he do come in my 
▁ way , so ; if he do not , if i come in his willingly , let him make a 
▁ carbonado of me . i like not such grinning honour as xxmaj sir xxmaj walter 
▁ hath . xxmaj give me life ; which if i can save , so ; if not , honour comes 
▁ unlook'd for , and there 's an end . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the field . 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj excursions . xxmaj enter the xxmaj king , the xxmaj prince , xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , 
 xxmaj earl of xxmaj westmoreland 

▁ xxmaj king . i prithee , 
▁ xxmaj harry , withdraw thyself ; thou bleedest too much . 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , go you unto him . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj not xxup i , my lord , unless i did bleed too . 
▁ xxmaj prince . i do beseech your xxmaj majesty make up , 
▁ xxmaj lest xxmaj your retirement do amaze your friends . 
▁ xxmaj king . i will do so . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland , lead him to his tent . 
▁ xxmaj west . xxmaj come , my lord , xxmaj i 'll lead you to your tent . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj lead me , my lord , i do not need your help ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj god forbid a shallow scratch should drive 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales from such a field as this , 
▁ xxmaj where stain'd nobility lies trodden on , 
▁ xxmaj and rebels ' arms triumph in massacres ! 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj we breathe too long . xxmaj come , cousin xxmaj westmoreland , 
▁ xxmaj our duty this way lies . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , come . 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj prince xxmaj john and xxmaj westmoreland . ] 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj by xxmaj god , thou hast deceiv'd me , xxmaj lancaster ! 
▁ i did not think thee lord of such a spirit . 
▁ xxmaj before , i lov'd thee as a brother , xxmaj john ; 
▁ xxmaj but now , i do respect thee as my soul . 
▁ xxmaj king . i saw him hold xxmaj lord xxmaj percy at the point 
▁ xxmaj with lustier maintenance than i did look for 
▁ xxmaj of such an ungrown warrior . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxup o , this boy 
▁ xxmaj lends mettle to us all ! xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj douglas . 

▁ xxmaj doug . xxmaj another king ? xxmaj they grow like xxmaj hydra 's heads . 
▁ i am the xxmaj douglas , fatal to all those 
▁ xxmaj that wear those colours on them . xxmaj what art thou 
▁ xxmaj that counterfeit'st the person of a king ? 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj the xxmaj king himself , who , xxmaj douglas , grieves at heart 
▁ xxmaj so many of his shadows thou hast met , 
▁ xxmaj and not the very xxmaj king . i have two boys 
▁ xxmaj seek xxmaj percy and thyself about the field ; 
▁ xxmaj but , seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily , 
▁ i will assay thee . xxmaj so defend thyself . 
▁ xxmaj doug . i fear thou art another counterfeit ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , in faith , thou bearest thee like a king . 
▁ xxmaj but mine i am sure thou art , whoe'er thou be , 
▁ xxmaj and thus i win thee . 

▁ xxmaj they fight . xxmaj the xxmaj king being in danger , enter xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj hold up thy head , vile xxmaj scot , or thou art like 
▁ xxmaj never to hold it up again ! xxmaj the spirits 
▁ xxmaj of valiant xxmaj shirley , xxmaj stafford , xxmaj blunt are in my arms . 
▁ xxmaj it is the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales that threatens thee , 
▁ xxmaj who never promiseth but he means to pay . 
▁ xxmaj they fight . xxmaj douglas flieth . 
▁ xxmaj cheerly , my lord . xxmaj how fares your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj nicholas xxmaj gawsey hath for succour sent , 
▁ xxmaj and so hath xxmaj clifton . xxmaj i 'll to xxmaj clifton straight . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj stay and breathe awhile . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast redeem'd thy lost opinion , 
▁ xxmaj and show'd thou mak'st some tender of my life , 
▁ xxmaj in this fair rescue thou hast brought to me . 
▁ xxmaj prince . o xxmaj god ! they did me too much injury 
▁ xxmaj that ever said i heark'ned for your death . 
▁ xxmaj if it were so , i might have let alone 
▁ xxmaj the insulting hand of xxmaj douglas over you , 
▁ xxmaj which would have been as speedy in your end 
▁ xxmaj as all the poisonous potions in the world , 
▁ xxmaj and sav'd the treacherous labour of your son . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj make up to xxmaj clifton ; xxmaj i 'll to xxmaj sir xxmaj nicholas xxmaj gawsey . 
 xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hotspur . 

▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj if i mistake not , thou art xxmaj harry xxmaj monmouth . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj thou speak'st as if i would deny my name . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj my name is xxmaj harry xxmaj percy . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , then i see 
▁ a very valiant rebel of the name . 
▁ i am the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales ; and think not , xxmaj percy , 
▁ xxmaj to share with me in glory any more . 
▁ xxmaj two stars keep not their motion in one sphere , 
▁ xxmaj nor can one xxmaj england brook a double reign 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj harry xxmaj percy and the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales . 
▁ xxmaj hot . xxmaj nor shall it , xxmaj harry ; for the hour is come 
▁ xxmaj to end the one of us and would to xxmaj god 
▁ xxmaj thy name in arms were now as great as mine ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj i 'll make it greater ere i part from thee , 
▁ xxmaj and all the budding honours on thy crest 
▁ xxmaj i 'll crop to make a garland for my head . 
▁ xxmaj hot . i can no longer brook thy vanities . 
▁ xxmaj they fight . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj falstaff . 

▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj well said , xxmaj hal ! to it , xxmaj hal ! xxmaj nay , you shall find no boy 's play 
▁ here , i can tell you . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj douglas . xxmaj he fighteth with xxmaj falstaff , who falls down as if 
▁ he were dead . [ exit xxmaj douglas . ] xxmaj the xxmaj prince killeth xxmaj percy . 

▁ xxmaj hot . o xxmaj harry , thou hast robb'd me of my youth ! 
▁ i better brook the loss of brittle life 
▁ xxmaj than those proud titles thou hast won of me . 
▁ xxmaj they wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh . 
▁ xxmaj but thoughts the slave , of life , and life time 's fool , 
▁ xxmaj and time , that takes survey of all the world , 
▁ xxmaj must have a stop . xxup o , i could prophesy , 
▁ xxmaj but that the earthy and cold hand of death 
▁ xxmaj lies on my tongue . xxmaj no , xxmaj percy , thou art dust , 
▁ xxmaj and food for- [ dies . ] 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj for worms , brave xxmaj percy . xxmaj fare thee well , great heart ! 
▁ xxmaj ill - weav'd ambition , how much art thou shrunk ! 
▁ xxmaj when that this body did contain a spirit , 
▁ a kingdom for it was too small a bound ; 
▁ xxmaj but now two paces of the vilest earth 
▁ xxmaj is room enough . xxmaj this earth that bears thee dead 
▁ xxmaj bears not alive so stout a gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj if thou wert sensible of courtesy , 
▁ i should not make so dear a show of zeal . 
▁ xxmaj but let my favours hide thy mangled face ; 
▁ xxmaj and , even in thy behalf , xxmaj i 'll thank myself 
▁ xxmaj for doing these fair rites of tenderness . 
▁ xxmaj adieu , and take thy praise with thee to heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave , 
▁ xxmaj but not rememb'red in thy epitaph ! 
▁ xxmaj he spieth xxmaj falstaff on the ground . 
▁ xxmaj what , old acquaintance ? xxmaj could not all this flesh 
▁ xxmaj keep in a little life ? xxmaj poor xxmaj jack , farewell ! 
▁ i could have better spar'd a better man . 
▁ xxup o , i should have a heavy miss of thee 
▁ xxmaj if i were much in love with vanity ! 
▁ xxmaj death hath not struck so fat a deer to - day , 
▁ xxmaj though many dearer , in this bloody fray . 
▁ xxmaj embowell'd will i see thee by - and - by ; 
▁ xxmaj till then in blood by noble xxmaj percy lie . xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj falstaff riseth up . 
▁
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj embowell'd ? xxmaj if thou embowel me to - day , xxmaj i 'll give you leave to 
▁ powder me and eat me too to - morrow . ' sblood , ' twas time to 
▁ counterfeit , or that hot termagant xxmaj scot had paid me scot and lot 
▁ too . xxmaj counterfeit ? i lie ; i am no counterfeit . xxmaj to die is to be a 
▁ counterfeit ; for he is but the counterfeit of a man who hath not 
▁ the life of a man ; but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby 
▁ liveth , is to be no counterfeit , but the true and perfect image 
▁ of life indeed . xxmaj the better part of valour is discretion ; in the 
▁ which better part i have saved my life . xxmaj zounds , i am afraid of 
▁ this gunpowder xxmaj percy , though he be dead . xxmaj how if he should 
▁ counterfeit too , and rise ? xxmaj by my faith , i am afraid he would 
▁ prove the better counterfeit . xxmaj therefore xxmaj i 'll make him sure ; yea , 
▁ and xxmaj i 'll swear i kill'd him . xxmaj why may not he rise as well as xxup i ? 
▁ xxmaj nothing confutes me but eyes , and nobody sees me . xxmaj therefore , 
▁ sirrah [ stabs him ] , with a new wound in your thigh , come you 
▁ along with me . 

▁ xxmaj he takes up xxmaj hotspur on his hack . [ enter xxmaj prince , and xxmaj john of 
▁ xxmaj lancaster . 
▁
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj come , brother xxmaj john ; full bravely hast thou flesh'd 
▁ xxmaj thy maiden sword . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj but , soft ! whom have we here ? 
▁ xxmaj did you not tell me this fat man was dead ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . i did ; i saw him dead , 
▁ xxmaj breathless and bleeding on the ground . xxmaj art thou alive , 
▁ xxmaj or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight ? 
▁ i prithee speak . xxmaj we will not trust our eyes 
▁ xxmaj without our ears . xxmaj thou art not what thou seem'st . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj no , that 's certain ! i am not a double man ; but if i be not 
▁ xxmaj jack xxmaj falstaff , then am i a xxmaj jack . xxmaj there 's xxmaj percy . xxmaj if your father 
▁ will do me any honour , so ; if not , let him kill the next xxmaj percy 
▁ himself . i look to be either earl or duke , i can assure you . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj why , xxmaj percy i kill'd myself , and saw thee dead ! 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj didst thou ? xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord , how this world is given to lying ! i 
▁ grant you i was down , and out of breath , and so was he ; but we 
▁ rose both at an instant and fought a long hour by xxmaj shrewsbury 
▁ clock . xxmaj if i may be believ'd , so ; if not , let them that should 
▁ reward valour bear the sin upon their own heads . xxmaj i 'll take it 
▁ upon my death , i gave him this wound in the thigh . xxmaj if the man 
▁ were alive and would deny it , zounds ! i would make him eat a 
▁ piece of my sword . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj this is the strangest tale that ever i beard . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj this is the strangest fellow , brother xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj come , bring your luggage nobly on your back . 
▁ xxmaj for my part , if a lie may do thee grace , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll gild it with the happiest terms i have . 
▁ a retreat is sounded . 
▁ xxmaj the trumpet sounds retreat ; the day is ours . 
▁ xxmaj come , brother , let 's to the highest of the field , 
▁ xxmaj to see what friends are living , who are dead . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ prince xxmaj henry and xxmaj prince xxmaj john ] . 
▁ xxmaj fal . xxmaj i 'll follow , as they say , for reward . xxmaj he that rewards me , xxmaj god 
▁ reward him ! xxmaj if i do grow great , xxmaj i 'll grow less ; for xxmaj i 'll purge , 
▁ and leave sack , and live cleanly , as a nobleman should do . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ bearing off the body ] . 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj another part of the field . 

 xxmaj the trumpets sound . [ enter the xxmaj king , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , 
 xxmaj earl of xxmaj westmoreland , with xxmaj worcester and xxmaj vernon prisoners . 

▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj thus ever did rebellion find rebuke . 
▁ xxmaj ill - spirited xxmaj worcester ! did not we send grace , 
▁ xxmaj pardon , and terms of love to all of you ? 
▁ xxmaj and wouldst thou turn our offers contrary ? 
▁ xxmaj misuse the tenour of thy kinsman 's trust ? 
▁ xxmaj three knights upon our party slain to - day , 
▁ a noble earl , and many a creature else 
▁ xxmaj had been alive this hour , 
▁ xxmaj if like a xxmaj christian thou hadst truly borne 
▁ xxmaj betwixt our armies true intelligence . 
▁ xxmaj wor . xxmaj what i have done my safety urg'd me to ; 
▁ xxmaj and i embrace this fortune patiently , 
▁ xxmaj since not to be avoided it fails on me . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj bear xxmaj worcester to the death , and xxmaj vernon too ; 
▁ xxmaj other offenders we will pause upon . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj worcester and xxmaj vernon , [ guarded ] . 
▁ xxmaj how goes the field ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj the noble xxmaj scot , xxmaj lord xxmaj douglas , when he saw 
▁ xxmaj the fortune of the day quite turn'd from him , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj noble xxmaj percy slain and all his men 
▁ xxmaj upon the foot of fear , fled with the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj and falling from a hill , he was so bruis'd 
▁ xxmaj that the pursuers took him . xxmaj at my tent 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj douglas is , and i beseech xxmaj your xxmaj grace 
▁ i may dispose of him . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj with all my heart . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj then brother xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster , to you 
▁ xxmaj this honourable bounty shall belong . 
▁ xxmaj go to the xxmaj douglas and deliver him 
▁ xxmaj up to his pleasure , ransomless and free . 
▁ xxmaj his valour shown upon our crests today 
▁ xxmaj hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds , 
▁ xxmaj even in the bosom of our adversaries . 
▁ xxmaj john . i thank your xxmaj grace for this high courtesy , 
▁ xxmaj which i shall give away immediately . 
▁ xxmaj king . xxmaj then this remains , that we divide our power . 
▁ xxmaj you , son xxmaj john , and my cousin xxmaj westmoreland , 
▁ xxmaj towards xxmaj york shall bend you with your dearest speed 
▁ xxmaj to meet xxmaj northumberland and the prelate xxmaj scroop , 
▁ xxmaj who , as we hear , are busily in arms . 
▁ xxmaj myself and you , son xxmaj harry , will towards xxmaj wales 
▁ xxmaj to fight with xxmaj glendower and the xxmaj earl of xxmaj march . 
▁ xxmaj rebellion in this laud shall lose his sway , 
▁ xxmaj meeting the check of such another day ; 
▁ xxmaj and since this business so fair is done , 
▁ xxmaj let us not leave till all our own be won . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1598 


 xxup second xxup part xxup of xxup king xxup henry xxup iv 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup rumour , the xxmaj presenter 
▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup fourth 

▁ xxup henry , xxup prince xxup of xxup wales , afterwards xxup henry 
▁ xxup prince xxup john xxup of xxup lancaster 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey xxup of xxup gloucester 
▁ xxup thomas , xxup duke xxup of xxup clarence 
▁ xxmaj sons of xxmaj henry xxup iv 

▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup northumberland 
▁ xxup scroop , xxup archbishop xxup of xxup york 
▁ xxup lord xxup mowbray 
▁ xxup lord xxup hastings 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup colville 
▁ xxup travers and xxup morton , retainers of xxmaj northumberland 
▁ xxmaj opposites against xxmaj king xxmaj henry xxup iv 

▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup warwick 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup surrey 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup kent 
▁ xxup gower 
▁ xxup harcourt 
▁ xxup blunt 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj king 's party 

▁ xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice 
▁ xxup servant , to xxmaj lord xxmaj chief xxmaj justice 

▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup falstaff 
▁ xxup edward xxup poins 
▁ xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup pistol 
▁ xxup peto 
▁ xxmaj irregular humourists 

▁ xxup page , to xxmaj falstaff 

▁ xxup robert xxup shallow and xxup silence , country xxmaj justices 
▁ xxup davy , servant to xxmaj shallow 

▁ xxup fang and xxup snare , xxmaj sheriff 's officers 

▁ xxup ralph xxup mouldy 
▁ xxup simon xxup shadow 
▁ xxup thomas xxup wart 
▁ xxup francis xxup feeble 
▁ xxup peter xxup bullcalf 
▁ xxmaj country soldiers 

▁ xxup francis , a drawer 

▁ xxup lady xxup northumberland 
▁ xxup lady xxup percy , xxmaj percy 's widow 
▁ xxup hostess xxup quickly , of the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head , xxmaj eastcheap 
▁ xxup doll xxup tearsheet 

▁ xxup lords , xxmaj attendants , xxmaj porter , xxmaj drawers , xxmaj beadles , xxmaj grooms , xxmaj servants , 
▁ xxmaj speaker of the xxmaj epilogue 

▁ xxup scene : xxmaj england 

 xxup induction 
▁ xxup induction . 
▁ xxmaj warkworth . xxmaj before xxup northumberland 's xxmaj castle 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup rumour , painted full of tongues 

▁ xxup rumour . xxmaj open your ears ; for which of you will stop 
▁ xxmaj the vent of hearing when loud xxmaj rumour speaks ? 
▁ xxup i , from the orient to the drooping west , 
▁ xxmaj making the wind my post - horse , still unfold 
▁ xxmaj the acts commenced on this ball of earth . 
▁ xxmaj upon my tongues continual slanders ride , 
▁ xxmaj the which in every language i pronounce , 
▁ xxmaj stuffing the ears of men with false reports . 
▁ i speak of peace while covert emnity , 
▁ xxmaj under the smile of safety , wounds the world ; 
▁ xxmaj and who but xxmaj rumour , who but only xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj make fearful musters and prepar'd defence , 
▁ xxmaj whiles the big year , swoln with some other grief , 
▁ xxmaj is thought with child by the stern tyrant war , 
▁ xxmaj and no such matter ? xxmaj rumour is a pipe 
▁ xxmaj blown by surmises , jealousies , conjectures , 
▁ xxmaj and of so easy and so plain a stop 
▁ xxmaj that the blunt monster with uncounted heads , 
▁ xxmaj the still - discordant wav'ring multitude , 
▁ xxmaj can play upon it . xxmaj but what need i thus 
▁ xxmaj my well - known body to anatomize 
▁ xxmaj among my household ? xxmaj why is xxmaj rumour here ? 
▁ i run before xxmaj king xxmaj harry 's victory , 
▁ xxmaj who , in a bloody field by xxmaj shrewsbury , 
▁ xxmaj hath beaten down young xxmaj hotspur and his troops , 
▁ xxmaj quenching the flame of bold rebellion 
▁ xxmaj even with the rebels ' blood . xxmaj but what mean i 
▁ xxmaj to speak so true at first ? xxmaj my office is 
▁ xxmaj to noise abroad that xxmaj harry xxmaj monmouth fell 
▁ xxmaj under the wrath of noble xxmaj hotspur 's sword , 
▁ xxmaj and that the xxmaj king before the xxmaj douglas ' rage 
▁ xxmaj stoop'd his anointed head as low as death . 
▁ xxmaj this have i rumour'd through the peasant towns 
▁ xxmaj between that royal field of xxmaj shrewsbury 
▁ xxmaj and this worm - eaten hold of ragged stone , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj hotspur 's father , old xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj lies crafty - sick . xxmaj the posts come tiring on , 
▁ xxmaj and not a man of them brings other news 
▁ xxmaj than they have learnt of me . xxmaj from xxmaj rumour 's tongues 
▁ xxmaj they bring smooth comforts false , worse than true wrongs . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj warkworth . xxmaj before xxup northumberland 's xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj who keeps the gate here , ho ? 

▁ xxmaj the xxup porter opens the gate 

▁ xxmaj where is the xxmaj earl ? 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj what shall i say you are ? 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj tell thou the xxmaj earl