xxbos xxmaj that the xxmaj lord xxmaj bardolph doth attend him here . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj his lordship is walk'd forth into the orchard . 
▁ xxmaj please it your honour knock but at the gate , 
▁ xxmaj and he himself will answer . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup northumberland 

▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj earl . xxmaj exit xxup porter 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj what news , xxmaj lord xxmaj bardolph ? xxmaj every minute now 
▁ xxmaj should be the father of some stratagem . 
▁ xxmaj the times are wild ; contention , like a horse 
▁ xxmaj full of high feeding , madly hath broke loose 
▁ xxmaj and bears down all before him . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj noble xxmaj earl , 
▁ i bring you certain news from xxmaj shrewsbury . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj good , an xxmaj god will ! 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj as good as heart can wish . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is almost wounded to the death ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in the fortune of my lord your son , 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj harry slain outright ; and both the xxmaj blunts 
▁ xxmaj kill'd by the hand of xxmaj douglas ; young xxmaj prince xxmaj john , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj westmoreland , and xxmaj stafford , fled the field ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj harry xxmaj monmouth 's brawn , the hulk xxmaj sir xxmaj john , 
▁ xxmaj is prisoner to your son . xxup o , such a day , 
▁ xxmaj so fought , so followed , and so fairly won , 
▁ xxmaj came not till now to dignify the times , 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj cxsar 's fortunes ! 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj how is this deriv'd ? 
▁ xxmaj saw you the field ? xxmaj came you from xxmaj shrewsbury ? 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . i spake with one , my lord , that came from thence ; 
▁ a gentleman well bred and of good name , 
▁ xxmaj that freely rend'red me these news for true . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup travers 

▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj here comes my servant xxmaj travers , whom i sent 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj tuesday last to listen after news . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj my lord , i over - rode him on the way ; 
▁ xxmaj and he is furnish'd with no certainties 
▁ xxmaj more than he haply may retail from me . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj now , xxmaj travers , what good tidings comes with you ? 
▁ xxup travers . xxmaj my lord , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj umfrevile turn'd me back 
▁ xxmaj with joyful tidings ; and , being better hors'd , 
▁ xxmaj out - rode me . xxmaj after him came spurring hard 
▁ a gentleman , almost forspent with speed , 
▁ xxmaj that stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse . 
▁ xxmaj he ask'd the way to xxmaj chester ; and of him 
▁ i did demand what news from xxmaj shrewsbury . 
▁ xxmaj he told me that rebellion had bad luck , 
▁ xxmaj and that young xxmaj harry xxmaj percy 's spur was cold . 
▁ xxmaj with that he gave his able horse the head 
▁ xxmaj and , bending forward , struck his armed heels 
▁ xxmaj against the panting sides of his poor jade 
▁ xxmaj up to the rowel - head ; and starting so , 
▁ xxmaj he seem'd in running to devour the way , 
▁ xxmaj staying no longer question . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj again : 
▁ xxmaj said he young xxmaj harry xxmaj percy 's spur was cold ? 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj hotspur , xxmaj coldspur ? that rebellion 
▁ xxmaj had met ill luck ? 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj my lord , xxmaj i 'll tell you what : 
▁ xxmaj if my young lord your son have not the day , 
▁ xxmaj upon mine honour , for a silken point 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give my barony . xxmaj never talk of it . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj why should that gentleman that rode by xxmaj travers 
▁ xxmaj give then such instances of loss ? 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj who- he ? 
▁ xxmaj he was some hilding fellow that had stol'n 
▁ xxmaj the horse he rode on and , upon my life , 
▁ xxmaj spoke at a venture . xxmaj look , here comes more news . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj morton 

▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj yea , this man 's brow , like to a title - leaf , 
▁ xxmaj foretells the nature of a tragic volume . 
▁ xxmaj so looks the strand whereon the imperious flood 
▁ xxmaj hath left a witness'd usurpation . 
▁ xxmaj say , xxmaj morton , didst thou come from xxmaj shrewsbury ? 
▁ xxup morton . i ran from xxmaj shrewsbury , my noble lord ; 
▁ xxmaj where hateful death put on his ugliest mask 
▁ xxmaj to fright our party . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj how doth my son and brother ? 
▁ xxmaj thou tremblest ; and the whiteness in thy cheek 
▁ xxmaj is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand . 
▁ xxmaj even such a man , so faint , so spiritless , 
▁ xxmaj so dull , so dread in look , so woe - begone , 
▁ xxmaj drew xxmaj priam 's curtain in the dead of night 
▁ xxmaj and would have told him half his xxmaj troy was burnt ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj priam found the fire ere he his tongue , 
▁ xxmaj and i my xxmaj percy 's death ere thou report'st it . 
▁ xxmaj this thou wouldst say : ' your son did thus and thus ; 
▁ xxmaj your brother thus ; so fought the noble xxmaj douglas'- 
▁ xxmaj stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds ; 
▁ xxmaj but in the end , to stop my ear indeed , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise , 
▁ xxmaj ending with ' brother , son , and all , are dead . ' 
▁ xxup morton . xxmaj douglas is living , and your brother , yet ; 
▁ xxmaj but for my lord your son- 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj why , he is dead . 
▁ xxmaj see what a ready tongue suspicion hath ! 
▁ xxmaj he that but fears the thing he would not know 
▁ xxmaj hath by instinct knowledge from others ' eyes 
▁ xxmaj that what he fear'd is chanced . xxmaj yet speak , xxmaj morton ; 
▁ xxmaj tell thou an earl his divination lies , 
▁ xxmaj and i will take it as a sweet disgrace 
▁ xxmaj and make thee rich for doing me such wrong . 
▁ xxup morton . xxmaj you are too great to be by me gainsaid ; 
▁ xxmaj your spirit is too true , your fears too certain . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj yet , for all this , say not that xxmaj percy 's dead . 
▁ i see a strange confession in thine eye ; 
▁ xxmaj thou shak'st thy head , and hold'st it fear or sin 
▁ xxmaj to speak a truth . xxmaj if he be slain , say so : 
▁ xxmaj the tongue offends not that reports his death ; 
▁ xxmaj and he doth sin that doth belie the dead , 
▁ xxmaj not he which says the dead is not alive . 
▁ xxmaj yet the first bringer of unwelcome news 
▁ xxmaj hath but a losing office , and his tongue 
▁ xxmaj sounds ever after as a sullen bell , 
▁ xxmaj rememb'red tolling a departing friend . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . i can not think , my lord , your son is dead . 
▁ xxup morton . i am sorry i should force you to believe 
▁ xxmaj that which i would to xxmaj god i had not seen ; 
▁ xxmaj but these mine eyes saw him in bloody state , 
▁ xxmaj rend'ring faint quittance , wearied and out - breath'd , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj harry xxmaj monmouth , whose swift wrath beat down 
▁ xxmaj the never - daunted xxmaj percy to the earth , 
▁ xxmaj from whence with life he never more sprung up . 
▁ xxmaj in few , his death- whose spirit lent a fire 
▁ xxmaj even to the dullest peasant in his camp- 
▁ xxmaj being bruited once , took fire and heat away 
▁ xxmaj from the best - temper'd courage in his troops ; 
▁ xxmaj for from his metal was his party steeled ; 
▁ xxmaj which once in him abated , an the rest 
▁ xxmaj turn'd on themselves , like dull and heavy lead . 
▁ xxmaj and as the thing that 's heavy in itself 
▁ xxmaj upon enforcement flies with greatest speed , 
▁ xxmaj so did our men , heavy in xxmaj hotspur 's loss , 
▁ xxmaj lend to this weight such lightness with their fear 
▁ xxmaj that arrows fled not swifter toward their aim 
▁ xxmaj than did our soldiers , aiming at their safety , 
▁ xxmaj fly from the field . xxmaj then was that noble xxmaj worcester 
▁ xxmaj too soon ta'en prisoner ; and that furious xxmaj scot , 
▁ xxmaj the bloody xxmaj douglas , whose well - labouring sword 
▁ xxmaj had three times slain th ' appearance of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame 
▁ xxmaj of those that turn'd their backs , and in his flight , 
▁ xxmaj stumbling in fear , was took . xxmaj the sum of all 
▁ xxmaj is that the xxmaj king hath won , and hath sent out 
▁ a speedy power to encounter you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj under the conduct of young xxmaj lancaster 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj westmoreland . xxmaj this is the news at full . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj for this i shall have time enough to mourn . 
▁ xxmaj in poison there is physic ; and these news , 
▁ xxmaj having been well , that would have made me sick , 
▁ xxmaj being sick , have in some measure made me well ; 
▁ xxmaj and as the wretch whose fever - weak'ned joints , 
▁ xxmaj like strengthless hinges , buckle under life , 
▁ xxmaj impatient of his fit , breaks like a fire 
▁ xxmaj out of his keeper 's arms , even so my limbs , 
▁ xxmaj weak'ned with grief , being now enrag'd with grief , 
▁ xxmaj are thrice themselves . xxmaj hence , therefore , thou nice crutch ! 
▁ a scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel 
▁ xxmaj must glove this hand ; and hence , thou sickly coif ! 
▁ xxmaj thou art a guard too wanton for the head 
▁ xxmaj which princes , flesh'd with conquest , aim to hit . 
▁ xxmaj now bind my brows with iron ; and approach 
▁ xxmaj the ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring 
▁ xxmaj to frown upon th ' enrag'd xxmaj northumberland ! 
▁ xxmaj let heaven kiss earth ! xxmaj now let not xxmaj nature 's hand 
▁ xxmaj keep the wild flood confin'd ! xxmaj let order die ! 
▁ xxmaj and let this world no longer be a stage 
▁ xxmaj to feed contention in a ling'ring act ; 
▁ xxmaj but let one spirit of the first - born xxmaj cain 
▁ xxmaj reign in all bosoms , that , each heart being set 
▁ xxmaj on bloody courses , the rude scene may end 
▁ xxmaj and darkness be the burier of the dead ! 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj this strained passion doth you wrong , my lord . 
▁ xxup morton . xxmaj sweet xxmaj earl , divorce not wisdom from your honour . 
▁ xxmaj the lives of all your loving complices 
▁ xxmaj lean on your health ; the which , if you give o'er 
▁ xxmaj to stormy passion , must perforce decay . 
▁ xxmaj you cast th ' event of war , my noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj and summ'd the account of chance before you said 
▁ ' let us make head . ' xxmaj it was your pre - surmise 
▁ xxmaj that in the dole of blows your son might drop . 
▁ xxmaj you knew he walk'd o'er perils on an edge , 
▁ xxmaj more likely to fall in than to get o'er ; 
▁ xxmaj you were advis'd his flesh was capable 
▁ xxmaj of wounds and scars , and that his forward spirit 
▁ xxmaj would lift him where most trade of danger rang'd ; 
▁ xxmaj yet did you say ' go forth ' ; and none of this , 
▁ xxmaj though strongly apprehended , could restrain 
▁ xxmaj the stiff - borne action . xxmaj what hath then befall'n , 
▁ xxmaj or what hath this bold enterprise brought forth 
▁ xxmaj more than that being which was like to be ? 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj we all that are engaged to this loss 
▁ xxmaj knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas 
▁ xxmaj that if we wrought out life ' twas ten to one ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet we ventur'd , for the gain propos'd 
▁ xxmaj chok'd the respect of likely peril fear'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and since we are o'erset , venture again . 
▁ xxmaj come , we will put forth , body and goods . 
▁ xxup morton . ' tis more than time . xxmaj and , my most noble lord , 
▁ i hear for certain , and dare speak the truth : 
▁ xxmaj the gentle xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj york is up 
▁ xxmaj with well - appointed pow'rs . xxmaj he is a man 
▁ xxmaj who with a double surety binds his followers . 
▁ xxmaj my lord your son had only but the corpse , 
▁ xxmaj but shadows and the shows of men , to fight ; 
▁ xxmaj for that same word ' rebellion ' did divide 
▁ xxmaj the action of their bodies from their souls ; 
▁ xxmaj and they did fight with queasiness , constrain'd , 
▁ xxmaj as men drink potions ; that their weapons only 
▁ xxmaj seem'd on our side , but for their spirits and souls 
▁ xxmaj this word ' rebellion'- it had froze them up , 
▁ xxmaj as fish are in a pond . xxmaj but now the xxmaj bishop 
▁ xxmaj turns insurrection to religion . 
▁ xxmaj suppos'd sincere and holy in his thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj he 's follow'd both with body and with mind ; 
▁ xxmaj and doth enlarge his rising with the blood 
▁ xxmaj of fair xxmaj king xxmaj richard , scrap'd from xxmaj pomfret stones ; 
▁ xxmaj derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause ; 
▁ xxmaj tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land , 
▁ xxmaj gasping for life under great xxmaj bolingbroke ; 
▁ xxmaj and more and less do flock to follow him . 
▁ xxup northumberland . i knew of this before ; but , to speak truth , 
▁ xxmaj this present grief had wip'd it from my mind . 
▁ xxmaj go in with me ; and counsel every man 
▁ xxmaj the aptest way for safety and revenge . 
▁ xxmaj get posts and letters , and make friends with speed- 
▁ xxmaj never so few , and never yet more need . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john xxup falstaff , with his xxup page bearing his sword and buckler 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj sirrah , you giant , what says the doctor to my water ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj he said , sir , the water itself was a good healthy water ; but 
▁ for the party that owed it , he might have moe diseases than he 
▁ knew for . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj men of all sorts take a pride to gird at me . xxmaj the brain of 
▁ this foolish - compounded clay , man , is not able to invent anything 
▁ that intends to laughter , more than i invent or is invented on 
▁ me . i am not only witty in myself , but the cause that wit is in 
▁ other men . i do here walk before thee like a sow that hath 
▁ overwhelm'd all her litter but one . xxmaj if the xxmaj prince put thee into 
▁ my service for any other reason than to set me off , why then i 
▁ have no judgment . xxmaj thou whoreson mandrake , thou art fitter to be 
▁ worn in my cap than to wait at my heels . i was never mann'd with 
▁ an agate till now ; but i will inset you neither in gold nor 
▁ silver , but in vile apparel , and send you back again to your 
▁ master , for a jewel- the juvenal , the xxmaj prince your master , whose 
▁ chin is not yet fledge . i will sooner have a beard grow in the 
▁ palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek ; and yet he 
▁ will not stick to say his face is a face - royal . xxmaj god may finish it 
▁ when he will , ' tis not a hair amiss yet . xxmaj he may keep it still at 
▁ a face - royal , for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it ; 
▁ and yet he 'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his 
▁ father was a bachelor . xxmaj he may keep his own grace , but he 's almost 
▁ out of mine , i can assure him . xxmaj what said xxmaj master xxmaj dommelton about 
▁ the satin for my short cloak and my slops ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj he said , sir , you should procure him better assurance than 
▁ xxmaj bardolph . xxmaj he would not take his band and yours ; he liked not the 
▁ security . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let him be damn'd , like the xxmaj glutton ; pray xxmaj god his tongue 
▁ be hotter ! a whoreson xxmaj achitophel ! a rascal - yea - forsooth knave , to 
▁ bear a gentleman in hand , and then stand upon security ! xxmaj the 
▁ whoreson smooth - pates do now wear nothing but high shoes , and 
▁ bunches of keys at their girdles ; and if a man is through with 
▁ them in honest taking - up , then they must stand upon security . i 
▁ had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop 
▁ it with security . i look'd ' a should have sent me two and twenty 
▁ yards of satin , as i am a true knight , and he sends me security . 
▁ xxmaj well , he may sleep in security ; for he hath the horn of 
▁ abundance , and the lightness of his wife shines through it ; and 
▁ yet can not he see , though he have his own lanthorn to light him . 
▁ xxmaj where 's xxmaj bardolph ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj he 's gone into xxmaj smithfield to buy your worship horse . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i bought him in xxmaj paul 's , and he 'll buy me a horse in 
▁ xxmaj smithfield . xxmaj an i could get me but a wife in the stews , i were 
▁ mann'd , hors'd , and wiv'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice and xxup servant 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj sir , here comes the nobleman that committed the 
▁ xxmaj prince for striking him about xxmaj bardolph . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj wait close ; i will not see him . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what 's he that goes there ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj falstaff , an't please your lordship . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj he that was in question for the robb'ry ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he , my lord ; but he hath since done good service at 
▁ xxmaj shrewsbury , and , as i hear , is now going with some charge to the 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what , to xxmaj york ? xxmaj call him back again . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj boy , tell him i am deaf . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj you must speak louder ; my master is deaf . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i am sure he is , to the hearing of anything good . 
▁ xxmaj go , pluck him by the elbow ; i must speak with him . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what ! a young knave , and begging ! xxmaj is there not wars ? xxmaj is 
▁ there not employment ? xxmaj doth not the xxmaj king lack subjects ? xxmaj do not the 
▁ rebels need soldiers ? xxmaj though it be a shame to be on any side but 
▁ one , it is worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side , were 
▁ it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj you mistake me , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj why , sir , did i say you were an honest man ? xxmaj setting my 
▁ knighthood and my soldiership aside , i had lied in my throat if i 
▁ had said so . 
▁ xxup servant . i pray you , sir , then set your knighthood and your 
▁ soldiership aside ; and give me leave to tell you you in your 
▁ throat , if you say i am any other than an honest man . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i give thee leave to tell me so ! i lay aside that which 
▁ grows to me ! xxmaj if thou get'st any leave of me , hang me ; if thou 
▁ tak'st leave , thou wert better be hang'd . xxmaj you hunt counter . 
▁ xxmaj hence ! xxmaj avaunt ! 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj sir , my lord would speak with you . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff , a word with you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my good lord ! xxmaj god give your lordship good time of day . i 
▁ am glad to see your lordship abroad . i heard say your lordship 
▁ was sick ; i hope your lordship goes abroad by advice . xxmaj your 
▁ lordship , though not clean past your youth , hath yet some smack 
▁ of age in you , some relish of the saltness of time ; and i most 
▁ humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your 
▁ health . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , i sent for you before your expedition to 
▁ xxmaj shrewsbury . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj an't please your lordship , i hear his xxmaj majesty is return'd 
▁ with some discomfort from xxmaj wales . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i talk not of his xxmaj majesty . xxmaj you would not come when i 
▁ sent for you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj and i hear , moreover , his xxmaj highness is fall'n into this 
▁ same whoreson apoplexy . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj well xxmaj god mend him ! i pray you let me speak with you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj this apoplexy , as i take it , is a kind of lethargy , an't 
▁ please your lordship , a kind of sleeping in the blood , a whoreson 
▁ tingling . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what tell you me of it ? xxmaj be it as it is . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj it hath it original from much grief , from study , and 
▁ perturbation of the brain . i have read the cause of his effects 
▁ in xxmaj galen ; it is a kind of deafness . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i think you are fall'n into the disease , for you 
▁ hear not what i say to you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj very well , my lord , very well . xxmaj rather an't please you , it 
▁ is the disease of not listening , the malady of not marking , that 
▁ i am troubled withal . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj to punish you by the heels would amend the attention 
▁ of your ears ; and i care not if i do become your physician . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i am as poor as xxmaj job , my lord , but not so patient . xxmaj your 
▁ lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in respect 
▁ of poverty ; but how i should be your patient to follow your 
▁ prescriptions , the wise may make some dram of a scruple , or 
▁ indeed a scruple itself . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i sent for you , when there were matters against you 
▁ for your life , to come speak with me . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj as i was then advis'd by my learned counsel in the laws 
▁ of this land - service , i did not come . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj well , the truth is , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , you live in great 
▁ infamy . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj he that buckles himself in my belt can not live in less . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj your means are very slender , and your waste is 
▁ great . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i would it were otherwise ; i would my means were greater 
▁ and my waist slenderer . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj you have misled the youthful xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj the young xxmaj prince hath misled me . i am the fellow with the 
▁ great belly , and he my dog . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj well , i am loath to gall a new - heal'd wound . xxmaj your 
▁ day 's service at xxmaj shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your 
▁ night 's exploit on xxmaj gadshill . xxmaj you may thank th ' unquiet time for 
▁ your quiet o'erposting that action . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj but since all is well , keep it so : wake not a 
▁ sleeping wolf . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj to wake a wolf is as bad as smell a fox . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what ! you are as a candle , the better part burnt 
▁ out . 
▁ xxup falstaff . a wassail candle , my lord- all tallow ; if i did say of 
▁ wax , my growth would approve the truth . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj there is not a white hair in your face but should 
▁ have his effect of gravity . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj his effect of gravy , gravy , 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj you follow the young xxmaj prince up and down , like his 
▁ ill angel . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj not so , my lord . xxmaj your ill angel is light ; but hope he 
▁ that looks upon me will take me without weighing . xxmaj and yet in some 
▁ respects , i grant , i can not go- i can not tell . xxmaj virtue is of so 
▁ little regard in these costermongers ' times that true valour is 
▁ turn'd berod ; pregnancy is made a tapster , and his quick wit 
▁ wasted in giving reckonings ; all the other gifts appertinent to 
▁ man , as the malice of this age shapes them , are not worth a 
▁ gooseberry . xxmaj you that are old consider not the capacities of us 
▁ that are young ; you do measure the heat of our livers with the 
▁ bitterness of your galls ; and we that are in the vaward of our 
▁ youth , must confess , are wags too . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj do you set down your name in the scroll of youth , 
▁ that are written down old with all the characters of age ? xxmaj have 
▁ you not a moist eye , a dry hand , a yellow cheek , a white beard , a 
▁ decreasing leg , an increasing belly ? xxmaj is not your voice broken , 
▁ your wind short , your chin double , your wit single , and every 
▁ part about you blasted with antiquity ? xxmaj and will you yet call 
▁ yourself young ? xxmaj fie , fie , fie , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord , i was born about three of the clock in the 
▁ afternoon , with a white head and something a round belly . xxmaj for my 
▁ voice- i have lost it with hallooing and singing of anthems . xxmaj to 
▁ approve my youth further , i will not . xxmaj the truth is , i am only old 
▁ in judgment and understanding ; and he that will caper with me for 
▁ a thousand marks , let him lend me the money , and have at him . xxmaj for 
▁ the box of the ear that the xxmaj prince gave you- he gave it like a 
▁ rude prince , and you took it like a sensible lord . i have check'd 
▁ him for it ; and the young lion repents- marry , not in ashes and 
▁ sackcloth , but in new silk and old sack . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj well , xxmaj god send the xxmaj prince a better companion ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj god send the companion a better prince ! i can not rid my 
▁ hands of him . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj well , the xxmaj king hath sever'd you . i hear you are 
▁ going with xxmaj lord xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster against the xxmaj archbishop and the 
▁ xxmaj earl of xxmaj northumberland . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj yea ; i thank your pretty sweet wit for it . xxmaj but look you 
▁ pray , all you that kiss my xxmaj lady xxmaj peace at home , that our armies 
▁ join not in a hot day ; for , by the xxmaj lord , i take but two shirts 
▁ out with me , and i mean not to sweat extraordinarily . xxmaj if it be a 
▁ hot day , and i brandish anything but a bottle , i would i might 
▁ never spit white again . xxmaj there is not a dangerous action can peep 
▁ out his head but i am thrust upon it . xxmaj well , i can not last ever ; 
▁ but it was alway yet the trick of our xxmaj english nation , if they 
▁ have a good thing , to make it too common . xxmaj if ye will needs say i 
▁ am an old man , you should give me rest . i would to xxmaj god my name 
▁ were not so terrible to the enemy as it is . i were better to be 
▁ eaten to death with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with 
▁ perpetual motion . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj well , be honest , be honest ; and xxmaj god bless your 
▁ expedition ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me 
▁ forth ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj not a penny , not a penny ; you are too impatient to 
▁ bear crosses . xxmaj fare you well . xxmaj commend me to my cousin 
▁ xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup chief xxup justice and xxup servant 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj if i do , fillip me with a three - man beetle . a man can no 
▁ more separate age and covetousness than ' a can part young limbs 
▁ and lechery ; but the gout galls the one , and the pox pinches the 
▁ other ; and so both the degrees prevent my curses . xxmaj boy ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what money is in my purse ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj seven groats and two pence . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i can get no remedy against this consumption of the 
▁ purse ; borrowing only lingers and lingers it out , but the disease 
▁ is incurable . xxmaj go bear this letter to my xxmaj lord of xxmaj lancaster ; this 
▁ to the xxmaj prince ; this to the xxmaj earl of xxmaj westmoreland ; and this to old 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj ursula , whom i have weekly sworn to marry since i 
▁ perceiv'd the first white hair of my chin . xxmaj about it ; you know 
▁ where to find me . [ exit xxup page ] a pox of this gout ! or , a gout of 
▁ this pox ! for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great 
▁ toe . ' tis no matter if i do halt ; i have the wars for my colour , 
▁ and my pension shall seem the more reasonable . a good wit will 
▁ make use of anything . i will turn diseases to commodity . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj york . xxmaj the xxup archbishop 's palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup archbishop , xxup thomas xxup mowbray the xxup earl xxup marshal , xxup lord xxup hastings , 
 and xxup lord xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj thus have you heard our cause and known our means ; 
▁ xxmaj and , my most noble friends , i pray you all 
▁ xxmaj speak plainly your opinions of our hopes- 
▁ xxmaj and first , xxmaj lord xxmaj marshal , what say you to it ? 
▁ xxup mowbray . i well allow the occasion of our amis ; 
▁ xxmaj but gladly would be better satisfied 
▁ xxmaj how , in our means , we should advance ourselves 
▁ xxmaj to look with forehead bold and big enough 
▁ xxmaj upon the power and puissance of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj our present musters grow upon the file 
▁ xxmaj to five and twenty thousand men of choice ; 
▁ xxmaj and our supplies live largely in the hope 
▁ xxmaj of great xxmaj northumberland , whose bosom burns 
▁ xxmaj with an incensed fire of injuries . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj the question then , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , standeth thus : 
▁ xxmaj whether our present five and twenty thousand 
▁ xxmaj may hold up head without xxmaj northumberland ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj with him , we may . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj yea , marry , there 's the point ; 
▁ xxmaj but if without him we be thought too feeble , 
▁ xxmaj my judgment is we should not step too far 
▁ xxmaj till we had his assistance by the hand ; 
▁ xxmaj for , in a theme so bloody - fac'd as this , 
▁ xxmaj conjecture , expectation , and surmise 
▁ xxmaj of aids incertain , should not be admitted . 
▁ xxup archbishop . ' tis very true , xxmaj lord xxmaj bardolph ; for indeed 
▁ xxmaj it was young xxmaj hotspur 's case at xxmaj shrewsbury . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj it was , my lord ; who lin'd himself with hope , 
▁ xxmaj eating the air and promise of supply , 
▁ xxmaj flatt'ring himself in project of a power 
▁ xxmaj much smaller than the smallest of his thoughts ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , with great imagination 
▁ xxmaj proper to madmen , led his powers to death , 
▁ xxmaj and , winking , leapt into destruction . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj but , by your leave , it never yet did hurt 
▁ xxmaj to lay down likelihoods and forms of hope . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj yes , if this present quality of war- 
▁ xxmaj indeed the instant action , a cause on foot- 
▁ xxmaj lives so in hope , as in an early spring 
▁ xxmaj we see th ' appearing buds ; which to prove fruit 
▁ xxmaj hope gives not so much warrant , as despair 
▁ xxmaj that frosts will bite them . xxmaj when we mean to build , 
▁ xxmaj we first survey the plot , then draw the model ; 
▁ xxmaj and when we see the figure of the house , 
▁ xxmaj then we must rate the cost of the erection ; 
▁ xxmaj which if we find outweighs ability , 
▁ xxmaj what do we then but draw anew the model 
▁ xxmaj in fewer offices , or at least desist 
▁ xxmaj to build at all ? xxmaj much more , in this great work- 
▁ xxmaj which is almost to pluck a kingdom down 
▁ xxmaj and set another up- should we survey 
▁ xxmaj the plot of situation and the model , 
▁ xxmaj consent upon a sure foundation , 
▁ xxmaj question surveyors , know our own estate 
▁ xxmaj how able such a work to undergo- 
▁ xxmaj to weigh against his opposite ; or else 
▁ xxmaj we fortify in paper and in figures , 
▁ xxmaj using the names of men instead of men ; 
▁ xxmaj like one that draws the model of a house 
▁ xxmaj beyond his power to build it ; who , half through , 
▁ xxmaj gives o'er and leaves his part - created cost 
▁ a naked subject to the weeping clouds 
▁ xxmaj and waste for churlish winter 's tyranny . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj grant that our hopes- yet likely of fair birth- 
▁ xxmaj should be still - born , and that we now possess'd 
▁ xxmaj the utmost man of expectation , 
▁ i think we are so a body strong enough , 
▁ xxmaj even as we are , to equal with the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj what , is the xxmaj king but five and twenty thousand ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj to us no more ; nay , not so much , xxmaj lord xxmaj bardolph ; 
▁ xxmaj for his divisions , as the times do brawl , 
▁ xxmaj are in three heads : one power against the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj and one against xxmaj glendower ; perforce a third 
▁ xxmaj must take up us . xxmaj so is the unfirm xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj in three divided ; and his coffers sound 
▁ xxmaj with hollow poverty and emptiness . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj that he should draw his several strengths together 
▁ xxmaj and come against us in full puissance 
▁ xxmaj need not be dreaded . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj if he should do so , 
▁ xxmaj he leaves his back unarm'd , the xxmaj french and xxmaj welsh 
▁ xxmaj baying at his heels . xxmaj never fear that . 
▁ xxup lord xxup bardolph . xxmaj who is it like should lead his forces hither ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster and xxmaj westmoreland ; 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj welsh , himself and xxmaj harry xxmaj monmouth ; 
▁ xxmaj but who is substituted against the xxmaj french 
▁ i have no certain notice . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj let us on , 
▁ xxmaj and publish the occasion of our arms . 
▁ xxmaj the commonwealth is sick of their own choice ; 
▁ xxmaj their over - greedy love hath surfeited . 
▁ xxmaj an habitation giddy and unsure 
▁ xxmaj hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart . 
▁ o thou fond many , with what loud applause 
▁ xxmaj didst thou beat heaven with blessing xxmaj bolingbroke 
▁ xxmaj before he was what thou wouldst have him be ! 
▁ xxmaj and being now trimm'd in thine own desires , 
▁ xxmaj thou , beastly feeder , art so full of him 
▁ xxmaj that thou provok'st thyself to cast him up . 
▁ xxmaj so , so , thou common dog , didst thou disgorge 
▁ xxmaj thy glutton bosom of the royal xxmaj richard ; 
▁ xxmaj and now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up , 
▁ xxmaj and howl'st to find it . xxmaj what trust is in these times ? 
▁ xxmaj they that , when xxmaj richard liv'd , would have him die 
▁ xxmaj are now become enamour'd on his grave . 
▁ xxmaj thou that threw'st dust upon his goodly head , 
▁ xxmaj when through proud xxmaj london he came sighing on 
▁ xxmaj after th ' admired heels of xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxmaj criest now ' o earth , yield us that king again , 
▁ xxmaj and take thou this ! ' o thoughts of men accurs'd ! 
▁ xxmaj past and to come seems best ; things present , worst . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj shall we go draw our numbers , and set on ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj we are time 's subjects , and time bids be gone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup hostess with two officers , xxup fang and xxup snare 

▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj master xxmaj fang , have you ent'red the action ? 
▁ xxup fang . xxmaj it is ent'red . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj where 's your yeoman ? xxmaj is't a lusty yeoman ? xxmaj will ' a stand 
▁ to't ? 
▁ xxup fang . xxmaj sirrah , where 's xxmaj snare ? 
▁ xxup hostess . o xxmaj lord , ay ! good xxmaj master xxmaj snare . 
▁ xxup snare . xxmaj here , here . 
▁ xxup fang . xxmaj snare , we must arrest xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj yea , good xxmaj master xxmaj snare ; i have ent'red him and all . 
▁ xxup snare . xxmaj it may chance cost some of our lives , for he will stab . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj alas the day ! take heed of him ; he stabb'd me in mine own 
▁ house , and that most beastly . xxmaj in good faith , ' a cares not what 
▁ mischief he does , if his weapon be out ; he will foin like any 
▁ devil ; he will spare neither man , woman , nor child . 
▁ xxup fang . xxmaj if i can close with him , i care not for his thrust . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj no , nor i neither ; xxmaj i 'll be at your elbow . 
▁ xxup fang . xxmaj an i but fist him once ; an ' a come but within my vice ! 
▁ xxup hostess . i am undone by his going ; i warrant you , he 's an 
▁ infinitive thing upon my score . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj fang , hold him sure . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj snare , let him not scape . ' a comes continuantly to 
▁ xxmaj pie - corner- saving your manhoods- to buy a saddle ; and he is 
▁ indited to dinner to the xxmaj lubber 's xxmaj head in xxmaj lumbert xxmaj street , to 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj smooth 's the silkman . i pray you , since my exion is 
▁ ent'red , and my case so openly known to the world , let him be 
▁ brought in to his answer . a hundred mark is a long one for a poor 
▁ lone woman to bear ; and i have borne , and borne , and borne ; and 
▁ have been fubb'd off , and fubb'd off , and fubb'd off , from this 
▁ day to that day , that it is a shame to be thought on . xxmaj there is no 
▁ honesty in such dealing ; unless a woman should be made an ass and 
▁ a beast , to bear every knave 's wrong . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john xxup falstaff , xxup page , and xxup bardolph 

▁ xxmaj yonder he comes ; and that arrant malmsey - nose knave , xxmaj bardolph , 
▁ with him . xxmaj do your offices , do your offices , xxmaj master xxmaj fang and 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj snare ; do me , do me , do me your offices . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj how now ! whose mare 's dead ? xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup fang . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , i arrest you at the suit of xxmaj mistress xxmaj quickly . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj away , varlets ! xxmaj draw , xxmaj bardolph . xxmaj cut me off the villian 's 
▁ head . xxmaj throw the quean in the channel . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj throw me in the channel ! xxmaj i 'll throw thee in the channel . 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou ? wilt thou ? thou bastardly rogue ! xxmaj murder , murder ! xxmaj ah , 
▁ thou honeysuckle villain ! wilt thou kill xxmaj god 's officers and the 
▁ xxmaj king 's ? xxmaj ah , thou honey - seed rogue ! thou art a honey - seed ; a 
▁ man - queller and a woman - queller . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj keep them off , xxmaj bardolph . 
▁ xxup fang . a rescue ! a rescue ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj good people , bring a rescue or two . xxmaj thou wot , wot thou ! 
▁ thou wot , wot ta ? xxmaj do , do , thou rogue ! do , thou hemp - seed ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj away , you scullion ! you rampallian ! you fustilarian ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tickle your catastrophe . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice and his men 

▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what is the matter ? xxmaj keep the peace here , ho ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj good my lord , be good to me . i beseech you , stand to me . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! what , are you brawling here ? 
▁ xxmaj doth this become your place , your time , and business ? 
▁ xxmaj you should have been well on your way to xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj stand from him , fellow ; wherefore hang'st thou upon him ? 
▁ xxup hostess . o xxmaj my most worshipful lord , an't please your xxmaj grace , i am a 
▁ poor widow of xxmaj eastcheap , and he is arrested at my suit . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj for what sum ? 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj it is more than for some , my lord ; it is for all- all i 
▁ have . xxmaj he hath eaten me out of house and home ; he hath put all my 
▁ substance into that fat belly of his . xxmaj but i will have some of it 
▁ out again , or i will ride thee a nights like a mare . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i think i am as like to ride the mare , if i have any 
▁ vantage of ground to get up . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj how comes this , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? xxmaj fie ! xxmaj what man of good 
▁ temper would endure this tempest of exclamation ? xxmaj are you not 
▁ ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come by 
▁ her own ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what is the gross sum that i owe thee ? 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj marry , if thou wert an honest man , thyself and the money 
▁ too . xxmaj thou didst swear to me upon a parcel - gilt goblet , sitting in 
▁ my xxmaj dolphin chamber , at the round table , by a sea - coal fire , upon 
▁ xxmaj wednesday in xxmaj wheeson week , when the xxmaj prince broke thy head for 
▁ liking his father to singing - man of xxmaj windsor- thou didst swear to 
▁ me then , as i was washing thy wound , to marry me and make me my 
▁ lady thy wife . xxmaj canst thou deny it ? xxmaj did not goodwife xxmaj keech , the 
▁ butcher 's wife , come in then and call me gossip xxmaj quickly ? xxmaj coming 
▁ in to borrow a mess of vinegar , telling us she had a good dish of 
▁ prawns , whereby thou didst desire to eat some , whereby i told 
▁ thee they were ill for green wound ? xxmaj and didst thou not , when she 
▁ was gone down stairs , desire me to be no more so familiarity with 
▁ such poor people , saying that ere long they should call me madam ? 
▁ xxmaj and didst thou not kiss me , and bid me fetch the thirty 
▁ shillings ? i put thee now to thy book - oath . xxmaj deny it , if thou 
▁ canst . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord , this is a poor mad soul , and she says up and 
▁ down the town that her eldest son is like you . xxmaj she hath been in 
▁ good case , and , the truth is , poverty hath distracted her . xxmaj but 
▁ for these foolish officers , i beseech you i may have redress 
▁ against them . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , i am well acquainted with your 
▁ manner of wrenching the true cause the false way . xxmaj it is not a 
▁ confident brow , nor the throng of words that come with such more 
▁ than impudent sauciness from you , can thrust me from a level 
▁ consideration . xxmaj you have , as it appears to me , practis'd upon the 
▁ easy yielding spirit of this woman , and made her serve your uses 
▁ both in purse and in person . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj yea , in truth , my lord . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj pray thee , peace . xxmaj pay her the debt you owe her , and 
▁ unpay the villainy you have done with her ; the one you may do 
▁ with sterling money , and the other with current repentance . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord , i will not undergo this sneap without reply . xxmaj you 
▁ call honourable boldness impudent sauciness ; if a man will make 
▁ curtsy and say nothing , he is virtuous . xxmaj no , my lord , my humble 
▁ duty rememb'red , i will not be your suitor . i say to you i do 
▁ desire deliverance from these officers , being upon hasty 
▁ employment in the xxmaj king 's affairs . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj you speak as having power to do wrong ; but answer in 
▁ th ' effect of your reputation , and satisfy the poor woman . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come hither , hostess . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gower 

▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj now , xxmaj master xxmaj gower , what news ? 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj the xxmaj king , my lord , and xxmaj harry xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales 
▁ xxmaj are near at hand . xxmaj the rest the paper tells . [ gives a letter ] 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj as i am a gentleman ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj faith , you said so before . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj as i am a gentleman ! xxmaj come , no more words of it . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj by this heavenly ground i tread on , i must be fain to pawn 
▁ both my plate and the tapestry of my dining - chambers . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj glasses , glasses , is the only drinking ; and for thy 
▁ walls , a pretty slight drollery , or the story of the xxmaj prodigal , or 
▁ the xxmaj german hunting , in water - work , is worth a thousand of these 
▁ bed - hangers and these fly - bitten tapestries . xxmaj let it be ten pound , 
▁ if thou canst . xxmaj come , and ' twere not for thy humours , there 's not 
▁ a better wench in xxmaj england . xxmaj go , wash thy face , and draw the 
▁ action . xxmaj come , thou must not be in this humour with me ; dost not 
▁ know me ? xxmaj come , come , i know thou wast set on to this . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj pray thee , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , let it be but twenty nobles ; 
▁ i ' faith , i am loath to pawn my plate , so xxmaj god save me , la ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let it alone ; xxmaj i 'll make other shift . xxmaj you 'll be a fool 
▁ still . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj well , you shall have it , though i pawn my gown . 
▁ i hope you 'll come to supper . you 'll pay me all together ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj will i live ? [ to xxup bardolph ] xxmaj go , with her , with her ; hook 
▁ on , hook on . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj will you have xxmaj doll xxmaj tearsheet meet you at supper ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no more words ; let 's have her . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup hostess , xxup bardolph , and xxup officers 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i have heard better news . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what 's the news , my lord ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj where lay the xxmaj king to - night ? 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj at xxmaj basingstoke , my lord . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i hope , my lord , all 's well . xxmaj what is the news , my lord ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj come all his forces back ? 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj no ; fifteen hundred foot , five hundred horse , 
▁ xxmaj are march'd up to my xxmaj lord of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj against xxmaj northumberland and the xxmaj archbishop . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj comes the xxmaj king back from xxmaj wales , my noble lord ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj you shall have letters of me presently . 
▁ xxmaj come , go along with me , good xxmaj master xxmaj gower . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj master xxmaj gower , shall i entreat you with me to dinner ? 
▁ xxup gower . i must wait upon my good lord here , i thank you , good xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , you loiter here too long , being you are to 
▁ take soldiers up in counties as you go . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj will you sup with me , xxmaj master xxmaj gower ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj what foolish master taught you these manners , xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj master xxmaj gower , if they become me not , he was a fool that 
▁ taught them me . xxmaj this is the right fencing grace , my lord ; tap for 
▁ tap , and so part fair . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj now , the xxmaj lord lighten thee ! xxmaj thou art a great fool . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj another street 

 xxmaj enter xxup prince xxup henry and xxup poins 

▁ xxup prince . xxmaj before xxmaj god , i am exceeding weary . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj is't come to that ? i had thought weariness durst not have 
▁ attach'd one of so high blood . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj faith , it does me ; though it discolours the complexion of 
▁ my greatness to acknowledge it . xxmaj doth it not show vilely in me to 
▁ desire small beer ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj why , a prince should not be so loosely studied as to 
▁ remember so weak a composition . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj belike then my appetite was not - princely got ; for , by my 
▁ troth , i do now remember the poor creature , small beer . xxmaj but 
▁ indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my 
▁ greatness . xxmaj what a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name , or 
▁ to know thy face to - morrow , or to take note how many pair of silk 
▁ stockings thou hast- viz . , these , and those that were thy 
▁ peach - colour'd ones- or to bear the inventory of thy shirts- as , 
▁ one for superfluity , and another for use ! xxmaj but that the 
▁ tennis - court - keeper knows better than xxup i ; for it is a low ebb of 
▁ linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there ; as thou hast 
▁ not done a great while , because the rest of thy low countries 
▁ have made a shift to eat up thy holland . xxmaj and xxmaj god knows whether 
▁ those that bawl out of the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his 
▁ kingdom ; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault ; 
▁ whereupon the world increases , and kindreds are mightily 
▁ strengthened . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj how ill it follows , after you have laboured so hard , you 
▁ should talk so idly ! xxmaj tell me , how many good young princes would 
▁ do so , their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj shall i tell thee one thing , xxmaj poins ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj yes , faith ; and let it be an excellent good thing . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj it shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj go to ; i stand the push of your one thing that you will 
▁ tell . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj marry , i tell thee it is not meet that i should be sad , now 
▁ my father is sick ; albeit i could tell to thee- as to one it 
▁ pleases me , for fault of a better , to call my friend- i could be 
▁ sad and sad indeed too . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj very hardly upon such a subject . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj by this hand , thou thinkest me as far in the devil 's book 
▁ as thou and xxmaj falstaff for obduracy and persistency : let the end 
▁ try the man . xxmaj but i tell thee my heart bleeds inwardly that my 
▁ father is so sick ; and keeping such vile company as thou art hath 
▁ in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj the reason ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj what wouldst thou think of me if i should weep ? 
▁ xxup poins . i would think thee a most princely hypocrite . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj it would be every man 's thought ; and thou art a blessed 
▁ fellow to think as every man thinks . xxmaj never a man 's thought in the 
▁ world keeps the road - way better than thine . xxmaj every man would think 
▁ me an hypocrite indeed . xxmaj and what accites your most worshipful 
▁ thought to think so ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj why , because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed to 
▁ xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj and to thee . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj by this light , i am well spoke on ; i can hear it with mine 
▁ own ears . xxmaj the worst that they can say of me is that i am a second 
▁ brother and that i am a proper fellow of my hands ; and those two 
▁ things , i confess , i can not help . xxmaj by the mass , here comes 
▁ xxmaj bardolph . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bardolph and xxup page 

▁ xxup prince . xxmaj and the boy that i gave xxmaj falstaff . ' a had him from me 
▁ xxmaj christian ; and look if the fat villain have not transform'd him 
▁ ape . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj god save your xxmaj grace ! 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj and yours , most noble xxmaj bardolph ! 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj come , you virtuous ass , you bashful fool , must you be 
▁ blushing ? xxmaj wherefore blush you now ? xxmaj what a maidenly man - at - arms 
▁ are you become ! xxmaj is't such a matter to get a pottle - pot 's 
▁ maidenhead ? 
▁ xxup page . ' a calls me e'en now , my lord , through a red lattice , and i 
▁ could discern no part of his face from the window . xxmaj at last i 
▁ spied his eyes ; and methought he had made two holes in the 
▁ alewife 's new petticoat , and so peep'd through . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj has not the boy profited ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj away , you whoreson upright rabbit , away ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj away , you rascally xxmaj althaea 's dream , away ! 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj instruct us , boy ; what dream , boy ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj marry , my lord , xxmaj althaea dreamt she was delivered of a 
▁ firebrand ; and therefore i call him her dream . 
▁ xxup prince . a crown 's worth of good interpretation . xxmaj there ' tis , boy . 
▁ [ giving a crown ] 
▁ xxup poins . o that this blossom could be kept from cankers ! 
▁ xxmaj well , there is sixpence to preserve thee . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj an you do not make him be hang'd among you , the gallows 
▁ shall have wrong . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj and how doth thy master , xxmaj bardolph ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj well , my lord . xxmaj he heard of your xxmaj grace 's coming to town . 
▁ xxmaj there 's a letter for you . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj deliver'd with good respect . xxmaj and how doth the martlemas , 
▁ your master ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj in bodily health , sir . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj marry , the immortal part needs a physician ; but that moves 
▁ not him . xxmaj though that be sick , it dies not . 
▁ xxup prince . i do allow this well to be as familiar with me as my dog ; 
▁ and he holds his place , for look you how he writes . 
▁ xxup poins . [ reads ] ' john xxmaj falstaff , knight'- xxmaj every man must know that 
▁ as oft as he has occasion to name himself , even like those that 
▁ are kin to the xxmaj king ; for they never prick their finger but they 
▁ say ' there 's some of the xxmaj king 's blood spilt . ' ' how comes that ? ' 
▁ says he that takes upon him not to conceive . xxmaj the answer is as 
▁ ready as a borrower 's cap : ' i am the xxmaj king 's poor cousin , sir . ' 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj nay , they will be kin to us , or they will fetch it from 
▁ xxmaj japhet . xxmaj but the letter : [ reads ] ' sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff , knight , to 
▁ the son of the xxmaj king nearest his father , xxmaj harry xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , 
▁ greeting . ' 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj why , this is a certificate . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj peace ! [ reads ] ' i will imitate the honourable xxmaj romans in 
▁ brevity . '- 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj he sure means brevity in breath , short - winded . 
▁ xxup prince . [ reads ] ' i commend me to thee , i commend thee , and i 
▁ leave thee . xxmaj be not too familiar with xxmaj poins ; for he misuses thy 
▁ favours so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister xxmaj nell . 
▁ xxmaj repent at idle times as thou mayst , and so farewell . 
▁ xxmaj thine , by yea and no- which is as much as to say as 
▁ thou usest him- xxup jack xxup falstaff with my familiars , 
▁ xxup john with my brothers and sisters , and xxup sir xxup john with 
▁ all xxmaj europe . ' 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj my lord , xxmaj i 'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj that 's to make him eat twenty of his words . xxmaj but do you use 
▁ me thus , xxmaj ned ? xxmaj must i marry your sister ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj god send the wench no worse fortune ! xxmaj but i never said so . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj well , thus we play the fools with the time , and the spirits 
▁ of the wise sit in the clouds and mock us . xxmaj is your master here in 
▁ xxmaj london ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj yea , my lord . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj where sups he ? xxmaj doth the old boar feed in the old frank ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj at the old place , my lord , in xxmaj eastcheap . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj what company ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj ephesians , my lord , of the old church . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj sup any women with him ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj none , my lord , but old xxmaj mistress xxmaj quickly and xxmaj mistress xxmaj doll 
▁ xxmaj tearsheet . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj what pagan may that be ? 
▁ xxup page . a proper gentlewoman , sir , and a kinswoman of my master 's . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull . 
▁ xxmaj shall we steal upon them , xxmaj ned , at supper ? 
▁ xxup poins . i am your shadow , my lord ; xxmaj i 'll follow you . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj sirrah , you boy , and xxmaj bardolph , no word to your master that 
▁ i am yet come to town . xxmaj there 's for your silence . 
▁ xxup bardolph . i have no tongue , sir . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj and for mine , sir , i will govern it . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj fare you well ; go . xxmaj exeunt xxup bardolph and xxup page 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj doll xxmaj tearsheet should be some road . 
▁ xxup poins . i warrant you , as common as the way between xxmaj saint xxmaj albans and 
▁ xxmaj london . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj how might we see xxmaj falstaff bestow himself to - night in his 
▁ true colours , and not ourselves be seen ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj put on two leathern jerkins and aprons , and wait upon him at 
▁ his table as drawers . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj from a god to a bull ? a heavy descension ! xxmaj it was xxmaj jove 's 
▁ case . xxmaj from a prince to a prentice ? a low transformation ! xxmaj that 
▁ shall be mine ; for in everything the purpose must weigh with the 
▁ folly . xxmaj follow me , xxmaj ned . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj warkworth . xxmaj before the castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup northumberland , xxup lady xxup northumberland , and xxup lady xxup percy 

▁ xxup northumberland . i pray thee , loving wife , and gentle daughter , 
▁ xxmaj give even way unto my rough affairs ; 
▁ xxmaj put not you on the visage of the times 
▁ xxmaj and be , like them , to xxmaj percy troublesome . 
▁ xxup lady xxup northumberland . i have given over , i will speak no more . 
▁ xxmaj do what you will ; your wisdom be your guide . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj alas , sweet wife , my honour is at pawn ; 
▁ xxmaj and but my going nothing can redeem it . 
▁ xxup lady xxup percy . xxup o , yet , for xxmaj god 's sake , go not to these wars ! 
▁ xxmaj the time was , father , that you broke your word , 
▁ xxmaj when you were more endear'd to it than now ; 
▁ xxmaj when your own xxmaj percy , when my heart 's dear xxmaj harry , 
▁ xxmaj threw many a northward look to see his father 
▁ xxmaj bring up his powers ; but he did long in vain . 
▁ xxmaj who then persuaded you to stay at home ? 
▁ xxmaj there were two honours lost , yours and your son 's . 
▁ xxmaj for yours , the xxmaj god of heaven brighten it ! 
▁ xxmaj for his , it stuck upon him as the sun 
▁ xxmaj in the grey vault of heaven ; and by his light 
▁ xxmaj did all the chivalry of xxmaj england move 
▁ xxmaj to do brave acts . xxmaj he was indeed the glass 
▁ xxmaj wherein the noble youth did dress themselves . 
▁ xxmaj he had no legs that practis'd not his gait ; 
▁ xxmaj and speaking thick , which nature made his blemish , 
▁ xxmaj became the accents of the valiant ; 
▁ xxmaj for those who could speak low and tardily 
▁ xxmaj would turn their own perfection to abuse 
▁ xxmaj to seem like him : so that in speech , in gait , 
▁ xxmaj in diet , in affections of delight , 
▁ xxmaj in military rules , humours of blood , 
▁ xxmaj he was the mark and glass , copy and book , 
▁ xxmaj that fashion'd others . xxmaj and him- o wondrous him ! 
▁ o miracle of men!- him did you leave- 
▁ xxmaj second to none , unseconded by you- 
▁ xxmaj to look upon the hideous god of war 
▁ xxmaj in disadvantage , to abide a field 
▁ xxmaj where nothing but the sound of xxmaj hotspur 's name 
▁ xxmaj did seem defensible . xxmaj so you left him . 
▁ xxmaj never , o never , do his ghost the wrong 
▁ xxmaj to hold your honour more precise and nice 
▁ xxmaj with others than with him ! xxmaj let them alone . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj marshal and the xxmaj archbishop are strong . 
▁ xxmaj had my sweet xxmaj harry had but half their numbers , 
▁ xxmaj to - day might xxup i , hanging on xxmaj hotspur 's neck , 
▁ xxmaj have talk'd of xxmaj monmouth 's grave . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj beshrew your heart , 
▁ xxmaj fair daughter , you do draw my spirits from me 
▁ xxmaj with new lamenting ancient oversights . 
▁ xxmaj but i must go and meet with danger there ,