xxbos xxmaj or it will seek me in another place , 
▁ xxmaj and find me worse provided . 
▁ xxup lady xxup northumberland . xxup o , fly to xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxmaj till that the nobles and the armed commons 
▁ xxmaj have of their puissance made a little taste . 
▁ xxup lady xxup percy . xxmaj if they get ground and vantage of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj then join you with them , like a rib of steel , 
▁ xxmaj to make strength stronger ; but , for all our loves , 
▁ xxmaj first let them try themselves . xxmaj so did your son ; 
▁ xxmaj he was so suff'red ; so came i a widow ; 
▁ xxmaj and never shall have length of life enough 
▁ xxmaj to rain upon remembrance with mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj that it may grow and sprout as high as heaven , 
▁ xxmaj for recordation to my noble husband . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj come , come , go in with me . ' tis with my mind 
▁ xxmaj as with the tide swell'd up unto his height , 
▁ xxmaj that makes a still - stand , running neither way . 
▁ xxmaj fain would i go to meet the xxmaj archbishop , 
▁ xxmaj but many thousand reasons hold me back . 
▁ i will resolve for xxmaj scotland . xxmaj there am xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj till time and vantage crave my company . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head xxmaj tavern in xxmaj eastcheap 

 xxmaj enter xxup francis and another xxup drawer 

▁ xxup francis . xxmaj what the devil hast thou brought there - apple - johns ? xxmaj thou 
▁ knowest xxmaj sir xxmaj john can not endure an apple - john . 
▁ xxup second xxup drawer . xxmaj mass , thou say'st true . xxmaj the xxmaj prince once set a dish 
▁ of apple - johns before him , and told him there were five more xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj johns ; and , putting off his hat , said ' i will now take my leave 
▁ of these six dry , round , old , withered knights . ' xxmaj it ang'red him 
▁ to the heart ; but he hath forgot that . 
▁ xxup francis . xxmaj why , then , cover and set them down ; and see if thou canst 
▁ find out xxmaj sneak 's noise ; xxmaj mistress xxmaj tearsheet would fain hear some 
▁ music . 

▁ xxmaj enter third xxup drawer 

▁ xxup third xxup drawer . xxmaj dispatch ! xxmaj the room where they supp'd is too hot ; 
▁ they 'll come in straight . 
▁ xxup francis . xxmaj sirrah , here will be the xxmaj prince and xxmaj master xxmaj poins anon ; and 
▁ they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons ; and xxmaj sir xxmaj john must 
▁ not know of it . xxmaj bardolph hath brought word . 
▁ xxup third xxup drawer . xxmaj by the mass , here will be old uds ; it will be an 
▁ excellent stratagem . 
▁ xxup second xxup drawer . xxmaj i 'll see if i can find out xxmaj sneak . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt second and third xxup drawers 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hostess and xxup doll xxup tearsheet 

▁ xxup hostess . xxup i ' faith , sweetheart , methinks now you are in an excellent 
▁ good temperality . xxmaj your pulsidge beats as extraordinarily as heart 
▁ would desire ; and your colour , i warrant you , is as red as any 
▁ rose , in good truth , la ! xxmaj but , i ' faith , you have drunk too much 
▁ canaries ; and that 's a marvellous searching wine , and it perfumes 
▁ the blood ere one can say ' what 's this ? ' xxmaj how do you now ? 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj better than i was- hem . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj why , that 's well said ; a good heart 's worth gold . 
▁ xxmaj lo , here comes xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup falstaff 
▁
▁ xxup falstaff . [ singing ] ' when xxmaj arthur first in court'- xxmaj empty the 
▁ jordan . [ exit xxup francis]- [ singing ] ' and was a worthy king'- xxmaj how 
▁ now , xxmaj mistress xxmaj doll ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj sick of a calm ; yea , good faith . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj so is all her sect ; and they be once in a calm , they are 
▁ sick . 
▁ xxup doll . a pox damn you , you muddy rascal ! xxmaj is that all the comfort you 
▁ give me ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj you make fat rascals , xxmaj mistress xxmaj doll . 
▁ xxup doll . i make them ! xxmaj gluttony and diseases make them : i make them 
▁ not . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj if the cook help to make the gluttony , you help to make 
▁ the diseases , xxmaj doll . xxmaj we catch of you , xxmaj doll , we catch of you ; grant 
▁ that , my poor virtue , grant that . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj yea , joy , our chains and our jewels . 
▁ xxup falstaff . ' your brooches , pearls , and ouches . ' xxmaj for to serve bravely 
▁ is to come halting off ; you know , to come off the breach with his 
▁ pike bent bravely , and to surgery bravely ; to venture upon the 
▁ charg'd chambers bravely- 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj hang yourself , you muddy conger , hang yourself ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj by my troth , this is the old fashion ; you two never meet 
▁ but you fall to some discord . xxmaj you are both , i ' good truth , as 
▁ rheumatic as two dry toasts ; you can not one bear with another 's 
▁ confirmities . xxmaj what the good - year ! one must bear , and that must be 
▁ you . xxmaj you are the weaker vessel , as as they say , the emptier 
▁ vessel . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogs - head ? 
▁ xxmaj there 's a whole merchant 's venture of xxmaj bourdeaux stuff in him ; you 
▁ have not seen a hulk better stuff'd in the hold . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll be 
▁ friends with thee , xxmaj jack . xxmaj thou art going to the wars ; and whether 
▁ i shall ever see thee again or no , there is nobody cares . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup francis 

▁ xxup francis . xxmaj sir , xxmaj ancient xxmaj pistol 's below and would speak with you . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj hang him , swaggering rascal ! xxmaj let him not come hither ; it is 
▁ the foul - mouth'dst rogue in xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj if he swagger , let him not come here . xxmaj no , by my faith ! i 
▁ must live among my neighbours ; xxmaj i 'll no swaggerers . i am in good 
▁ name and fame with the very best . xxmaj shut the door . xxmaj there comes no 
▁ swaggerers here ; i have not liv'd all this while to have 
▁ swaggering now . xxmaj shut the door , i pray you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj dost thou hear , hostess ? 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj pray ye , pacify yourself , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ; there comes no 
▁ swaggerers here . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj dost thou hear ? xxmaj it is mine ancient . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj tilly - fally , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , ne'er tell me ; and your ancient 
▁ swagg'rer comes not in my doors . i was before xxmaj master xxmaj tisick , the 
▁ debuty , t ' other day ; and , as he said to me- ' twas no longer ago 
▁ than xxmaj wednesday last , i ' good faith!- ' neighbour xxmaj quickly , ' says 
▁ he- xxmaj master xxmaj dumbe , our minister , was by then- ' neighbour xxmaj quickly , ' 
▁ says he ' receive those that are civil , for ' said he ' you are in 
▁ an ill name . ' xxmaj now ' a said so , i can tell whereupon . ' for ' says he 
▁ ' you are an honest woman and well thought on , therefore take heed 
▁ what guests you receive . xxmaj receive ' says he ' no swaggering 
▁ companions . ' xxmaj there comes none here . xxmaj you would bless you to hear 
▁ what he said . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll no swagg'rers . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj he 's no swagg'rer , hostess ; a tame cheater , i ' faith ; you 
▁ may stroke him as gently as a puppy greyhound . xxmaj he 'll not swagger 
▁ with a xxmaj barbary hen , if her feathers turn back in any show of 
▁ resistance . xxmaj call him up , drawer . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup francis 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj cheater , call you him ? i will bar no honest man my house , 
▁ nor no cheater ; but i do not love swaggering , by my troth . i am 
▁ the worse when one says ' swagger . ' xxmaj feel , masters , how i shake ; 
▁ look you , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj so you do , hostess . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj do xxup i ? xxmaj yea , in very truth , do xxup i , an ' twere an aspen leaf . i 
▁ can not abide swagg'rers . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pistol , xxup bardolph , and xxup page 

▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj god save you , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj ancient xxmaj pistol . xxmaj here , xxmaj pistol , i charge you with 
▁ a cup of sack ; do you discharge upon mine hostess . 
▁ xxup pistol . i will discharge upon her , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , with two bullets . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj she is pistol - proof , sir ; you shall not hardly offend 
▁ her . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll drink no proofs nor no bullets . xxmaj i 'll drink no 
▁ more than will do me good , for no man 's pleasure , xxup i. 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj then to you , xxmaj mistress xxmaj dorothy ; i will charge you . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj charge me ! i scorn you , scurvy companion . xxmaj what ! you poor , 
▁ base , rascally , cheating , lack - linen mate ! xxmaj away , you mouldy 
▁ rogue , away ! i am meat for your master . 
▁ xxup pistol . i know you , xxmaj mistress xxmaj dorothy . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj away , you cut - purse rascal ! you filthy bung , away ! xxmaj by this 
▁ wine , xxmaj i 'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps , an you play the 
▁ saucy cuttle with me . xxmaj away , you bottle - ale rascal ! you 
▁ basket - hilt stale juggler , you ! xxmaj since when , i pray you , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj god 's light , with two points on your shoulder ? xxmaj much ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj god let me not live but i will murder your ruff for this . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no more , xxmaj pistol ; i would not have you go off here . 
▁ xxmaj discharge yourself of our company , xxmaj pistol . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj no , good xxmaj captain xxmaj pistol ; not here , sweet captain . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj captain ! xxmaj thou abominable damn'd cheater , art thou not ashamed 
▁ to be called captain ? xxmaj an captains were of my mind , they would 
▁ truncheon you out , for taking their names upon you before you 
▁ have earn'd them . xxmaj you a captain ! you slave , for what ? xxmaj for tearing 
▁ a poor whore 's ruff in a bawdy - house ? xxmaj he a captain ! hang him , 
▁ rogue ! xxmaj he lives upon mouldy stew'd prunes and dried cakes . a 
▁ captain ! xxmaj god 's light , these villains will make the word as odious 
▁ as the word ' occupy ' ; which was an excellent good word before it 
▁ was ill sorted . xxmaj therefore captains had need look to't . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj pray thee go down , good ancient . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj hark thee hither , xxmaj mistress xxmaj doll . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj not xxup i ! i tell thee what , xxmaj corporal xxmaj bardolph , i could tear 
▁ her ; xxmaj i 'll be reveng'd of her . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj pray thee go down . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj i 'll see her damn'd first ; to xxmaj pluto 's damn'd lake , by this 
▁ hand , to th ' infernal deep , with xxmaj erebus and tortures vile also . 
▁ xxmaj hold hook and line , say xxup i. xxmaj down , down , dogs ! down , faitors ! xxmaj have 
▁ we not xxmaj hiren here ? 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj good xxmaj captain xxmaj peesel , be quiet ; ' tis very late , i ' faith ; i 
▁ beseek you now , aggravate your choler . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj these be good humours , indeed ! xxmaj shall packhorses , 
▁ xxmaj and hollow pamper'd jades of xxmaj asia , 
▁ xxmaj which can not go but thirty mile a day , 
▁ xxmaj compare with xxmaj caesars , and with xxmaj cannibals , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj troiant xxmaj greeks ? xxmaj nay , rather damn them with 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj cerberus ; and let the welkin roar . 
▁ xxmaj shall we fall foul for toys ? 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj by my troth , xxmaj captain , these are very bitter words . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj be gone , good ancient ; this will grow to a brawl anon . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj die men like dogs ! xxmaj give crowns like pins ! xxmaj have we not xxmaj hiren 
▁ here ? 
▁ xxup hostess . xxup o ' my word , xxmaj captain , there 's none such here . xxmaj what the 
▁ good - year ! do you think i would deny her ? xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , be 
▁ quiet . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj then feed and be fat , my fair xxmaj calipolis . 
▁ xxmaj come , give 's some sack . 
▁ ' si fortune me tormente sperato me contento . ' 
▁ xxmaj fear we broadsides ? xxmaj no , let the fiend give fire . 
▁ xxmaj give me some sack ; and , sweetheart , lie thou there . 
▁ [ laying down his sword ] 
▁ xxmaj come we to full points here , and are etceteras nothings ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj pistol , i would be quiet . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj sweet knight , i kiss thy neaf . xxmaj what ! we have seen the seven 
▁ stars . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake thrust him down stairs ; i can not endure such a 
▁ fustian rascal . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj thrust him down stairs ! xxmaj know we not xxmaj galloway nags ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj quoit him down , xxmaj bardolph , like a shove - groat shilling . 
▁ xxmaj nay , an ' a do nothing but speak nothing , ' a shall be nothing 
▁ here . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj come , get you down stairs . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj what ! shall we have incision ? xxmaj shall we imbrue ? 
▁ [ snatching up his sword ] 
▁ xxmaj then death rock me asleep , abridge my doleful days ! 
▁ xxmaj why , then , let grievous , ghastly , gaping wounds 
▁ xxmaj untwine the xxmaj sisters xxmaj three ! xxmaj come , xxmaj atropos , i say ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj here 's goodly stuff toward ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj give me my rapier , boy . 
▁ xxup doll . i pray thee , xxmaj jack , i pray thee , do not draw . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj get you down stairs . 
▁ [ drawing and driving xxup pistol out ] 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj here 's a goodly tumult ! xxmaj i 'll forswear keeping house afore 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be in these tirrits and frights . xxmaj so ; murder , i warrant now . 
▁ xxmaj alas , alas ! put up your naked weapons , put up your naked weapons . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup pistol and xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup doll . i pray thee , xxmaj jack , be quiet ; the rascal 's gone . xxmaj ah , you 
▁ whoreson little valiant villain , you ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj are you not hurt i ' th ' groin ? xxmaj methought ' a made a shrewd 
▁ thrust at your belly . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj have you turn'd him out a doors ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj yea , sir . xxmaj the rascal 's drunk . xxmaj you have hurt him , sir , i ' 
▁ th ' shoulder . 
▁ xxup falstaff . a rascal ! to brave me ! 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj ah , you sweet little rogue , you ! xxmaj alas , poor ape , how thou 
▁ sweat'st ! xxmaj come , let me wipe thy face . xxmaj come on , you whoreson 
▁ chops . xxmaj ah , rogue ! i ' faith , i love thee . xxmaj thou art as valorous as 
▁ xxmaj hector of xxmaj troy , worth five of xxmaj agamemnon , and ten times better 
▁ than the xxmaj nine xxmaj worthies . xxmaj ah , villain ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . a rascally slave ! i will toss the rogue in a blanket . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj do , an thou dar'st for thy heart . xxmaj an thou dost , xxmaj i 'll canvass 
▁ thee between a pair of sheets . 

▁ xxmaj enter musicians 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj the music is come , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let them play . xxmaj play , sirs . xxmaj sit on my knee , xxmaj don . a rascal 
▁ bragging slave ! xxmaj the rogue fled from me like quick - silver . 
▁ xxup doll . xxup i ' faith , and thou follow'dst him like a church . xxmaj thou 
▁ whoreson little tidy xxmaj bartholomew boar - pig , when wilt thou leave 
▁ fighting a days and foining a nights , and begin to patch up thine 
▁ old body for heaven ? 

▁ xxmaj enter , behind , xxup prince xxup henry and xxup poins disguised as drawers 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj peace , good xxmaj doll ! xxmaj do not speak like a death's - head ; do 
▁ not bid me remember mine end . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj sirrah , what humour 's the xxmaj prince of ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . a good shallow young fellow . ' a would have made a good 
▁ pantler ; ' a would ha ' chipp'd bread well . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj they say xxmaj poins has a good wit . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj he a good wit ! hang him , baboon ! xxmaj his wit 's as thick as 
▁ xxmaj tewksbury mustard ; there 's no more conceit in him than is in a 
▁ mallet . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj why does the xxmaj prince love him so , then ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj because their legs are both of a bigness , and ' a plays at 
▁ quoits well , and eats conger and fennel , and drinks off candles ' 
▁ ends for flap - dragons , and rides the wild mare with the boys , and 
▁ jumps upon join'd - stools , and swears with a good grace , and wears 
▁ his boots very smooth , like unto the sign of the xxmaj leg , and breeds 
▁ no bate with telling of discreet stories ; and such other gambol 
▁ faculties ' a has , that show a weak mind and an able body , for the 
▁ which the xxmaj prince admits him . xxmaj for the xxmaj prince himself is such 
▁ another ; the weight of a hair will turn the scales between their 
▁ avoirdupois . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj let 's beat him before his whore . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj look whe'er the wither'd elder hath not his poll claw'd 
▁ like a parrot . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive 
▁ performance ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj kiss me , xxmaj doll . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj saturn and xxmaj venus this year in conjunction ! xxmaj what says th ' 
▁ almanac to that ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj and look whether the fiery xxmaj trigon , his man , be not lisping 
▁ to his master 's old tables , his note - book , his counsel - keeper . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj thou dost give me flattering busses . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj by my troth , i kiss thee with a most constant heart . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i am old , i am old . 
▁ xxup doll . i love thee better than i love e'er a scurvy young boy of 
▁ them all . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what stuff wilt have a kirtle of ? i shall receive money a 
▁ xxmaj thursday . xxmaj shalt have a cap to - morrow . a merry song , come . ' a 
▁ grows late ; we 'll to bed . xxmaj thou't forget me when i am gone . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj by my troth , thou't set me a - weeping , an thou say'st so . 
▁ xxmaj prove that ever i dress myself handsome till thy return . xxmaj well , 
▁ hearken a ' th ' end . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj some sack , xxmaj francis . 
▁ xxup prince & xxup poins . xxmaj anon , anon , sir . [ advancing ] 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj ha ! a bastard son of the xxmaj king 's ? xxmaj and art thou not xxmaj poins 
▁ his brother ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj why , thou globe of sinful continents , what a life dost thou 
▁ lead ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . a better than thou . i am a gentleman : thou art a drawer . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj very true , sir , and i come to draw you out by the ears . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxup o , the xxmaj lord preserve thy xxmaj grace ! xxmaj by my troth , welcome to 
▁ xxmaj london . xxmaj now the xxmaj lord bless that sweet face of thine . o xxmaj jesu , are 
▁ you come from xxmaj wales ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj thou whoreson mad compound of majesty , by this light 
▁ flesh and corrupt blood , thou art welcome . 
▁ [ leaning his band upon xxup doll ] 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj how , you fat fool ! i scorn you . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj my lord , he will drive you out of your revenge and turn all 
▁ to a merriment , if you take not the heat . 
▁ xxup prince . xxup you whoreson candle - mine , you , how vilely did you speak of 
▁ me even now before this honest , virtuous , civil gentlewoman ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj god 's blessing of your good heart ! and so she is , by my 
▁ troth . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj didst thou hear me ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj yea ; and you knew me , as you did when you ran away by 
▁ xxmaj gadshill . xxmaj you knew i was at your back , and spoke it on purpose to 
▁ try my patience . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no , no , no ; not so ; i did not think thou wast within 
▁ hearing . 
▁ xxup prince . i shall drive you then to confess the wilful abuse , and 
▁ then i know how to handle you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no abuse , xxmaj hal , o ' mine honour ; no abuse . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj not- to dispraise me , and call me pander , and 
▁ bread - chipper , and i know not what ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no abuse , xxmaj hal . 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj no abuse ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no abuse , xxmaj ned , i ' th ' world ; honest xxmaj ned , none . i 
▁ disprais'd him before the wicked- that the wicked might not fall 
▁ in love with thee ; in which doing , i have done the part of a 
▁ careful friend and a true subject ; and thy father is to give me 
▁ thanks for it . xxmaj no abuse , xxmaj hal ; none , xxmaj ned , none ; no , faith , boys , 
▁ none . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj see now , whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not 
▁ make thee wrong this virtuous gentlewoman to close with us ? xxmaj is 
▁ she of the wicked ? xxmaj is thine hostess here of the wicked ? xxmaj or is thy 
▁ boy of the wicked ? xxmaj or honest xxmaj bardolph , whose zeal burns in his 
▁ nose , of the wicked ? 
▁ xxup poins . xxmaj answer , thou dead elm , answer . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj the fiend hath prick'd down xxmaj bardolph irrecoverable ; and 
▁ his face is xxmaj lucifer 's privy - kitchen , where he doth nothing but 
▁ roast malt - worms . xxmaj for the boy- there is a good angel about him ; 
▁ but the devil outbids him too . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj for the women ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj for one of them- she 's in hell already , and burns poor 
▁ souls . xxmaj for th ' other- i owe her money ; and whether she be damn'd 
▁ for that , i know not . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj no , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no , i think thou art not ; i think thou art quit for that . 
▁ xxmaj marry , there is another indictment upon thee for suffering flesh 
▁ to be eaten in thy house , contrary to the law ; for the which i 
▁ think thou wilt howl . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj all vict'lers do so . xxmaj what 's a joint of mutton or two in a 
▁ whole xxmaj lent ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj you , gentlewoman- 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj what says your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj his xxmaj grace says that which his flesh rebels against . 
▁ [ knocking within ] 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj who knocks so loud at door ? xxmaj look to th ' door there , 
▁ xxmaj francis . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup peto 

▁ xxup prince . xxmaj peto , how now ! xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxup peto . xxmaj the xxmaj king your father is at xxmaj westminster ; 
▁ xxmaj and there are twenty weak and wearied posts 
▁ xxmaj come from the north ; and as i came along 
▁ i met and overtook a dozen captains , 
▁ xxmaj bare - headed , sweating , knocking at the taverns , 
▁ xxmaj and asking every one for xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj poins , i feel me much to blame 
▁ xxmaj so idly to profane the precious time , 
▁ xxmaj when tempest of commotion , like the south , 
▁ xxmaj borne with black vapour , doth begin to melt 
▁ xxmaj and drop upon our bare unarmed heads . 
▁ xxmaj give me my sword and cloak . xxmaj falstaff , good night . 

▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup prince , xxup poins , xxup peto , and xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night , and we 
▁ must hence , and leave it unpick'd . [ knocking within ] xxmaj more 
▁ knocking at the door ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup bardolph 

▁ xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj you must away to court , sir , presently ; 
▁ a dozen captains stay at door for you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . [ to the xxup page ] . xxmaj pay the musicians , sirrah.- xxmaj farewell , 
▁ hostess ; farewell , xxmaj doll . xxmaj you see , my good wenches , how men of 
▁ merit are sought after ; the undeserver may sleep , when the man of 
▁ action is call'd on . xxmaj farewell , good wenches . xxmaj if i be not sent 
▁ away post , i will see you again ere i go . 
▁ xxup doll . i can not speak . xxmaj if my heart be not ready to burst ! 
▁ xxmaj well , sweet xxmaj jack , have a care of thyself . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj farewell , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup falstaff and xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj well , fare thee well . i have known thee these twenty - nine 
▁ years , come peascod - time ; but an honester and truer - hearted man 
▁ -well fare thee well . 
▁ xxup bardolph . [ xxmaj within ] xxmaj mistress xxmaj tearsheet ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . [ xxmaj within ] xxmaj bid xxmaj mistress xxmaj tearsheet come to my master . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxup o , run xxmaj doll , run , run , good xxmaj come . [ to xxup bardolph ] xxmaj she 
▁ comes blubber'd.- xxmaj yea , will you come , xxmaj doll ? xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj westminster . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king in his nightgown , with a page 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj go call the xxmaj earls of xxmaj surrey and of xxmaj warwick ; 
▁ xxmaj but , ere they come , bid them o'er - read these letters 
▁ xxmaj and well consider of them . xxmaj make good speed . xxmaj exit page 
▁ xxmaj how many thousands of my poorest subjects 
▁ xxmaj are at this hour asleep ! o sleep , o gentle sleep , 
▁ xxmaj nature 's soft nurse , how have i frightened thee , 
▁ xxmaj that thou no more will weigh my eyelids down , 
▁ xxmaj and steep my senses in forgetfulness ? 
▁ xxmaj why rather , sleep , liest thou in smoky cribs , 
▁ xxmaj upon uneasy pallets stretching thee , 
▁ xxmaj and hush'd with buzzing night - flies to thy slumber , 
▁ xxmaj than in the perfum'd chambers of the great , 
▁ xxmaj under the canopies of costly state , 
▁ xxmaj and lull'd with sound of sweetest melody ? 
▁ o thou dull god , why liest thou with the vile 
▁ xxmaj in loathsome beds , and leav'st the kingly couch 
▁ a watch - case or a common ' larum - bell ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast 
▁ xxmaj seal up the ship - boy 's eyes , and rock his brains 
▁ xxmaj in cradle of the rude imperious surge , 
▁ xxmaj and in the visitation of the winds , 
▁ xxmaj who take the ruffian billows by the top , 
▁ xxmaj curling their monstrous heads , and hanging them 
▁ xxmaj with deafing clamour in the slippery clouds , 
▁ xxmaj that with the hurly death itself awakes ? 
▁ xxmaj canst thou , o partial sleep , give thy repose 
▁ xxmaj to the wet sea - boy in an hour so rude ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the calmest and most stillest night , 
▁ xxmaj with all appliances and means to boot , 
▁ xxmaj deny it to a king ? xxmaj then , happy low , lie down ! 
▁ xxmaj uneasy lies the head that wears a crown . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup warwick and xxmaj surrey 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj many good morrows to your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj is it good morrow , lords ? 
▁ xxup warwick . ' tis one o'clock , and past . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj why then , good morrow to you all , my lords . 
▁ xxmaj have you read o'er the letters that i sent you ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj we have , my liege . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj then you perceive the body of our kingdom 
▁ xxmaj how foul it is ; what rank diseases grow , 
▁ xxmaj and with what danger , near the heart of it . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj it is but as a body yet distempered ; 
▁ xxmaj which to his former strength may be restored 
▁ xxmaj with good advice and little medicine . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland will soon be cool'd . 
▁ xxup king . o xxmaj god ! that one might read the book of fate , 
▁ xxmaj and see the revolution of the times 
▁ xxmaj make mountains level , and the continent , 
▁ xxmaj weary of solid firmness , melt itself 
▁ xxmaj into the sea ; and other times to see 
▁ xxmaj the beachy girdle of the ocean 
▁ xxmaj too wide for xxmaj neptune 's hips ; how chances mock , 
▁ xxmaj and changes fill the cup of alteration 
▁ xxmaj with divers liquors ! xxup o , if this were seen , 
▁ xxmaj the happiest youth , viewing his progress through , 
▁ xxmaj what perils past , what crosses to ensue , 
▁ xxmaj would shut the book and sit him down and die . 
▁ ' tis not ten years gone 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj richard and xxmaj northumberland , great friends , 
▁ xxmaj did feast together , and in two years after 
▁ xxmaj were they at wars . xxmaj it is but eight years since 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj percy was the man nearest my soul ; 
▁ xxmaj who like a brother toil'd in my affairs 
▁ xxmaj and laid his love and life under my foot ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , for my sake , even to the eyes of xxmaj richard 
▁ xxmaj gave him defiance . xxmaj but which of you was by- 
▁ [ to xxup warwick ] xxmaj you , cousin xxmaj nevil , as i may remember- 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj richard , with his eye brim full of tears , 
▁ xxmaj then check'd and rated by xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj did speak these words , now prov'd a prophecy ? 
▁ ' northumberland , thou ladder by the which 
▁ xxmaj my cousin xxmaj bolingbroke ascends my throne'- 
▁ xxmaj though then , xxmaj god knows , i had no such intent 
▁ xxmaj but that necessity so bow'd the state 
▁ xxmaj that i and greatness were compell'd to kiss- 
▁ ' the time shall come'- thus did he follow it- 
▁ ' the time will come that foul sin , gathering head , 
▁ xxmaj shall break into corruption ' so went on , 
▁ xxmaj foretelling this same time 's condition 
▁ xxmaj and the division of our amity . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj there is a history in all men 's lives , 
▁ xxmaj figuring the natures of the times deceas'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the which observ'd , a man may prophesy , 
▁ xxmaj with a near aim , of the main chance of things 
▁ xxmaj as yet not come to life , who in their seeds 
▁ xxmaj and weak beginning lie intreasured . 
▁ xxmaj such things become the hatch and brood of time ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by the necessary form of this , 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj richard might create a perfect guess 
▁ xxmaj that great xxmaj northumberland , then false to him , 
▁ xxmaj would of that seed grow to a greater falseness ; 
▁ xxmaj which should not find a ground to root upon 
▁ xxmaj unless on you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj are these things then necessities ? 
▁ xxmaj then let us meet them like necessities ; 
▁ xxmaj and that same word even now cries out on us . 
▁ xxmaj they say the xxmaj bishop and xxmaj northumberland 
▁ xxmaj are fifty thousand strong . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj it can not be , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj rumour doth double , like the voice and echo , 
▁ xxmaj the numbers of the feared . xxmaj please it your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj to go to bed . xxmaj upon my soul , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj the powers that you already have sent forth 
▁ xxmaj shall bring this prize in very easily . 
▁ xxmaj to comfort you the more , i have receiv'd 
▁ a certain instance that xxmaj glendower is dead . 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj majesty hath been this fortnight ill ; 
▁ xxmaj and these unseasoned hours perforce must ad 
▁ xxmaj unto your sickness . 
▁ xxup king . i will take your counsel . 
▁ xxmaj and , were these inward wars once out of hand , 
▁ xxmaj we would , dear lords , unto the xxmaj holy xxmaj land . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj gloucestershire . xxmaj before xxmaj justice , xxup shallow 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup shallow and xxup silence , meeting ; xxup mouldy , xxup shadow , xxup wart , xxup feeble , xxup bullcalf , 
 and servants behind 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj come on , come on , come on ; give me your hand , sir ; give me 
▁ your hand , sir . xxmaj an early stirrer , by the rood ! xxmaj and how doth my 
▁ good cousin xxmaj silence ? 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj good morrow , good cousin xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj and how doth my cousin , your bed - fellow ? and your fairest 
▁ daughter and mine , my god - daughter xxmaj ellen ? 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj alas , a black ousel , cousin xxmaj shallow ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by yea and no , sir . i dare say my cousin xxmaj william is become 
▁ a good scholar ; he is at xxmaj oxford still , is he not ? 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj indeed , sir , to my cost . 
▁ xxup shallow . ' a must , then , to the xxmaj inns o ' xxmaj court shortly . i was once of 
▁ xxmaj clement 's xxmaj inn ; where i think they will talk of mad xxmaj shallow yet . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj you were call'd ' lusty xxmaj shallow ' then , cousin . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by the mass , i was call'd anything ; and i would have done 
▁ anything indeed too , and roundly too . xxmaj there was xxup i , and little 
▁ xxmaj john xxmaj doit of xxmaj staffordshire , and black xxmaj george xxmaj barnes , and xxmaj francis 
▁ xxmaj pickbone , and xxmaj will xxmaj squele a xxmaj cotsole man- you had not four such 
▁ swinge - bucklers in all the xxmaj inns of xxmaj court again . xxmaj and i may say to 
▁ you we knew where the bona - robas were , and had the best of them 
▁ all at commandment . xxmaj then was xxmaj jack xxmaj falstaff , now xxmaj sir xxmaj john , boy , 
▁ and page to xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray , xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj this xxmaj sir xxmaj john , cousin , that comes hither anon about 
▁ soldiers ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj the same xxmaj sir xxmaj john , the very same . i see him break 
▁ xxmaj scoggin 's head at the court gate , when ' a was a crack not thus 
▁ high ; and the very same day did i fight with one xxmaj sampson 
▁ xxmaj stockfish , a fruiterer , behind xxmaj gray 's xxmaj inn . xxmaj jesu , xxmaj jesu , the mad 
▁ days that i have spent ! and to see how many of my old 
▁ acquaintance are dead ! 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj we shall all follow , cousin . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj certain , ' tis certain ; very sure , very sure . xxmaj death , as the 
▁ xxmaj psalmist saith , is certain to all ; all shall die . xxmaj how a good yoke 
▁ of bullocks at xxmaj stamford fair ? 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj by my troth , i was not there . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj death is certain . xxmaj is old xxmaj double of your town living yet ? 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj dead , sir . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj jesu , xxmaj jesu , dead ! drew a good bow ; and dead ! ' a shot a 
▁ fine shoot . xxmaj john a xxmaj gaunt loved him well , and betted much money on 
▁ his head . xxmaj dead ! ' a would have clapp'd i ' th ' clout at twelve 
▁ score , and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen 
▁ and a half , that it would have done a man 's heart good to see . 
▁ xxmaj how a score of ewes now ? 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj thereafter as they be- a score of good ewes may be worth 
▁ ten pounds . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj and is old xxmaj double dead ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bardolph , and one with him 

▁ xxup silence . xxmaj here come two of xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaffs men , as i think . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj good morrow , honest gentlemen . 
▁ xxup bardolph . i beseech you , which is xxmaj justice xxmaj shallow ? 
▁ xxup shallow . i am xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow , sir , a poor esquire of this county , 
▁ and one of the xxmaj king 's justices of the peace . xxmaj what is your good 
▁ pleasure with me ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj my captain , sir , commends him to you ; my captain , xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff- a tall gentleman , by heaven , and a most gallant 
▁ leader . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj he greets me well , sir ; i knew him a good back - sword man . 
▁ xxmaj how doth the good knight ? xxmaj may i ask how my lady his wife doth ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj sir , pardon ; a soldier is better accommodated than with a 
▁ wife . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it is well said , in faith , sir ; and it is well said indeed 
▁ too . ' better accommodated ! ' xxmaj it is good ; yea , indeed , is it . xxmaj good 
▁ phrases are surely , and ever were , very commendable . 
▁ ' accommodated ! ' xxmaj it comes of accommodo . xxmaj very good ; a good phrase . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj pardon , sir ; i have heard the word . ' phrase ' call you it ? 
▁ xxmaj by this day , i know not the phrase ; but i will maintain the word 
▁ with my sword to be a soldier - like word , and a word of exceeding 
▁ good command , by heaven . xxmaj accommodated : that is , when a man is , as 
▁ they say , accommodated ; or , when a man is being - whereby ' a may be 
▁ thought to be accommodated ; which is an excellent thing . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup falstaff 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it is very just . xxmaj look , here comes good xxmaj sir xxmaj john . xxmaj give me 
▁ your good hand , give me your worship 's good hand . xxmaj by my troth , 
▁ you like well and bear your years very well . xxmaj welcome , good xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i am glad to see you well , good xxmaj master xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj surecard , as i think ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj no , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ; it is my cousin xxmaj silence , in commission with 
▁ me . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj silence , it well befits you should be of the 
▁ peace . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj your good worship is welcome . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fie ! this is hot weather . xxmaj gentlemen , have you provided me 
▁ here half a dozen sufficient men ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj marry , have we , sir . xxmaj will you sit ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let me see them , i beseech you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj where 's the roll ? xxmaj where 's the roll ? xxmaj where 's the roll ? xxmaj let 
▁ me see , let me see , let me see . xxmaj so , so , so , so,- so , so- yea , 
▁ marry , sir . xxmaj rafe xxmaj mouldy ! xxmaj let them appear as i call ; let them do 
▁ so , let them do so . xxmaj let me see ; where is xxmaj mouldy ? 
▁ xxup mouldy . xxmaj here , an't please you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj what think you , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? a good - limb'd fellow ; young , 
▁ strong , and of good friends . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj is thy name xxmaj mouldy ? 
▁ xxup mouldy . xxmaj yea , an't please you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . ' tis the more time thou wert us'd . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! most excellent , i ' faith ! xxmaj things that are 
▁ mouldy lack use . xxmaj very singular good ! xxmaj in faith , well said , xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john ; very well said . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj prick him . 
▁ xxup mouldy . i was prick'd well enough before , an you could have let me 
▁ alone . xxmaj my old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry 
▁ and her drudgery . xxmaj you need not to have prick'd me ; there are 
▁ other men fitter to go out than xxup i. 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj go to ; peace , xxmaj mouldy ; you shall go . xxmaj mouldy , it is time 
▁ you were spent . 
▁ xxup mouldy . xxmaj spent ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj peace , fellow , peace ; stand aside ; know you where you are ? 
▁ xxmaj for th ' other , xxmaj sir xxmaj john- let me see . xxmaj simon xxmaj shadow ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj yea , marry , let me have him to sit under . xxmaj he 's like to be 
▁ a cold soldier . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj where 's xxmaj shadow ? 
▁ xxup shadow . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj shadow , whose son art thou ? 
▁ xxup shadow . xxmaj my mother 's son , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj thy mother 's son ! xxmaj like enough ; and thy father 's shadow . 
▁ xxmaj so the son of the female is the shadow of the male . xxmaj it is often 
▁ so indeed ; but much of the father 's substance ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj do you like him , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj shadow will serve for summer . xxmaj prick him ; for we have a 
▁ number of shadows fill up the muster - book . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj thomas xxmaj wart ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj where 's he ? 
▁ xxup wart . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj is thy name xxmaj wart ? 
▁ xxup wart . xxmaj yea , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj thou art a very ragged wart . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj shall i prick him , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj it were superfluous ; for his apparel is built upon his 
▁ back , and the whole frame stands upon pins . xxmaj prick him no more . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! xxmaj you can do it , sir ; you can do it . i commend 
▁ you well . xxmaj francis xxmaj feeble ! 
▁ xxup feeble . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what trade art thou , xxmaj feeble ? 
▁ xxup feeble . a woman 's tailor , sir . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj shall i prick him , sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj you may ; but if he had been a man 's tailor , he 'd ha ' 
▁ prick'd you . xxmaj wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy 's battle as 
▁ thou hast done in a woman 's petticoat ? 
▁ xxup feeble . i will do my good will , sir ; you can have no more . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well said , good woman 's tailor ! well said , courageous 
▁ xxmaj feeble ! xxmaj thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most 
▁ magnanimous mouse . xxmaj prick the woman 's tailor- well , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj shallow , deep , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup feeble . i would xxmaj wart might have gone , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i would thou wert a man 's tailor , that thou mightst mend 
▁ him and make him fit to go . i can not put him to a private 
▁ soldier , that is the leader of so many thousands . xxmaj let that 
▁ suffice , most forcible xxmaj feeble . 
▁ xxup feeble . xxmaj it shall suffice , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i am bound to thee , reverend xxmaj feeble . xxmaj who is next ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj peter xxmaj bullcalf o ' th ' green ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj yea , marry , let 's see xxmaj bullcalf . 
▁ xxup bullcalf . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fore xxmaj god , a likely fellow ! xxmaj come , prick me xxmaj bullcalf till 
▁ he roar again . 
▁ xxup bullcalf . o xxmaj lord ! good my lord captain- 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what , dost thou roar before thou art prick'd ? 
▁ xxup bullcalf . o xxmaj lord , sir ! i am a diseased man . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what disease hast thou ? 
▁ xxup bullcalf . a whoreson cold , sir , a cough , sir , which i caught with 
▁ ringing in the xxmaj king 's affairs upon his coronation day , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come , thou shalt go to the wars in a gown . xxmaj we will have 
▁ away thy cold ; and i will take such order that thy friends shall 
▁ ring for thee . xxmaj is here all ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj here is two more call'd than your number . xxmaj you must have 
▁ but four here , sir ; and so , i pray you , go in with me to dinner . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come , i will go drink with you , but i can not tarry 
▁ dinner . i am glad to see you , by my troth , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxup o , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , do you remember since we lay all night in the 
▁ windmill in xxmaj saint xxmaj george 's xxmaj field ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no more of that , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , no more of that . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ha , ' twas a merry night . xxmaj and is xxmaj jane xxmaj nightwork alive ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj she lives , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj she never could away with me . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj never , never ; she would always say she could not abide 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by the mass , i could anger her to th ' heart . xxmaj she was then 
▁ a bona - roba . xxmaj doth she hold her own well ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj old , old , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj nay , she must be old ; she can not choose but be old ; 
▁ certain she 's old ; and had xxmaj robin xxmaj nightwork , by old xxmaj nightwork , 
▁ before i came to xxmaj clement 's xxmaj inn . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj that 's fifty - five year ago . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ha , cousin xxmaj silence , that thou hadst seen that that this 
▁ knight and i have seen ! xxmaj ha , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , said i well ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj we have heard the chimes at midnight , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj that we have , that we have , that we have ; in faith , xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john , we have . xxmaj our watchword was ' hem , boys ! ' xxmaj come , let 's to 
▁ dinner ; come , let 's to dinner . xxmaj jesus , the days that we have seen ! 
▁ xxmaj come , come . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup falstaff and the xxup justices 
▁ xxup bullcalf . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj corporate xxmaj bardolph , stand my friend ; and 
▁ here 's four xxmaj harry ten shillings in xxmaj french crowns for you . xxmaj in very 
▁ truth , sir , i had as lief be hang'd , sir , as go . xxmaj and yet , for 
▁ mine own part , sir , i do not care ; but rather because i am 
▁ unwilling and , for mine own part , have a desire to stay with my 
▁ friends ; else , sir , i did not care for mine own part so much . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj go to ; stand aside . 
▁ xxup mouldy . xxmaj and , good xxmaj master xxmaj corporal xxmaj captain , for my old dame 's sake , 
▁ stand my friend . xxmaj she has nobody to do anything about her when i 
▁ am gone ; and she is old , and can not help herself . xxmaj you shall have 
▁ forty , sir . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj go to ; stand aside . 
▁ xxup feeble . xxmaj by my troth , i care not ; a man can die but once ; we owe xxmaj god 
▁ a death . xxmaj i 'll ne'er bear a base mind . xxmaj an't be my destiny , so ; 
▁ an't be not , so . xxmaj no man 's too good to serve 's xxmaj prince ; and , let 
▁ it go which way it will , he that dies this year is quit for the 
▁ next . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj well said ; th'art a good fellow . 
▁ xxup feeble . xxmaj faith , xxmaj i 'll bear no base mind . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup falstaff and the xxup justices 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come , sir , which men shall i have ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj four of which you please . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj sir , a word with you . i have three pound to free xxmaj mouldy 
▁ and xxmaj bullcalf . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj go to ; well . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj come , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , which four will you have ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj do you choose for me . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj marry , then- xxmaj mouldy , xxmaj bullcalf , xxmaj feeble , and xxmaj shadow . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mouldy and xxmaj bullcalf : for you , xxmaj mouldy , stay at home till 
▁ you are past service ; and for your part , xxmaj bullcalf , grow you come 
▁ unto it . i will none of you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , do not yourself wrong . xxmaj they are your 
▁ likeliest men , and i would have you serv'd with the best . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj will you tell me , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , how to choose a man ? 
▁ xxmaj care i for the limb , the thews , the stature , bulk , and big 
▁ assemblance of a man ! xxmaj give me the spirit , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . xxmaj here 's 
▁ xxmaj wart ; you see what a ragged appearance it is . ' a shall charge you 
▁ and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer 's hammer , come 
▁ off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer 's bucket . 
▁ xxmaj and this same half - fac'd fellow , xxmaj shadow- give me this man . xxmaj he 
▁ presents no mark to the enemy ; the foeman may with as great aim 
▁ level at the edge of a penknife . xxmaj and , for a retreat- how swiftly 
▁ will this xxmaj feeble , the woman 's tailor , run off ! xxup o , give me the 
▁ spare men , and spare me the great ones . xxmaj put me a caliver into 
▁ xxmaj wart 's hand , xxmaj bardolph . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj hold , xxmaj wart . xxmaj traverse- thus , thus , thus . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come , manage me your caliver . xxmaj so- very well . xxmaj go to ; very 
▁ good ; exceeding good . xxup o , give me always a little , lean , old , 
▁ chopt , bald shot . xxmaj well said , i ' faith , xxmaj wart ; th'art a good scab . 
▁ xxmaj hold , there 's a tester for thee . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj he is not his craft 's master , he doth not do it right . i 
▁ remember at xxmaj mile - end xxmaj green , when i lay at xxmaj clement 's xxmaj inn- i was 
▁ then xxmaj sir xxmaj dagonet in xxmaj arthur 's show- there was a little quiver 
▁ fellow , and ' a would manage you his piece thus ; and ' a would 
▁ about and about , and come you in and come you in . ' rah , tah , 
▁ tah ! ' would ' a say ; ' bounce ! ' would ' a say ; and away again would 
▁ ' a go , and again would ' a come . i shall ne'er see such a fellow . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj these fellows will do well . xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , xxmaj god keep you ! 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj silence , i will not use many words with you : xxmaj fare you 
▁ well ! xxmaj gentlemen both , i thank you . i must a dozen mile to - night . 
▁ xxmaj bardolph , give the soldiers coats . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , the xxmaj lord bless you ; xxmaj god prosper your affairs ; 
▁ xxmaj god send us peace ! xxmaj at your return , visit our house ; let our old 
▁ acquaintance be renewed . xxmaj peradventure i will with ye to the 
▁ court . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fore xxmaj god , would you would . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj go to ; i have spoke at a word . xxmaj god keep you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fare you well , gentle gentlemen . [ exeunt xxup justices ] xxmaj on , 
▁ xxmaj bardolph ; lead the men away . [ exeunt all but xxup falstaff ] xxmaj as i 
▁ return , i will fetch off these justices . i do see the bottom of 
▁ justice xxmaj shallow . xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord , how subject we old men are to this 
▁ vice of lying ! xxmaj this same starv'd justice hath done nothing but 
▁ prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the feats he hath 
▁ done about xxmaj turnbull xxmaj street ; and every third word a lie , duer paid 
▁ to the hearer than the xxmaj turk 's tribute . i do remember him at 
▁ xxmaj clement 's xxmaj inn , like a man made after supper of a cheese - paring . 
▁ xxmaj when ' a was naked , he was for all the world like a fork'd radish , 
▁ with a head fantastically carved upon it with a knife . ' a was so 
▁ forlorn that his dimensions to any thick sight were invisible . ' a 
▁ was the very genius of famine ; yet lecherous as a monkey , and the 
▁ whores call'd him mandrake . ' a came ever in the rearward of the 
▁ fashion , and sung those tunes to the overscutch'd huswifes that 
▁ he heard the carmen whistle , and sware they were his fancies or 
▁ his good - nights . xxmaj and now is this xxmaj vice 's dagger become a squire , 
▁ and talks as familiarly of xxmaj john a xxmaj gaunt as if he had been sworn 
▁ brother to him ; and xxmaj i 'll be sworn ' a ne'er saw him but once in 
▁ the xxmaj tiltyard ; and then he burst his head for crowding among the 
▁ marshal 's men . i saw it , and told xxmaj john a xxmaj gaunt he beat his own 
▁ name ; for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an 
▁ eel - skin ; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him , a 
▁ court- and now has he land and beeves . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll be acquainted 
▁ with him if i return ; and ' t shall go hard but xxmaj i 'll make him a 
▁ philosopher 's two stones to me . xxmaj if the young dace be a bait for 
▁ the old pike , i see no reason in the law of nature but i may snap 
▁ at him . xxmaj let time shape , and there an end . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj yorkshire . xxmaj within the xxmaj forest of xxmaj gaultree 

 xxmaj enter the xxup archbishop xxup of xxup york , xxup mowbray , xxup hastings , and others 

▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj what is this forest call'd 
▁ xxup hastings . ' tis xxmaj gaultree xxmaj forest , an't shall please your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj here stand , my lords , and send discoverers forth 
▁ xxmaj to know the numbers of our enemies . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj we have sent forth already . 
▁ xxup archbishop . ' tis well done . 
▁ xxmaj my friends and brethren in these great affairs , 
▁ i must acquaint you that i have receiv'd 
▁ xxmaj new - dated letters from xxmaj northumberland ; 
▁ xxmaj their cold intent , tenour , and substance , thus : 
▁ xxmaj here doth he wish his person , with such powers 
▁ xxmaj as might hold sortance with his quality , 
▁ xxmaj the which he could not levy ; whereupon 
▁ xxmaj he is retir'd , to ripe his growing fortunes , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj scotland ; and concludes in hearty prayers 
▁ xxmaj that your attempts may overlive the hazard 
▁ xxmaj and fearful meeting of their opposite . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground 
▁ xxmaj and dash themselves to pieces . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj now , what news ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj west of this forest , scarcely off a mile , 
▁ xxmaj in goodly form comes on the enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by the ground they hide , i judge their number 
▁ xxmaj upon or near the rate of thirty thousand . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj the just proportion that we gave them out . 
▁ xxmaj let us sway on and face them in the field . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj what well - appointed leader fronts us here ? 
▁ xxup mowbray . i think it is my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj health and fair greeting from our general , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince , xxmaj lord xxmaj john and xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj say on , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland , in peace , 
▁ xxmaj what doth concern your coming . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj then , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj unto your xxmaj grace do i in chief address 
▁ xxmaj the substance of my speech . xxmaj if that rebellion 
▁ xxmaj came like itself , in base and abject routs , 
▁ xxmaj led on by bloody youth , guarded with rags , 
▁ xxmaj and countenanc'd by boys and beggary- 
▁ i say , if damn'd commotion so appear'd 
▁ xxmaj in his true , native , and most proper shape , 
▁ xxmaj you , reverend father , and these noble lords , 
▁ xxmaj had not been here to dress the ugly form 
▁ xxmaj of base and bloody insurrection 
▁ xxmaj with your fair honours . xxmaj you , xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop , 
▁ xxmaj whose see is by a civil peace maintain'd , 
▁ xxmaj whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touch'd , 
▁ xxmaj whose learning and good letters peace hath tutor'd , 
▁ xxmaj whose white investments figure innocence , 
▁ xxmaj the dove , and very blessed spirit of peace- 
▁ xxmaj wherefore you do so ill translate yourself 
▁ xxmaj out of the speech of peace , that bears such grace , 
▁ xxmaj into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war ; 
▁ xxmaj turning your books to graves , your ink to blood , 
▁ xxmaj your pens to lances , and your tongue divine 
▁ xxmaj to a loud trumpet and a point of war ? 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj wherefore do i this ? xxmaj so the question stands . 
▁ xxmaj briefly to this end : we are all diseas'd 
▁ xxmaj and with our surfeiting and wanton hours 
▁ xxmaj have brought ourselves into a burning fever , 
▁ xxmaj and we must bleed for it ; of which disease 
▁ xxmaj our late xxmaj king , xxmaj richard , being infected , died . 
▁ xxmaj but , my most noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland , 
▁ i take not on me here as a physician ; 
▁ xxmaj nor do i as an enemy to peace 
▁ xxmaj troop in the throngs of military men ; 
▁ xxmaj but rather show awhile like fearful war 
▁ xxmaj to diet rank minds sick of happiness , 
▁ xxmaj and purge th ' obstructions which begin to stop 
▁ xxmaj our very veins of life . xxmaj hear me more plainly . 
▁ i have in equal balance justly weigh'd 
▁ xxmaj what wrongs our arms may do , what wrongs we suffer , 
▁ xxmaj and find our griefs heavier than our offences . 
▁ xxmaj we see which way the stream of time doth run 
▁ xxmaj and are enforc'd from our most quiet there 
▁ xxmaj by the rough torrent of occasion ; 
▁ xxmaj and have the summary of all our griefs , 
▁ xxmaj when time shall serve , to show in articles ; 
▁ xxmaj which long ere this we offer'd to the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and might by no suit gain our audience : 
▁ xxmaj when we are wrong'd , and would unfold our griefs , 
▁ xxmaj we are denied access unto his person , 
▁ xxmaj even by those men that most have done us wrong . 
▁ xxmaj the dangers of the days but newly gone , 
▁ xxmaj whose memory is written on the earth 
▁ xxmaj with yet appearing blood , and the examples 
▁ xxmaj of every minute 's instance , present now , 
▁ xxmaj hath put us in these ill - beseeming arms ; 
▁ xxmaj not to break peace , or any branch of it , 
▁ xxmaj but to establish here a peace indeed , 
▁ xxmaj concurring both in name and quality . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj when ever yet was your appeal denied ; 
▁ xxmaj wherein have you been galled by the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj what peer hath been suborn'd to grate on you 
▁ xxmaj that you should seal this lawless bloody book 
▁ xxmaj of forg'd rebellion with a seal divine , 
▁ xxmaj and consecrate commotion 's bitter edge ? 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj my brother general , the commonwealth , 
▁ xxmaj to brother horn an household cruelty , 
▁ i make my quarrel in particular . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj there is no need of any such redress ; 
▁ xxmaj or if there were , it not belongs to you . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj why not to him in part , and to us all 
▁ xxmaj that feel the bruises of the days before , 
▁ xxmaj and suffer the condition of these times 
▁ xxmaj to lay a heavy and unequal hand 
▁ xxmaj upon our honours ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . o my good xxmaj lord xxmaj mowbray , 
▁ xxmaj construe the times to their necessities , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall say , indeed , it is the time , 
▁ xxmaj and not the xxmaj king , that doth you injuries . 
▁ xxmaj yet , for your part , it not appears to me , 
▁ xxmaj either from the xxmaj king or in the present time , 
▁ xxmaj that you should have an inch of any ground 
▁ xxmaj to build a grief on . xxmaj were you not restor'd 
▁ xxmaj to all the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk 's signiories , 
▁ xxmaj your noble and right well - rememb'red father 's ? 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj what thing , in honour , had my father lost 
▁ xxmaj that need to be reviv'd and breath'd in me ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king that lov'd him , as the state stood then , 
▁ xxmaj was force perforce compell'd to banish him , 
▁ xxmaj and then that xxmaj henry xxmaj bolingbroke and he , 
▁ xxmaj being mounted and both roused in their seats , 
▁ xxmaj their neighing coursers daring of the spur , 
▁ xxmaj their armed staves in charge , their beavers down , 
▁ xxmaj their eyes of fire sparkling through sights of steel , 
▁ xxmaj and the loud trumpet blowing them together-