xxbos xxmaj then , then , when there was nothing could have stay'd 
▁ xxmaj my father from the breast of xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxup o , when the xxmaj king did throw his warder down- 
▁ xxmaj his own life hung upon the staff he threw- 
▁ xxmaj then threw he down himself , and all their lives 
▁ xxmaj that by indictment and by dint of sword 
▁ xxmaj have since miscarried under xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj you speak , xxmaj lord xxmaj mowbray , now you know not what . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj hereford was reputed then 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj england the most valiant gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj who knows on whom fortune would then have smil'd ? 
▁ xxmaj but if your father had been victor there , 
▁ xxmaj he ne'er had borne it out of xxmaj coventry ; 
▁ xxmaj for all the country , in a general voice , 
▁ xxmaj cried hate upon him ; and all their prayers and love 
▁ xxmaj were set on xxmaj hereford , whom they doted on , 
▁ xxmaj and bless'd and grac'd indeed more than the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj but this is mere digression from my purpose . 
▁ xxmaj here come i from our princely general 
▁ xxmaj to know your griefs ; to tell you from his xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj that he will give you audience ; and wherein 
▁ xxmaj it shall appear that your demands are just , 
▁ xxmaj you shall enjoy them , everything set off 
▁ xxmaj that might so much as think you enemies . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj but he hath forc'd us to compel this offer ; 
▁ xxmaj and it proceeds from policy , not love . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj mowbray . you overween to take it so . 
▁ xxmaj this offer comes from mercy , not from fear ; 
▁ xxmaj for , lo ! within a ken our army lies- 
▁ xxmaj upon mine honour , all too confident 
▁ xxmaj to give admittance to a thought of fear . 
▁ xxmaj our battle is more full of names than yours , 
▁ xxmaj our men more perfect in the use of arms , 
▁ xxmaj our armour all as strong , our cause the best ; 
▁ xxmaj then reason will our hearts should be as good . 
▁ xxmaj say you not , then , our offer is compell'd . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj well , by my will we shall admit no parley . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj that argues but the shame of your offence : 
▁ a rotten case abides no handling . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj hath the xxmaj prince xxmaj john a full commission , 
▁ xxmaj in very ample virtue of his father , 
▁ xxmaj to hear and absolutely to determine 
▁ xxmaj of what conditions we shall stand upon ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj that is intended in the general 's name . 
▁ i muse you make so slight a question . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj then take , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland , this schedule , 
▁ xxmaj for this contains our general grievances . 
▁ xxmaj each several article herein redress'd , 
▁ xxmaj all members of our cause , both here and hence , 
▁ xxmaj that are insinewed to this action , 
▁ xxmaj acquitted by a true substantial form , 
▁ xxmaj and present execution of our wills 
▁ xxmaj to us and to our purposes confin'd- 
▁ xxmaj we come within our awful banks again , 
▁ xxmaj and knit our powers to the arm of peace . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj this will i show the general . xxmaj please you , lords , 
▁ xxmaj in sight of both our battles we may meet ; 
▁ xxmaj and either end in peace- which xxmaj god so frame!- 
▁ xxmaj or to the place of diff'rence call the swords 
▁ xxmaj which must decide it . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj my lord , we will do so . xxmaj exit xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj there is a thing within my bosom tells me 
▁ xxmaj that no conditions of our peace can stand . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj fear you not that : if we can make our peace 
▁ xxmaj upon such large terms and so absolute 
▁ xxmaj as our conditions shall consist upon , 
▁ xxmaj our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj yea , but our valuation shall be such 
▁ xxmaj that every slight and false - derived cause , 
▁ xxmaj yea , every idle , nice , and wanton reason , 
▁ xxmaj shall to the xxmaj king taste of this action ; 
▁ xxmaj that , were our royal faiths martyrs in love , 
▁ xxmaj we shall be winnow'd with so rough a wind 
▁ xxmaj that even our corn shall seem as light as chaff , 
▁ xxmaj and good from bad find no partition . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj no , no , my lord . xxmaj note this : the xxmaj king is weary 
▁ xxmaj of dainty and such picking grievances ; 
▁ xxmaj for he hath found to end one doubt by death 
▁ xxmaj revives two greater in the heirs of life ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore will he wipe his tables clean , 
▁ xxmaj and keep no tell - tale to his memory 
▁ xxmaj that may repeat and history his los 
▁ xxmaj to new remembrance . xxmaj for full well he knows 
▁ xxmaj he can not so precisely weed this land 
▁ xxmaj as his misdoubts present occasion : 
▁ xxmaj his foes are so enrooted with his friends 
▁ xxmaj that , plucking to unfix an enemy , 
▁ xxmaj he doth unfasten so and shake a friend . 
▁ xxmaj so that this land , like an offensive wife 
▁ xxmaj that hath enrag'd him on to offer strokes , 
▁ xxmaj as he is striking , holds his infant up , 
▁ xxmaj and hangs resolv'd correction in the arm 
▁ xxmaj that was uprear'd to execution . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj besides , the xxmaj king hath wasted all his rods 
▁ xxmaj on late offenders , that he now doth lack 
▁ xxmaj the very instruments of chastisement ; 
▁ xxmaj so that his power , like to a fangless lion , 
▁ xxmaj may offer , but not hold . 
▁ xxup archbishop . ' tis very true ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore be assur'd , my good xxmaj lord xxmaj marshal , 
▁ xxmaj if we do now make our atonement well , 
▁ xxmaj our peace will , like a broken limb united , 
▁ xxmaj grow stronger for the breaking . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj be it so . 
▁ xxmaj here is return'd my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj the xxmaj prince is here at hand . xxmaj pleaseth your lordship 
▁ xxmaj to meet his xxmaj grace just distance ' tween our armies ? 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj your xxmaj grace of xxmaj york , in xxmaj god 's name then , set forward . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj before , and greet his xxmaj grace . xxmaj my lord , we come . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj another part of the forest 

 xxmaj enter , from one side , xxup mowbray , attended ; afterwards , the xxup archbishop , 
 xxup hastings , and others ; from the other side , xxup prince xxup john of xxup lancaster , 
 xxup westmoreland , xxup officers , and others 

▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj you are well encount'red here , my cousin xxmaj mowbray . 
▁ xxmaj good day to you , gentle xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop ; 
▁ xxmaj and so to you , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , and to all . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , it better show'd with you 
▁ xxmaj when that your flock , assembled by the bell , 
▁ xxmaj encircled you to hear with reverence 
▁ xxmaj your exposition on the holy text 
▁ xxmaj than now to see you here an iron man , 
▁ xxmaj cheering a rout of rebels with your drum , 
▁ xxmaj turning the word to sword , and life to death . 
▁ xxmaj that man that sits within a monarch 's heart 
▁ xxmaj and ripens in the sunshine of his favour , 
▁ xxmaj would he abuse the countenance of the king , 
▁ xxmaj alack , what mischiefs might he set abroach 
▁ xxmaj in shadow of such greatness ! xxmaj with you , xxmaj lord xxmaj bishop , 
▁ xxmaj it is even so . xxmaj who hath not heard it spoken 
▁ xxmaj how deep you were within the books of xxmaj god ? 
▁ xxmaj to us the speaker in xxmaj his parliament , 
▁ xxmaj to us th ' imagin'd voice of xxmaj god himself , 
▁ xxmaj the very opener and intelligencer 
▁ xxmaj between the grace , the sanctities of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and our dull workings . xxup o , who shall believe 
▁ xxmaj but you misuse the reverence of your place , 
▁ xxmaj employ the countenance and grace of heav'n 
▁ xxmaj as a false favourite doth his prince 's name , 
▁ xxmaj in deeds dishonourable ? xxmaj you have ta'en up , 
▁ xxmaj under the counterfeited zeal of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj the subjects of xxmaj his substitute , my father , 
▁ xxmaj and both against the peace of heaven and him 
▁ xxmaj have here up - swarm'd them . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj good my xxmaj lord of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ i am not here against your father 's peace ; 
▁ xxmaj but , as i told my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland , 
▁ xxmaj the time misord'red doth , in common sense , 
▁ xxmaj crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form 
▁ xxmaj to hold our safety up . i sent your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj the parcels and particulars of our grief , 
▁ xxmaj the which hath been with scorn shov'd from the court , 
▁ xxmaj whereon this hydra son of war is born ; 
▁ xxmaj whose dangerous eyes may well be charm'd asleep 
▁ xxmaj with grant of our most just and right desires ; 
▁ xxmaj and true obedience , of this madness cur'd , 
▁ xxmaj stoop tamely to the foot of majesty . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj if not , we ready are to try our fortunes 
▁ xxmaj to the last man . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj and though we here fall down , 
▁ xxmaj we have supplies to second our attempt . 
▁ xxmaj if they miscarry , theirs shall second them ; 
▁ xxmaj and so success of mischief shall be born , 
▁ xxmaj and heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up 
▁ xxmaj whiles xxmaj england shall have generation . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxup you are too shallow , xxmaj hastings , much to shallow , 
▁ xxmaj to sound the bottom of the after - times . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj pleaseth your xxmaj grace to answer them directly 
▁ xxmaj how far forth you do like their articles . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . i like them all and do allow them well ; 
▁ xxmaj and swear here , by the honour of my blood , 
▁ xxmaj my father 's purposes have been mistook ; 
▁ xxmaj and some about him have too lavishly 
▁ xxmaj wrested his meaning and authority . 
▁ xxmaj my lord , these griefs shall be with speed redress'd ; 
▁ xxmaj upon my soul , they shall . xxmaj if this may please you , 
▁ xxmaj discharge your powers unto their several counties , 
▁ xxmaj as we will ours ; and here , between the armies , 
▁ xxmaj let 's drink together friendly and embrace , 
▁ xxmaj that all their eyes may bear those tokens home 
▁ xxmaj of our restored love and amity . 
▁ xxup archbishop . i take your princely word for these redresses . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . i give it you , and will maintain my word ; 
▁ xxmaj and thereupon i drink unto your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj go , xxmaj captain , and deliver to the army 
▁ xxmaj this news of peace . xxmaj let them have pay , and part . 
▁ i know it will please them . xxmaj hie thee , xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj officer 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj to you , my noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . i pledge your xxmaj grace ; and if you knew what pains 
▁ i have bestow'd to breed this present peace , 
▁ xxmaj you would drink freely ; but my love to ye 
▁ xxmaj shall show itself more openly hereafter . 
▁ xxup archbishop . i do not doubt you . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . i am glad of it . 
▁ xxmaj health to my lord and gentle cousin , xxmaj mowbray . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj you wish me health in very happy season , 
▁ xxmaj for i am on the sudden something ill . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj against ill chances men are ever merry ; 
▁ xxmaj but heaviness foreruns the good event . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj therefore be merry , coz ; since sudden sorrow 
▁ xxmaj serves to say thus , ' some good thing comes to - morrow . ' 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj believe me , i am passing light in spirit . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj so much the worse , if your own rule be true . 
▁ [ shouts within ] 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj the word of peace is rend'red . xxmaj hark , how they shout ! 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj this had been cheerful after victory . 
▁ xxup archbishop . a peace is of the nature of a conquest ; 
▁ xxmaj for then both parties nobly are subdu'd , 
▁ xxmaj and neither party loser . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj go , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj and let our army be discharged too . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxmaj and , good my lord , so please you let our trains 
▁ xxmaj march by us , that we may peruse the men 
▁ xxmaj we should have cop'd withal . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj go , good xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , 
▁ xxmaj and , ere they be dismiss'd , let them march by . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup hastings 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . i trust , lords , we shall lie to - night together . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxmaj now , cousin , wherefore stands our army still ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj the leaders , having charge from you to stand , 
▁ xxmaj will not go off until they hear you speak . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj they know their duties . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup hastings 

▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj my lord , our army is dispers'd already . 
▁ xxmaj like youthful steers unyok'd , they take their courses 
▁ xxmaj east , west , north , south ; or like a school broke up , 
▁ xxmaj each hurries toward his home and sporting - place . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj good tidings , my xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings ; for the which 
▁ i do arrest thee , traitor , of high treason ; 
▁ xxmaj and you , xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop , and you , xxmaj lord xxmaj mowbray , 
▁ xxmaj of capital treason i attach you both . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj is this proceeding just and honourable ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj is your assembly so ? 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj will you thus break your faith ? 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . i pawn'd thee none : 
▁ i promis'd you redress of these same grievances 
▁ xxmaj whereof you did complain ; which , by mine honour , 
▁ i will perform with a most xxmaj christian care . 
▁ xxmaj but for you , rebels- look to taste the due 
▁ xxmaj meet for rebellion and such acts as yours . 
▁ xxmaj most shallowly did you these arms commence , 
▁ xxmaj fondly brought here , and foolishly sent hence . 
▁ xxmaj strike up our drums , pursue the scatt'red stray . 
▁ xxmaj god , and not we , hath safely fought to - day . 
▁ xxmaj some guard these traitors to the block of death , 
▁ xxmaj treason 's true bed and yielder - up of breath . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another part of the forest 

 xxmaj alarum ; excursions . xxmaj enter xxup falstaff and xxup colville , meeting 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what 's your name , sir ? xxmaj of what condition are you , and of 
▁ what place , i pray ? 
▁ xxup colville . i am a knight sir ; and my name is xxmaj colville of the xxmaj dale . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well then , xxmaj colville is your name , a knight is your 
▁ degree , and your place the xxmaj dale . xxmaj colville shall still be your 
▁ name , a traitor your degree , and the dungeon your place- a place 
▁ deep enough ; so shall you be still xxmaj colville of the xxmaj dale . 
▁ xxup colville . xxmaj are not you xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj as good a man as he , sir , whoe'er i am . xxmaj do you yield , 
▁ sir , or shall i sweat for you ? xxmaj if i do sweat , they are the drops 
▁ of thy lovers , and they weep for thy death ; therefore rouse up 
▁ fear and trembling , and do observance to my mercy . 
▁ xxup colville . i think you are xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff , and in that thought 
▁ yield me . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine ; 
▁ and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name . 
▁ xxmaj an i had but a belly of any indifferency , i were simply the most 
▁ active fellow in xxmaj europe . xxmaj my womb , my womb , my womb undoes me . 
▁ xxmaj here comes our general . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup prince xxup john xxup of xxup lancaster , xxup westmoreland , 
▁ xxup blunt , and others 

▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj the heat is past ; follow no further now . 
▁ xxmaj call in the powers , good cousin xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj falstaff , where have you been all this while ? 
▁ xxmaj when everything is ended , then you come . 
▁ xxmaj these tardy tricks of yours will , on my life , 
▁ xxmaj one time or other break some gallows ' back . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i would be sorry , my lord , but it should be thus : i never 
▁ knew yet but rebuke and check was the reward of valour . xxmaj do you 
▁ think me a swallow , an arrow , or a bullet ? xxmaj have xxup i , in my poor and 
▁ old motion , the expedition of thought ? i have speeded hither with 
▁ the very extremest inch of possibility ; i have found'red nine 
▁ score and odd posts ; and here , travel tainted as i am , have , in 
▁ my pure and immaculate valour , taken xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj colville of the 
▁ xxmaj dale , a most furious knight and valorous enemy . xxmaj but what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj he saw me , and yielded ; that i may justly say with the hook - nos'd 
▁ fellow of rome - i came , saw , and overcame . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj it was more of his courtesy than your deserving . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i know not . xxmaj here he is , and here i yield him ; and i 
▁ beseech your xxmaj grace , let it be book'd with the rest of this day 's 
▁ deeds ; or , by the xxmaj lord , i will have it in a particular ballad 
▁ else , with mine own picture on the top on't , xxmaj colville kissing my 
▁ foot ; to the which course if i be enforc'd , if you do not all 
▁ show like gilt twopences to me , and xxup i , in the clear sky of fame , 
▁ o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the 
▁ element , which show like pins ' heads to her , believe not the word 
▁ of the noble . xxmaj therefore let me have right , and let desert mount . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj thine 's too heavy to mount . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let it shine , then . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj thine 's too thick to shine . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let it do something , my good lord , that may do me good , 
▁ and call it what you will . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj is thy name xxmaj colville ? 
▁ xxup colville . xxmaj it is , my lord . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . a famous rebel art thou , xxmaj colville . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj and a famous true subject took him . 
▁ xxup colville . i am , my lord , but as my betters are 
▁ xxmaj that led me hither . xxmaj had they been rul'd by me , 
▁ xxmaj you should have won them dearer than you have . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i know not how they sold themselves ; but thou , like a 
▁ kind fellow , gavest thyself away gratis ; and i thank thee for 
▁ thee . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj now , have you left pursuit ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj retreat is made , and execution stay'd . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj send xxmaj colville , with his confederates , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj york , to present execution . 
▁ xxmaj blunt , lead him hence ; and see you guard him sure . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup blunt and others 
▁ xxmaj and now dispatch we toward the court , my lords . 
▁ i hear the xxmaj king my father is sore sick . 
▁ xxmaj our news shall go before us to his xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj which , cousin , you shall bear to comfort him 
▁ xxmaj and we with sober speed will follow you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord , i beseech you , give me leave to go through 
▁ xxmaj gloucestershire ; and , when you come to court , stand my good lord , 
▁ pray , in your good report . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj fare you well , xxmaj falstaff . xxup i , in my condition , 
▁ xxmaj shall better speak of you than you deserve . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup falstaff 
▁ xxup falstaff . i would you had but the wit ; ' twere better than your 
▁ dukedom . xxmaj good faith , this same young sober - blooded boy doth not 
▁ love me ; nor a man can not make him laugh- but that 's no marvel ; 
▁ he drinks no wine . xxmaj there 's never none of these demure boys come 
▁ to any proof ; for thin drink doth so over - cool their blood , and 
▁ making many fish - meals , that they fall into a kind of male 
▁ green - sickness ; and then , when they marry , they get wenches . xxmaj they 
▁ are generally fools and cowards - which some of us should be too , 
▁ but for inflammation . a good sherris - sack hath a two - fold 
▁ operation in it . xxmaj it ascends me into the brain ; dries me there all 
▁ the foolish and dull and crudy vapours which environ it ; makes it 
▁ apprehensive , quick , forgetive , full of nimble , fiery , and 
▁ delectable shapes ; which delivered o'er to the voice , the tongue , 
▁ which is the birth , becomes excellent wit . xxmaj the second property of 
▁ your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood ; which before , 
▁ cold and settled , left the liver white and pale , which is the 
▁ badge of pusillanimity and cowardice ; but the sherris warms it , 
▁ and makes it course from the inwards to the parts extremes . xxmaj it 
▁ illumineth the face , which , as a beacon , gives warning to all the 
▁ rest of this little kingdom , man , to arm ; and then the vital 
▁ commoners and inland petty spirits muster me all to their 
▁ captain , the heart , who , great and puff'd up with this retinue , 
▁ doth any deed of courage- and this valour comes of sherris . xxmaj so 
▁ that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack , for that sets 
▁ it a - work ; and learning , a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil 
▁ till sack commences it and sets it in act and use . xxmaj hereof comes 
▁ it that xxmaj prince xxmaj harry is valiant ; for the cold blood he did 
▁ naturally inherit of his father , he hath , like lean , sterile , and 
▁ bare land , manured , husbanded , and till'd , with excellent 
▁ endeavour of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris , 
▁ that he is become very hot and valiant . xxmaj if i had a thousand sons , 
▁ the first humane principle i would teach them should be to 
▁ forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bardolph 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj bardolph ! 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj the army is discharged all and gone . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let them go . xxmaj i 'll through xxmaj gloucestershire , and there will 
▁ i visit xxmaj master xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow , xxmaj esquire . i have him already 
▁ temp'ring between my finger and my thumb , and shortly will i seal 
▁ with him . xxmaj come away . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj westminster . xxmaj the xxmaj jerusalem xxmaj chamber 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup prince xxup thomas xxup of xxup clarence , xxup prince xxup humphrey xxup of xxup gloucester , 
 xxup warwick , and others 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj now , lords , if xxmaj god doth give successful end 
▁ xxmaj to this debate that bleedeth at our doors , 
▁ xxmaj we will our youth lead on to higher fields , 
▁ xxmaj and draw no swords but what are sanctified . 
▁ xxmaj our navy is address'd , our power connected , 
▁ xxmaj our substitutes in absence well invested , 
▁ xxmaj and everything lies level to our wish . 
▁ xxmaj only we want a little personal strength ; 
▁ xxmaj and pause us till these rebels , now afoot , 
▁ xxmaj come underneath the yoke of government . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj both which we doubt not but your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj shall soon enjoy . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj humphrey , my son of xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj where is the xxmaj prince your brother ? 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . i think he 's gone to hunt , my lord , at xxmaj windsor . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and how accompanied ? 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . i do not know , my lord . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj is not his brother , xxmaj thomas of xxmaj clarence , with him ? 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj no , my good lord , he is in presence here . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj what would my lord and father ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj nothing but well to thee , xxmaj thomas of xxmaj clarence . 
▁ xxmaj how chance thou art not with the xxmaj prince thy brother ? 
▁ xxmaj he loves thee , and thou dost neglect him , xxmaj thomas . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast a better place in his affection 
▁ xxmaj than all thy brothers ; cherish it , my boy , 
▁ xxmaj and noble offices thou mayst effect 
▁ xxmaj of mediation , after i am dead , 
▁ xxmaj between his greatness and thy other brethren . 
▁ xxmaj therefore omit him not ; blunt not his love , 
▁ xxmaj nor lose the good advantage of his grace 
▁ xxmaj by seeming cold or careless of his will ; 
▁ xxmaj for he is gracious if he be observ'd . 
▁ xxmaj he hath a tear for pity and a hand 
▁ xxmaj open as day for melting charity ; 
▁ xxmaj yet notwithstanding , being incens'd , he is flint ; 
▁ xxmaj as humorous as winter , and as sudden 
▁ xxmaj as flaws congealed in the spring of day . 
▁ xxmaj his temper , therefore , must be well observ'd . 
▁ xxmaj chide him for faults , and do it reverently , 
▁ xxmaj when you perceive his blood inclin'd to mirth ; 
▁ xxmaj but , being moody , give him line and scope 
▁ xxmaj till that his passions , like a whale on ground , 
▁ xxmaj confound themselves with working . xxmaj learn this , xxmaj thomas , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends , 
▁ a hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in , 
▁ xxmaj that the united vessel of their blood , 
▁ xxmaj mingled with venom of suggestion- 
▁ xxmaj as , force perforce , the age will pour it in- 
▁ xxmaj shall never leak , though it do work as strong 
▁ xxmaj as aconitum or rash gunpowder . 
▁ xxup clarence . i shall observe him with all care and love . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj why art thou not at xxmaj windsor with him , xxmaj thomas ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj he is not there to - day ; he dines in xxmaj london . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and how accompanied ? xxmaj canst thou tell that ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj with xxmaj poins , and other his continual followers . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj most subject is the fattest soil to weeds ; 
▁ xxmaj and he , the noble image of my youth , 
▁ xxmaj is overspread with them ; therefore my grief 
▁ xxmaj stretches itself beyond the hour of death . 
▁ xxmaj the blood weeps from my heart when i do shape , 
▁ xxmaj in forms imaginary , th'unguided days 
▁ xxmaj and rotten times that you shall look upon 
▁ xxmaj when i am sleeping with my ancestors . 
▁ xxmaj for when his headstrong riot hath no curb , 
▁ xxmaj when rage and hot blood are his counsellors 
▁ xxmaj when means and lavish manners meet together , 
▁ xxup o , with what wings shall his affections fly 
▁ xxmaj towards fronting peril and oppos'd decay ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj my gracious lord , you look beyond him quite . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince but studies his companions 
▁ xxmaj like a strange tongue , wherein , to gain the language , 
▁ ' tis needful that the most immodest word 
▁ xxmaj be look'd upon and learnt ; which once attain'd , 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness knows , comes to no further use 
▁ xxmaj but to be known and hated . xxmaj so , like gross terms , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince will , in the perfectness of time , 
▁ xxmaj cast off his followers ; and their memory 
▁ xxmaj shall as a pattern or a measure live 
▁ xxmaj by which his xxmaj grace must mete the lives of other , 
▁ xxmaj turning past evils to advantages . 
▁ xxup king . ' tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb 
▁ xxmaj in the dead carrion . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxmaj who 's here ? xxmaj westmoreland ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj health to my sovereign , and new happiness 
▁ xxmaj added to that that am to deliver ! 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj john , your son , doth kiss your xxmaj grace 's hand . 
▁ xxmaj mowbray , the xxmaj bishop xxmaj scroop , xxmaj hastings , and all , 
▁ xxmaj are brought to the correction of your law . 
▁ xxmaj there is not now a rebel 's sword unsheath'd , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj peace puts forth her olive everywhere . 
▁ xxmaj the manner how this action hath been borne 
▁ xxmaj here at more leisure may your xxmaj highness read , 
▁ xxmaj with every course in his particular . 
▁ xxup king . o xxmaj westmoreland , thou art a summer bird , 
▁ xxmaj which ever in the haunch of winter sings 
▁ xxmaj the lifting up of day . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup harcourt 

▁ xxmaj look here 's more news . 
▁ xxup harcourt . xxmaj from enemies heaven keep your xxmaj majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj and , when they stand against you , may they fall 
▁ xxmaj as those that i am come to tell you of ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl xxmaj northumberland and the xxmaj lord xxmaj bardolph , 
▁ xxmaj with a great power of xxmaj english and of xxmaj scots , 
▁ xxmaj are by the shrieve of xxmaj yorkshire overthrown . 
▁ xxmaj the manner and true order of the fight 
▁ xxmaj this packet , please it you , contains at large . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and wherefore should these good news make me sick ? 
▁ xxmaj will xxmaj fortune never come with both hands full , 
▁ xxmaj but write her fair words still in foulest letters ? 
▁ xxmaj she either gives a stomach and no food- 
▁ xxmaj such are the poor , in health- or else a feast , 
▁ xxmaj and takes away the stomach- such are the rich 
▁ xxmaj that have abundance and enjoy it not . 
▁ i should rejoice now at this happy news ; 
▁ xxmaj and now my sight fails , and my brain is giddy . 
▁ o me ! come near me now i am much ill . 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj comfort , your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup clarence . o my royal father ! 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj my sovereign lord , cheer up yourself , look up . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj be patient , xxmaj princes ; you do know these fits 
▁ xxmaj are with his xxmaj highness very ordinary . 
▁ xxmaj stand from him , give him air ; he 'll straight be well . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj no , no ; he can not long hold out these pangs . 
▁ xxmaj th ' incessant care and labour of his mind 
▁ xxmaj hath wrought the mure that should confine it in 
▁ xxmaj so thin that life looks through , and will break out . 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj the people fear me ; for they do observe 
▁ xxmaj unfather'd heirs and loathly births of nature . 
▁ xxmaj the seasons change their manners , as the year 
▁ xxmaj had found some months asleep , and leapt them over . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj the river hath thrice flow'd , no ebb between ; 
▁ xxmaj and the old folk , xxmaj time 's doting chronicles , 
▁ xxmaj say it did so a little time before 
▁ xxmaj that our great grandsire , xxmaj edward , sick'd and died . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj speak lower , xxmaj princes , for the xxmaj king recovers . 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj this apoplexy will certain be his end . 
▁ xxup king . i pray you take me up , and bear me hence 
▁ xxmaj into some other chamber . xxmaj softly , pray . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj westminster . xxmaj another chamber 

 xxmaj the xxup king lying on a bed ; xxup clarence , xxup gloucester , xxup warwick , 
 and others in attendance 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj let there be no noise made , my gentle friends ; 
▁ xxmaj unless some dull and favourable hand 
▁ xxmaj will whisper music to my weary spirit . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj call for the music in the other room . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj set me the crown upon my pillow here . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj his eye is hollow , and he changes much . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj less noise ! less noise ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup prince xxup henry 

▁ xxup prince . xxmaj who saw the xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence ? 
▁ xxup clarence . i am here , brother , full of heaviness . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj rain within doors , and none abroad ! 
▁ xxmaj how doth the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj exceeding ill . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj heard he the good news yet ? xxmaj tell it him . 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj he alt'red much upon the hearing it . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj if he be sick with joy , he 'll recover without physic . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj not so much noise , my lords . xxmaj sweet xxmaj prince , speak low ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king your father is dispos'd to sleep . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj let us withdraw into the other room . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj will't please your xxmaj grace to go along with us ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj no ; i will sit and watch here by the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup prince 
▁ xxmaj why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow , 
▁ xxmaj being so troublesome a bedfellow ? 
▁ o polish'd perturbation ! golden care ! 
▁ xxmaj that keep'st the ports of slumber open wide 
▁ xxmaj to many a watchful night ! xxmaj sleep with it now ! 
▁ xxmaj yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet 
▁ xxmaj as he whose brow with homely biggen bound 
▁ xxmaj snores out the watch of night . o majesty ! 
▁ xxmaj when thou dost pinch thy bearer , thou dost sit 
▁ xxmaj like a rich armour worn in heat of day 
▁ xxmaj that scald'st with safety . xxmaj by his gates of breath 
▁ xxmaj there lies a downy feather which stirs not . 
▁ xxmaj did he suspire , that light and weightless down 
▁ xxmaj perforce must move . xxmaj my gracious lord ! my father ! 
▁ xxmaj this sleep is sound indeed ; this is a sleep 
▁ xxmaj that from this golden rigol hath divorc'd 
▁ xxmaj so many xxmaj english kings . xxmaj thy due from me 
▁ xxmaj is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood 
▁ xxmaj which nature , love , and filial tenderness , 
▁ xxmaj shall , o dear father , pay thee plenteously . 
▁ xxmaj my due from thee is this imperial crown , 
▁ xxmaj which , as immediate from thy place and blood , 
▁ xxmaj derives itself to me . [ putting on the crown ] xxmaj lo where it sits- 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj god shall guard ; and put the world 's whole strength 
▁ xxmaj into one giant arm , it shall not force 
▁ xxmaj this lineal honour from me . xxmaj this from thee 
▁ xxmaj will i to mine leave as ' tis left to me . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj warwick ! xxmaj gloucester ! xxmaj clarence ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup warwick , xxup gloucester , xxup clarence 

▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj doth the xxmaj king call ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what would your xxmaj majesty ? xxmaj how fares your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj why did you leave me here alone , my lords ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj we left the xxmaj prince my brother here , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj who undertook to sit and watch by you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales ! xxmaj where is he ? xxmaj let me see him . 
▁ xxmaj he is not here . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj this door is open ; he is gone this way . 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxmaj he came not through the chamber where we stay'd . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj where is the crown ? xxmaj who took it from my pillow ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj when we withdrew , my liege , we left it here . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the xxmaj prince hath ta'en it hence . xxmaj go , seek him out . 
▁ xxmaj is he so hasty that he doth suppose 
▁ xxmaj my sleep my death ? 
▁ xxmaj find him , my lord of xxmaj warwick ; chide him hither . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup warwick 
▁ xxmaj this part of his conjoins with my disease 
▁ xxmaj and helps to end me . xxmaj see , sons , what things you are ! 
▁ xxmaj how quickly nature falls into revolt 
▁ xxmaj when gold becomes her object ! 
▁ xxmaj for this the foolish over - careful fathers 
▁ xxmaj have broke their sleep with thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj their brains with care , their bones with industry ; 
▁ xxmaj for this they have engrossed and pil'd up 
▁ xxmaj the cank'red heaps of strange - achieved gold ; 
▁ xxmaj for this they have been thoughtful to invest 
▁ xxmaj their sons with arts and martial exercises ; 
▁ xxmaj when , like the bee , tolling from every flower 
▁ xxmaj the virtuous sweets , 
▁ xxmaj our thighs with wax , our mouths with honey pack'd , 
▁ xxmaj we bring it to the hive , and , like the bees , 
▁ xxmaj are murd'red for our pains . xxmaj this bitter taste 
▁ xxmaj yields his engrossments to the ending father . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup warwick 

▁ xxmaj now where is he that will not stay so long 
▁ xxmaj till his friend sickness hath determin'd me ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj my lord , i found the xxmaj prince in the next room , 
▁ xxmaj washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj with such a deep demeanour in great sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj that tyranny , which never quaff'd but blood , 
▁ xxmaj would , by beholding him , have wash'd his knife 
▁ xxmaj with gentle eye - drops . xxmaj he is coming hither . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj but wherefore did he take away the crown ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup prince xxup henry 

▁ xxmaj lo where he comes . xxmaj come hither to me , xxmaj harry . 
▁ xxmaj depart the chamber , leave us here alone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup king and the xxup prince 
▁ xxup prince . i never thought to hear you speak again . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thy wish was father , xxmaj harry , to that thought . 
▁ i stay too long by thee , i weary thee . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair 
▁ xxmaj that thou wilt needs invest thee with my honours 
▁ xxmaj before thy hour be ripe ? o foolish youth ! 
▁ xxmaj thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee . 
▁ xxmaj stay but a little , for my cloud of dignity 
▁ xxmaj is held from falling with so weak a wind 
▁ xxmaj that it will quickly drop ; my day is dim . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast stol'n that which , after some few hours , 
▁ xxmaj were thine without offense ; and at my death 
▁ xxmaj thou hast seal'd up my expectation . 
▁ xxmaj thy life did manifest thou lov'dst me not , 
▁ xxmaj and thou wilt have me die assur'd of it . 
▁ xxmaj thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart , 
▁ xxmaj to stab at half an hour of my life . 
▁ xxmaj what , canst thou not forbear me half an hour ? 
▁ xxmaj then get thee gone , and dig my grave thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj and bid the merry bells ring to thine ear 
▁ xxmaj that thou art crowned , not that i am dead . 
▁ xxmaj let all the tears that should bedew my hearse 
▁ xxmaj be drops of balm to sanctify thy head ; 
▁ xxmaj only compound me with forgotten dust ; 
▁ xxmaj give that which gave thee life unto the worms . 
▁ xxmaj pluck down my officers , break my decrees ; 
▁ xxmaj for now a time is come to mock at form- 
▁ xxmaj harry the xxmaj fifth is crown'd . xxmaj up , vanity : 
▁ xxmaj down , royal state . xxmaj all you sage counsellors , hence . 
▁ xxmaj and to the xxmaj english court assemble now , 
▁ xxmaj from every region , apes of idleness . 
▁ xxmaj now , neighbour confines , purge you of your scum . 
▁ xxmaj have you a ruffian that will swear , drink , dance , 
▁ xxmaj revel the night , rob , murder , and commit 
▁ xxmaj the oldest sins the newest kind of ways ? 
▁ xxmaj be happy , he will trouble you no more . 
▁ xxmaj england shall double gild his treble guilt ; 
▁ xxmaj england shall give him office , honour , might ; 
▁ xxmaj for the fifth xxmaj harry from curb'd license plucks 
▁ xxmaj the muzzle of restraint , and the wild dog 
▁ xxmaj shall flesh his tooth on every innocent . 
▁ o my poor kingdom , sick with civil blows ! 
▁ xxmaj when that my care could not withhold thy riots , 
▁ xxmaj what wilt thou do when riot is thy care ? 
▁ xxup o , thou wilt be a wilderness again . 
▁ xxmaj peopled with wolves , thy old inhabitants ! 
▁ xxup prince . xxup o , pardon me , my liege ! xxmaj but for my tears , 
▁ xxmaj the moist impediments unto my speech , 
▁ i had forestall'd this dear and deep rebuke 
▁ xxmaj ere you with grief had spoke and i had heard 
▁ xxmaj the course of it so far . xxmaj there is your crown , 
▁ xxmaj and he that wears the crown immortally 
▁ xxmaj long guard it yours ! [ kneeling ] xxmaj if i affect it more 
▁ xxmaj than as your honour and as your renown , 
▁ xxmaj let me no more from this obedience rise , 
▁ xxmaj which my most inward true and duteous spirit 
▁ xxmaj teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending ! 
▁ xxmaj god witness with me , when i here came in 
▁ xxmaj and found no course of breath within your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj how cold it struck my heart ! xxmaj if i do feign , 
▁ xxup o , let me in my present wildness die , 
▁ xxmaj and never live to show th ' incredulous world 
▁ xxmaj the noble change that i have purposed ! 
▁ xxmaj coming to look on you , thinking you dead- 
▁ xxmaj and dead almost , my liege , to think you were- 
▁ i spake unto this crown as having sense , 
▁ xxmaj and thus upbraided it : ' the care on thee depending 
▁ xxmaj hath fed upon the body of my father ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore thou best of gold art worst of gold . 
▁ xxmaj other , less fine in carat , is more precious , 
▁ xxmaj preserving life in med'cine potable ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou , most fine , most honour'd , most renown'd , 
▁ xxmaj hast eat thy bearer up . ' xxmaj thus , my most royal liege , 
▁ xxmaj accusing it , i put it on my head , 
▁ xxmaj to try with it- as with an enemy 
▁ xxmaj that had before my face murd'red my father- 
▁ xxmaj the quarrel of a true inheritor . 
▁ xxmaj but if it did infect my blood with joy , 
▁ xxmaj or swell my thoughts to any strain of pride ; 
▁ xxmaj if any rebel or vain spirit of mine 
▁ xxmaj did with the least affection of a welcome 
▁ xxmaj give entertainment to the might of it , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj god for ever keep it from my head , 
▁ xxmaj and make me as the poorest vassal is , 
▁ xxmaj that doth with awe and terror kneel to it ! 
▁ xxup king . o my son , 
▁ xxmaj god put it in thy mind to take it hence , 
▁ xxmaj that thou mightst win the more thy father 's love , 
▁ xxmaj pleading so wisely in excuse of it ! 
▁ xxmaj come hither , xxmaj harry ; sit thou by my bed , 
▁ xxmaj and hear , i think , the very latest counsel 
▁ xxmaj that ever i shall breathe . xxmaj god knows , my son , 
▁ xxmaj by what by - paths and indirect crook'd ways 
▁ i met this crown ; and i myself know well 
▁ xxmaj how troublesome it sat upon my head : 
▁ xxmaj to thee it shall descend with better quiet , 
▁ xxmaj better opinion , better confirmation ; 
▁ xxmaj for all the soil of the achievement goes 
▁ xxmaj with me into the earth . xxmaj it seem'd in me 
▁ xxmaj but as an honour snatch'd with boist'rous hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and i had many living to upbraid 
▁ xxmaj my gain of it by their assistances ; 
▁ xxmaj which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed , 
▁ xxmaj wounding supposed peace . xxmaj all these bold fears 
▁ xxmaj thou seest with peril i have answered ; 
▁ xxmaj for all my reign hath been but as a scene 
▁ xxmaj acting that argument . xxmaj and now my death 
▁ xxmaj changes the mood ; for what in me was purchas'd 
▁ xxmaj falls upon thee in a more fairer sort ; 
▁ xxmaj so thou the garland wear'st successively . 
▁ xxmaj yet , though thou stand'st more sure than i could do , 
▁ xxmaj thou art not firm enough , since griefs are green ; 
▁ xxmaj and all my friends , which thou must make thy friends , 
▁ xxmaj have but their stings and teeth newly ta'en out ; 
▁ xxmaj by whose fell working i was first advanc'd , 
▁ xxmaj and by whose power i well might lodge a fear 
▁ xxmaj to be again displac'd ; which to avoid , 
▁ i cut them off ; and had a purpose now 
▁ xxmaj to lead out many to the xxmaj holy xxmaj land , 
▁ xxmaj lest rest and lying still might make them look 
▁ xxmaj too near unto my state . xxmaj therefore , my xxmaj harry , 
▁ xxmaj be it thy course to busy giddy minds 
▁ xxmaj with foreign quarrels , that action , hence borne out , 
▁ xxmaj may waste the memory of the former days . 
▁ xxmaj more would xxup i , but my lungs are wasted so 
▁ xxmaj that strength of speech is utterly denied me . 
▁ xxmaj how i came by the crown , o xxmaj god , forgive ; 
▁ xxmaj and grant it may with thee in true peace live ! 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj my gracious liege , 
▁ xxmaj you won it , wore it , kept it , gave it me ; 
▁ xxmaj then plain and right must my possession be ; 
▁ xxmaj which i with more than with a common pain 
▁ ' gainst all the world will rightfully maintain . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup prince xxup john xxup of xxup lancaster , xxup warwick , xxup lords , and others 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj look , look , here comes my xxmaj john of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj health , peace , and happiness , to my royal father ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thou bring'st me happiness and peace , son xxmaj john ; 
▁ xxmaj but health , alack , with youthful wings is flown 
▁ xxmaj from this bare wither'd trunk . xxmaj upon thy sight 
▁ xxmaj my worldly business makes a period . 
▁ xxmaj where is my xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwick ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwick ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj doth any name particular belong 
▁ xxmaj unto the lodging where i first did swoon ? 
▁ xxup warwick . ' tis call'd xxmaj jerusalem , my noble lord . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj laud be to xxmaj god ! xxmaj even there my life must end . 
▁ xxmaj it hath been prophesied to me many years , 
▁ i should not die but in xxmaj jerusalem ; 
▁ xxmaj which vainly i suppos'd the xxmaj holy xxmaj land . 
▁ xxmaj but bear me to that chamber ; there xxmaj i 'll lie ; 
▁ xxmaj in that xxmaj jerusalem shall xxmaj harry die . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj gloucestershire . xxup shallow 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup shallow , xxup falstaff , xxup bardolph , and xxup page 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by cock and pie , sir , you shall not away to - night . 
▁ xxmaj what , xxmaj davy , i say ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj you must excuse me , xxmaj master xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . i will not excuse you ; you shall not be excus'd ; excuses 
▁ shall not be admitted ; there is no excuse shall serve ; you shall 
▁ not be excus'd . xxmaj why , xxmaj davy ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup davy 

▁ xxup davy . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj davy , xxmaj davy , xxmaj davy , xxmaj davy ; let me see , xxmaj davy ; let me see , 
▁ xxmaj davy ; let me see- yea , marry , xxmaj william cook , bid him come hither . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john , you shall not be excus'd . 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj marry , sir , thus : those precepts can not be served ; and , 
▁ again , sir- shall we sow the headland with wheat ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj with red wheat , xxmaj davy . xxmaj but for xxmaj william cook- are there no 
▁ young pigeons ? 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj yes , sir . xxmaj here is now the smith 's note for shoeing and 
▁ plough - irons . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj let it be cast , and paid . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , you shall not be 
▁ excused . 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj now , sir , a new link to the bucket must needs be had ; and , 
▁ sir , do you mean to stop any of xxmaj william 's wages about the sack he 
▁ lost the other day at xxmaj hinckley fair ? 
▁ xxup shallow . ' a shall answer it . xxmaj some pigeons , xxmaj davy , a couple of 
▁ short - legg'd hens , a joint of mutton , and any pretty little tiny 
▁ kickshaws , tell xxmaj william cook . 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj doth the man of war stay all night , sir ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj yea , xxmaj davy ; i will use him well . a friend i ' th ' court is 
▁ better than a penny in purse . xxmaj use his men well , xxmaj davy ; for they 
▁ are arrant knaves and will backbite . 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj no worse than they are backbitten , sir ; for they have 
▁ marvellous foul linen . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj well conceited , xxmaj davy- about thy business , xxmaj davy . 
▁ xxup davy . i beseech you , sir , to countenance xxmaj william xxmaj visor of xxmaj woncot 
▁ against xxmaj clement xxmaj perkes o ' th ' hill . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj there , is many complaints , xxmaj davy , against that xxmaj visor . xxmaj that 
▁ xxmaj visor is an arrant knave , on my knowledge . 
▁ xxup davy . i grant your worship that he is a knave , sir ; but yet xxmaj god 
▁ forbid , sir , but a knave should have some countenance at his 
▁ friend 's request . xxmaj an honest man , sir , is able to speak for 
▁ himself , when a knave is not . i have serv'd your worship truly , 
▁ sir , this eight years ; an i can not once or twice in a quarter 
▁ bear out a knave against an honest man , i have but a very little 
▁ credit with your worship . xxmaj the knave is mine honest friend , sir ; 
▁ therefore , i beseech you , let him be countenanc'd . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj go to ; i say he shall have no wrong . xxmaj look about , 
▁ xxup davy . [ exit xxup davy ] xxmaj where are you , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? xxmaj come , come , come , off 
▁ with your boots . xxmaj give me your hand , xxmaj master xxmaj bardolph . 
▁ xxup bardolph . i am glad to see your worship . 
▁ xxup shallow . i thank thee with all my heart , kind xxmaj master xxmaj bardolph . 
▁ [ to the xxup page ] xxmaj and welcome , my tall fellow . xxmaj come , xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj i 'll follow you , good xxmaj master xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow . 
▁ [ exit xxup shallow ] xxmaj bardolph , look to our horses . [ exeunt xxup bardolph 
▁ and xxup page ] xxmaj if i were sawed into quantities , i should make four 
▁ dozen of such bearded hermits ' staves as xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . xxmaj it is a 
▁ wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men 's 
▁ spirits and his . xxmaj they , by observing of him , do bear themselves 
▁ like foolish justices : he , by conversing with them , is turned 
▁ into a justice - like serving - man . xxmaj their spirits are so married in 
▁ conjunction with the participation of society that they flock 
▁ together in consent , like so many wild geese . xxmaj if i had a suit to 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , i would humour his men with the imputation of 
▁ being near their master ; if to his men , i would curry with xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj shallow that no man could better command his servants . xxmaj it is 
▁ certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught , 
▁ as men take diseases , one of another ; therefore let men take heed 
▁ of their company . i will devise matter enough out of this xxmaj shallow 
▁ to keep xxmaj prince xxmaj harry in continual laughter the wearing out of six 
▁ fashions , which is four terms , or two actions ; and ' a shall laugh 
▁ without intervallums . xxup o , it is much that a lie with a slight 
▁ oath , and a jest with a sad brow will do with a fellow that never 
▁ had the ache in his shoulders ! xxup o , you shall see him laugh till 
▁ his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up ! 
▁ xxup shallow . [ within ] xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . i come , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow ; i come , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj westminster . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter , severally , xxup warwick , and the xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj how now , my xxmaj lord xxmaj chief xxmaj justice ; whither away ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj how doth the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj exceeding well ; his cares are now all ended . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i hope , not dead . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj he 's walk'd the way of nature ; 
▁ xxmaj and to our purposes he lives no more . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i would his xxmaj majesty had call'd me with him . 
▁ xxmaj the service that i truly did his life 
▁ xxmaj hath left me open to all injuries . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj indeed , i think the young king loves you not . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i know he doth not , and do arm myself 
▁ xxmaj to welcome the condition of the time , 
▁ xxmaj which can not look more hideously upon me 
▁ xxmaj than i have drawn it in my fantasy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lancaster , xxup clarence , xxup gloucester , 
▁ xxup westmoreland , and others 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj here comes the heavy issue of dead xxmaj harry . 
▁ o that the living xxmaj harry had the temper 
▁ xxmaj of he , the worst of these three gentlemen ! 
▁ xxmaj how many nobles then should hold their places 
▁ xxmaj that must strike sail to spirits of vile sort ! 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . o xxmaj god , i fear all will be overturn'd . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj good morrow , cousin xxmaj warwick , good morrow . 
▁ xxup gloucester & xxup clarence . xxmaj good morrow , cousin . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj we meet like men that had forgot to speak . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj we do remember ; but our argument 
▁ xxmaj is all too heavy to admit much talk . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj well , peace be with him that hath made us heavy ! 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj peace be with us , lest we be heavier ! 
▁ xxup prince xxup humphrey . xxup o , good my lord , you have lost a friend indeed ; 
▁ xxmaj and i dare swear you borrow not that face 
▁ xxmaj of seeming sorrow- it is sure your own . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj though no man be assur'd what grace to find , 
▁ xxmaj you stand in coldest expectation . 
▁ i am the sorrier ; would ' twere otherwise . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj well , you must now speak xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff fair ; 
▁ xxmaj which swims against your stream of quality . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj sweet xxmaj princes , what i did , i did in honour , 
▁ xxmaj led by th ' impartial conduct of my soul ; 
▁ xxmaj and never shall you see that i will beg 
▁ a ragged and forestall'd remission . 
▁ xxmaj if truth and upright innocency fail me , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj king my master that is dead , 
▁ xxmaj and tell him who hath sent me after him . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj prince . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup fifth , attended 

▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj good morrow , and xxmaj god save your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj this new and gorgeous garment , majesty , 
▁ xxmaj sits not so easy on me as you think . 
▁ xxmaj brothers , you mix your sadness with some fear . 
▁ xxmaj this is the xxmaj english , not the xxmaj turkish court ; 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj amurath an xxmaj amurath succeeds , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj harry xxmaj harry . xxmaj yet be sad , good brothers , 
▁ xxmaj for , by my faith , it very well becomes you . 
▁ xxmaj sorrow so royally in you appears 
▁ xxmaj that i will deeply put the fashion on , 
▁ xxmaj and wear it in my heart . xxmaj why , then , be sad ; 
▁ xxmaj but entertain no more of it , good brothers , 
▁ xxmaj than a joint burden laid upon us all . 
▁ xxmaj for me , by heaven , i bid you be assur'd , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be your father and your brother too ; 
▁ xxmaj let me but bear your love , xxmaj i 'll bear your cares . 
▁ xxmaj yet weep that xxmaj harry 's dead , and so will xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj harry lives that shall convert those tears 
▁ xxmaj by number into hours of happiness . 
▁ xxup brothers . xxmaj we hope no otherwise from your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you all look strangely on me ; and you most . 
▁ xxmaj you are , i think , assur'd i love you not .