xxbos xxup chief xxup justice . i am assur'd , if i be measur'd rightly , 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj majesty hath no just cause to hate me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no ? 
▁ xxmaj how might a prince of my great hopes forget 
▁ xxmaj so great indignities you laid upon me ? 
▁ xxmaj what , rate , rebuke , and roughly send to prison , 
▁ xxmaj th ' immediate heir of xxmaj england ! xxmaj was this easy ? 
▁ xxmaj may this be wash'd in xxmaj lethe and forgotten ? 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i then did use the person of your father ; 
▁ xxmaj the image of his power lay then in me ; 
▁ xxmaj and in th ' administration of his law , 
▁ xxmaj whiles i was busy for the commonwealth , 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness pleased to forget my place , 
▁ xxmaj the majesty and power of law and justice , 
▁ xxmaj the image of the xxmaj king whom i presented , 
▁ xxmaj and struck me in my very seat of judgment ; 
▁ xxmaj whereon , as an offender to your father , 
▁ i gave bold way to my authority 
▁ xxmaj and did commit you . xxmaj if the deed were ill , 
▁ xxmaj be you contented , wearing now the garland , 
▁ xxmaj to have a son set your decrees at nought , 
▁ xxmaj to pluck down justice from your awful bench , 
▁ xxmaj to trip the course of law , and blunt the sword 
▁ xxmaj that guards the peace and safety of your person ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , more , to spurn at your most royal image , 
▁ xxmaj and mock your workings in a second body . 
▁ xxmaj question your royal thoughts , make the case yours ; 
▁ xxmaj be now the father , and propose a son ; 
▁ xxmaj hear your own dignity so much profan'd , 
▁ xxmaj see your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted , 
▁ xxmaj behold yourself so by a son disdain'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and then imagine me taking your part 
▁ xxmaj and , in your power , soft silencing your son . 
▁ xxmaj after this cold considerance , sentence me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as you are a king , speak in your state 
▁ xxmaj what i have done that misbecame my place , 
▁ xxmaj my person , or my liege 's sovereignty . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you are right , xxmaj justice , and you weigh this well ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore still bear the balance and the sword ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do wish your honours may increase 
▁ xxmaj till you do live to see a son of mine 
▁ xxmaj offend you , and obey you , as i did . 
▁ xxmaj so shall i live to speak my father 's words : 
▁ ' happy am i that have a man so bold 
▁ xxmaj that dares do justice on my proper son ; 
▁ xxmaj and not less happy , having such a son 
▁ xxmaj that would deliver up his greatness so 
▁ xxmaj into the hands of justice . ' xxmaj you did commit me ; 
▁ xxmaj for which i do commit into your hand 
▁ xxmaj th ' unstained sword that you have us'd to bear ; 
▁ xxmaj with this remembrance- that you use the same 
▁ xxmaj with the like bold , just , and impartial spirit 
▁ xxmaj as you have done ' gainst me . xxmaj there is my hand . 
▁ xxmaj you shall be as a father to my youth ; 
▁ xxmaj my voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will stoop and humble my intents 
▁ xxmaj to your well - practis'd wise directions . 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj princes all , believe me , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj my father is gone wild into his grave , 
▁ xxmaj for in his tomb lie my affections ; 
▁ xxmaj and with his spirits sadly i survive , 
▁ xxmaj to mock the expectation of the world , 
▁ xxmaj to frustrate prophecies , and to raze out 
▁ xxmaj rotten opinion , who hath writ me down 
▁ xxmaj after my seeming . xxmaj the tide of blood in me 
▁ xxmaj hath proudly flow'd in vanity till now . 
▁ xxmaj now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea , 
▁ xxmaj where it shall mingle with the state of floods , 
▁ xxmaj and flow henceforth in formal majesty . 
▁ xxmaj now call we our high court of parliament ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us choose such limbs of noble counsel , 
▁ xxmaj that the great body of our state may go 
▁ xxmaj in equal rank with the best govern'd nation ; 
▁ xxmaj that war , or peace , or both at once , may be 
▁ xxmaj as things acquainted and familiar to us ; 
▁ xxmaj in which you , father , shall have foremost hand . 
▁ xxmaj our coronation done , we will accite , 
▁ xxmaj as i before rememb'red , all our state ; 
▁ xxmaj and- xxmaj god consigning to my good intents- 
▁ xxmaj no prince nor peer shall have just cause to say , 
▁ xxmaj god shorten xxmaj harry 's happy life one day . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj gloucestershire . xxup shallow 's orchard 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff , xxup shallow , xxup silence , xxup bardolph , the xxup page , and xxup davy 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj nay , you shall see my orchard , where , in an arbour , we 
▁ will eat a last year 's pippin of mine own graffing , with a dish 
▁ of caraways , and so forth . xxmaj come , cousin xxmaj silence . xxmaj and then to bed . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fore xxmaj god , you have here a goodly dwelling and rich . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj barren , barren , barren ; beggars all , beggars all , xxmaj sir xxmaj john 
▁ -marry , good air . xxmaj spread , xxmaj davy , spread , xxmaj davy ; well said , xxmaj davy . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj this xxmaj davy serves you for good uses ; he is your 
▁ serving - man and your husband . 
▁ xxup shallow . a good varlet , a good varlet , a very good varlet , xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj by the mass , i have drunk too much sack at supper . a good 
▁ varlet . xxmaj now sit down , now sit down ; come , cousin . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj ah , sirrah ! quoth - a- we shall [ singing ] 

▁ xxmaj do nothing but eat and make good cheer , 
▁ xxmaj and praise xxmaj god for the merry year ; 
▁ xxmaj when flesh is cheap and females dear , 
▁ xxmaj and lusty lads roam here and there , 
▁ xxmaj so merrily , 
▁ xxmaj and ever among so merrily . 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj there 's a merry heart ! xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj silence , xxmaj i 'll give you 
▁ a health for that anon . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj give xxmaj master xxmaj bardolph some wine , xxmaj davy . 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj sweet sir , sit ; xxmaj i 'll be with you anon ; most sweet sir , sit . 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj page , good xxmaj master xxmaj page , sit . xxmaj proface ! xxmaj what you want in 
▁ meat , we 'll have in drink . xxmaj but you must bear ; the heart 's all . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj be merry , xxmaj master xxmaj bardolph ; and , my little soldier there , 
▁ be merry . 
▁ xxup silence . [ singing ] 

▁ xxmaj be merry , be merry , my wife has all ; 
▁ xxmaj for women are shrews , both short and tall ; 
▁ ' tis merry in hall when beards wag an ; 
▁ xxmaj and welcome merry xxmaj shrove - tide . 
▁ xxmaj be merry , be merry . 

▁ xxup falstaff . i did not think xxmaj master xxmaj silence had been a man of this 
▁ mettle . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj who , xxup i ? i have been merry twice and once ere now . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup davy 

▁ xxup davy . [ to xxup bardolph ] xxmaj there 's a dish of leather - coats for you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj davy ! 
▁ xxup davy . xxmaj your worship ! xxmaj i 'll be with you straight . [ to xxup bardolph ] 
▁ a cup of wine , sir ? 
▁ xxup silence . [ singing ] 

▁ a cup of wine that 's brisk and fine , 
▁ xxmaj and drink unto the leman mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and a merry heart lives long - a. 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well said , xxmaj master xxmaj silence . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj an we shall be merry , now comes in the sweet o ' th ' night . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj health and long life to you , xxmaj master xxmaj silence ! 
▁ xxup silence . [ singing ] 

▁ xxmaj fill the cup , and let it come , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll pledge you a mile to th ' bottom . 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj honest xxmaj bardolph , welcome ; if thou want'st anything and 
▁ wilt not call , beshrew thy heart . xxmaj welcome , my little tiny thief 
▁ and welcome indeed too . xxmaj i 'll drink to xxmaj master xxmaj bardolph , and to all 
▁ the cabileros about xxmaj london . 
▁ xxup davy . i hope to see xxmaj london once ere i die . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj an i might see you there , xxmaj davy ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by the mass , you'r crack a quart together- ha ! will you 
▁ not , xxmaj master xxmaj bardolph ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj yea , sir , in a pottle - pot . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by xxmaj god 's liggens , i thank thee . xxmaj the knave will stick by 
▁ thee , i can assure thee that . ' a will not out , ' a ; ' tis true 
▁ bred . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll stick by him , sir . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj why , there spoke a king . xxmaj lack nothing ; be merry . 
▁ [ one knocks at door ] xxmaj look who 's at door there , ho ! xxmaj who knocks ? 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup davy 
▁ xxup falstaff . [ to xxup silence , who has drunk a bumper ] xxmaj why , now you have 
▁ done me right . 
▁ xxup silence . [ singing ] 

▁ xxmaj do me right , 
▁ xxmaj and dub me knight . 
▁ xxmaj samingo . 

▁ xxmaj is't not so ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . ' tis so . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj is't so ? xxmaj why then , say an old man can do somewhat . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup davy 

▁ xxup davy . xxmaj an't please your worship , there 's one xxmaj pistol come from the 
▁ court with news . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj from the court ? xxmaj let him come in . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pistol 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj pistol ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , xxmaj god save you ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what wind blew you hither , xxmaj pistol ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj not the ill wind which blows no man to good . xxmaj sweet knight , 
▁ thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm . 
▁ xxup silence . xxmaj by'r lady , i think ' a be , but goodman xxmaj puff of xxmaj barson . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj puff ! 
▁ xxmaj puff in thy teeth , most recreant coward base ! 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john , i am thy xxmaj pistol and thy friend , 
▁ xxmaj and helter - skelter have i rode to thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and tidings do i bring , and lucky joys , 
▁ xxmaj and golden times , and happy news of price . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i pray thee now , deliver them like a man of this world . 
▁ xxup pistol . a foutra for the world and worldlings base ! 
▁ i speak of xxmaj africa and golden joys . 
▁ xxup falstaff . o base xxmaj assyrian knight , what is thy news ? 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj king xxmaj cophetua know the truth thereof . 
▁ xxup silence . [ singing ] xxmaj and xxmaj robin xxmaj hood , xxmaj scarlet , and xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj shall dunghill curs confront the xxmaj helicons ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall good news be baffled ? 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj pistol , lay thy head in xxmaj furies ' lap . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj honest gentleman , i know not your breeding . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj why , then , lament therefore . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj give me pardon , sir . xxmaj if , sir , you come with news from the 
▁ court , i take it there 's but two ways- either to utter them or 
▁ conceal them . i am , sir , under the xxmaj king , in some authority . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj under which king , xxmaj bezonian ? xxmaj speak , or die . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj under xxmaj king xxmaj harry . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj harry the xxmaj fourth- or xxmaj fifth ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj harry the xxmaj fourth . 
▁ xxup pistol . a foutra for thine office ! 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john , thy tender lambkin now is xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj harry the xxmaj fifth 's the man . i speak the truth . 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj pistol lies , do this ; and fig me , like 
▁ xxmaj the bragging xxmaj spaniard . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what , is the old king dead ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj as nail in door . xxmaj the things i speak are just . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj away , xxmaj bardolph ! saddle my horse . xxmaj master xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow , 
▁ choose what office thou wilt in the land , ' tis thine . xxmaj pistol , i 
▁ will double - charge thee with dignities . 
▁ xxup bardolph . o joyful day ! 
▁ i would not take a knighthood for my fortune . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj what , i do bring good news ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj carry xxmaj master xxmaj silence to bed . xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , my xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj shallow , be what thou wilt- i am xxmaj fortune 's steward . xxmaj get on thy 
▁ boots ; we 'll ride all night . o sweet xxmaj pistol ! xxmaj away , xxmaj bardolph ! 
▁ [ exit xxup bardolph ] xxmaj come , xxmaj pistol , utter more to me ; and withal 
▁ devise something to do thyself good . xxmaj boot , boot , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow ! 
▁ i know the young xxmaj king is sick for me . xxmaj let us take any man 's 
▁ horses : the laws of xxmaj england are at my commandment . xxmaj blessed are 
▁ they that have been my friends ; and woe to my xxmaj lord xxmaj chief xxmaj justice ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj let vultures vile seize on his lungs also ! 
▁ ' where is the life that late i led ? ' say they . 
▁ xxmaj why , here it is ; welcome these pleasant days ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup beadles , dragging in xxup hostess xxup quickly and xxup doll xxup tearsheet 

▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj no , thou arrant knave ; i would to xxmaj god that i might die , 
▁ that i might have thee hang'd . xxmaj thou hast drawn my shoulder out of 
▁ joint . 
▁ xxup first xxup beadle . xxmaj the constables have delivered her over to me ; and she 
▁ shall have whipping - cheer enough , i warrant her . xxmaj there hath been 
▁ a man or two lately kill'd about her . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj nut - hook , nut - hook , you lie . xxmaj come on ; xxmaj i 'll tell thee what , 
▁ thou damn'd tripe - visag'd rascal , an the child i now go with do 
▁ miscarry , thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother , thou 
▁ paper - fac'd villain . 
▁ xxup hostess . o the xxmaj lord , that xxmaj sir xxmaj john were come ! xxmaj he would make this a 
▁ bloody day to somebody . xxmaj but i pray xxmaj god the fruit of her womb 
▁ miscarry ! 
▁ xxup first xxup beadle . xxmaj if it do , you shall have a dozen of cushions again ; 
▁ you have but eleven now . xxmaj come , i charge you both go with me ; for 
▁ the man is dead that you and xxmaj pistol beat amongst you . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj i 'll tell you what , you thin man in a censer , i will have you 
▁ as soundly swing'd for this- you blue - bottle rogue , you filthy 
▁ famish'd correctioner , if you be not swing'd , xxmaj i 'll forswear 
▁ half - kirtles . 
▁ xxup first xxup beadle . xxmaj come , come , you she knight - errant , come . 
▁ xxup hostess . o xxmaj god , that right should thus overcome might ! 
▁ xxmaj well , of sufferance comes ease . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj come , you rogue , come ; bring me to a justice . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj ay , come , you starv'd bloodhound . 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj goodman death , goodman bones ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj thou atomy , thou ! 
▁ xxup doll . xxmaj come , you thin thing ! come , you rascal ! 
▁ xxup first xxup beadle . xxmaj very well . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj westminster . xxmaj near the xxmaj abbey 

 xxmaj enter xxup grooms , strewing rushes 

▁ xxup first xxup groom . xxmaj more rushes , more rushes ! 
▁ xxup second xxup groom . xxmaj the trumpets have sounded twice . 
▁ xxup third xxup groom . ' twill be two o'clock ere they come from the 
▁ coronation . xxmaj dispatch , dispatch . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj trumpets sound , and the xxup king and his train pass 
▁ over the stage . xxmaj after them enter xxup falstaff , xxup shallow , 
▁ xxup pistol , xxup bardolph , and page 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj stand here by me , xxmaj master xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow ; i will make the 
▁ xxmaj king do you grace . i will leer upon him , as ' a comes by ; and do 
▁ but mark the countenance that he will give me . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj god bless thy lungs , good knight ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come here , xxmaj pistol ; stand behind me . [ to xxup shallow ] xxup o , if 
▁ i had had to have made new liveries , i would have bestowed the 
▁ thousand pound i borrowed of you . xxmaj but ' tis no matter ; this poor 
▁ show doth better ; this doth infer the zeal i had to see him . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it doth so . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj it shows my earnestness of affection- 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it doth so . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my devotion- 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it doth , it doth , it doth . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj as it were , to ride day and night ; and not to deliberate , 
▁ not to remember , not to have patience to shift me- 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it is best , certain . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj but to stand stained with travel , and sweating with 
▁ desire to see him ; thinking of nothing else , putting all affairs 
▁ else in oblivion , as if there were nothing else to be done but to 
▁ see him . 
▁ xxup pistol . ' tis ' semper idem ' for ' obsque hoc nihil est . ' ' tis all in 
▁ every part . 
▁ xxup shallow . ' tis so , indeed . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj my knight , i will inflame thy noble liver 
▁ xxmaj and make thee rage . 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj doll , and xxmaj helen of thy noble thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj is in base durance and contagious prison ; 
▁ xxmaj hal'd thither 
▁ xxmaj by most mechanical and dirty hand . 
▁ xxmaj rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell xxmaj alecto 's snake , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj doll is in . xxmaj pistol speaks nought but truth . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i will deliver her . 
▁ [ shouts , within , and the trumpets sound ] 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj there roar'd the sea , and trumpet - clangor sounds . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king and his train , the xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice 
▁ among them 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj god save thy xxmaj grace , xxmaj king xxmaj hal ; my royal xxmaj hal ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj the heavens thee guard and keep , most royal imp of fame ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj god save thee , my sweet boy ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj chief xxmaj justice , speak to that vain man . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj have you your wits ? xxmaj know you what ' tis you speak ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my king ! my xxmaj jove ! i speak to thee , my heart ! 
▁ xxup king . i know thee not , old man . xxmaj fall to thy prayers . 
▁ xxmaj how ill white hairs become a fool and jester ! 
▁ i have long dreamt of such a kind of man , 
▁ xxmaj so surfeit - swell'd , so old , and so profane ; 
▁ xxmaj but being awak'd , i do despise my dream . 
▁ xxmaj make less thy body hence , and more thy grace ; 
▁ xxmaj leave gormandizing ; know the grave doth gape 
▁ xxmaj for thee thrice wider than for other men- 
▁ xxmaj reply not to me with a fool - born jest ; 
▁ xxmaj presume not that i am the thing i was , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god doth know , so shall the world perceive , 
▁ xxmaj that i have turn'd away my former self ; 
▁ xxmaj so will i those that kept me company . 
▁ xxmaj when thou dost hear i am as i have been , 
▁ xxmaj approach me , and thou shalt be as thou wast , 
▁ xxmaj the tutor and the feeder of my riots . 
▁ xxmaj till then i banish thee , on pain of death , 
▁ xxmaj as i have done the rest of my misleaders , 
▁ xxmaj not to come near our person by ten mile . 
▁ xxmaj for competence of life i will allow you , 
▁ xxmaj that lack of means enforce you not to evils ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as we hear you do reform yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj we will , according to your strengths and qualities , 
▁ xxmaj give you advancement . xxmaj be it your charge , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj to see perform'd the tenour of our word . 
▁ xxmaj set on . xxmaj exeunt the xxup king and his train 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , i owe you a thousand pounds . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj yea , marry , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ; which i beseech you to let me have 
▁ home with me . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj that can hardly be , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . xxmaj do not you grieve at 
▁ this ; i shall be sent for in private to him . xxmaj look you , he must 
▁ seem thus to the world . xxmaj fear not your advancements ; i will be the 
▁ man yet that shall make you great . 
▁ xxup shallow . i can not perceive how , unless you give me your doublet , 
▁ and stuff me out with straw . i beseech you , good xxmaj sir xxmaj john , let me 
▁ have five hundred of my thousand . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj sir , i will be as good as my word . xxmaj this that you heard 
▁ was but a colour . 
▁ xxup shallow . a colour that i fear you will die in , xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fear no colours ; go with me to dinner . xxmaj come , xxmaj lieutenant 
▁ xxmaj pistol ; come , xxmaj bardolph . i shall be sent for soon at night . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup prince xxup john , the xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice , 
▁ with officers 

▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj go , carry xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff to the xxmaj fleet ; 
▁ xxmaj take all his company along with him . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my lord , my lord- 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . i can not now speak . i will hear you soon . 
▁ xxmaj take them away . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj si fortuna me tormenta , spero me contenta . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup prince xxup john and the xxup lord xxup chief xxup justice 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . i like this fair proceeding of the xxmaj king 's . 
▁ xxmaj he hath intent his wonted followers 
▁ xxmaj shall all be very well provided for ; 
▁ xxmaj but all are banish'd till their conversations 
▁ xxmaj appear more wise and modest to the world . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj and so they are . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath call'd his parliament , my lord . 
▁ xxup chief xxup justice . xxmaj he hath . 
▁ xxup prince xxup john . i will lay odds that , ere this year expire , 
▁ xxmaj we bear our civil swords and native fire 
▁ xxmaj as far as xxmaj france . i heard a bird so sing , 
▁ xxmaj whose music , to my thinking , pleas'd the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj come , will you hence ? xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup epilogue 
▁ xxup epilogue . 

▁ xxmaj first my fear , then my curtsy , last my speech . xxmaj my fear , is your 
 displeasure ; my curtsy , my duty ; and my speech , to beg your pardons . 
 xxmaj if you look for a good speech now , you undo me ; for what i have to say 
 is of mine own making ; and what , indeed , i should say will , i doubt , 
 prove mine own marring . xxmaj but to the purpose , and so to the venture . 
 xxmaj be it known to you , as it is very well , i was lately here in the end 
 of a displeasing play , to pray your patience for it and to promise you 
 a better . i meant , indeed , to pay you with this ; which if like an 
 ill venture it come unluckily home , i break , and you , my gentle 
 creditors , lose . xxmaj here i promis'd you i would be , and here i commit 
 my body to your mercies . xxmaj bate me some , and i will pay you some , and , 
 as most debtors do , promise you infinitely ; and so i kneel down before 
 you- but , indeed , to pray for the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj if my tongue can not entreat you to acquit me , will you command me to 
 use my legs ? xxmaj and yet that were but light payment - to dance out of 
 your debt . xxmaj but a good conscience will make any possible 
 satisfaction , and so would xxup i. xxmaj all the gentlewomen here have forgiven 
 me . xxmaj if the gentlemen will not , then the gentlemen do not agree with 
 the gentlewomen , which was never seen before in such an assembly . 
▁ xxmaj one word more , i beseech you . xxmaj if you be not too much cloy'd with fat 
 meat , our humble author will continue the story , with xxmaj sir xxmaj john in 
 it , and make you merry with fair xxmaj katherine of xxmaj france ; where , for 
 anything i know , xxmaj falstaff shall die of a sweat , unless already ' a be 
 killed with your hard opinions ; for xxmaj oldcastle died a martyr and this 
 is not the man . xxmaj my tongue is weary ; when my legs are too , i will bid 
 you good night . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1599 

 xxup the xxup life xxup of xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup fifth 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup chorus 
▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup fifth 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , brother to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup bedford , " " " " 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup exeter , xxmaj uncle to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup york , cousin to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup warwick 
▁ xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury 
▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely 

▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup cambridge , conspirator against the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup lord xxup scroop , " " " " 
▁ xxup sir xxup thomas xxup grey , " " " " 
▁ xxup sir xxup thomas xxup erpingham , officer in the xxmaj king 's army 
▁ xxup gower , " " " " " 
▁ xxup fluellen , " " " " " 
▁ xxup macmorris , " " " " " 
▁ xxup jamy , " " " " " 

▁ xxup bates , soldier in the xxmaj king 's army 
▁ xxup court , " " " " " 
▁ xxup williams , " " " " " 
▁ xxup nym , " " " " " 
▁ xxup bardolph , " " " " " 
▁ xxup pistol , " " " " " 

▁ xxup boy a xxup herald 

▁ xxup charles xxup the xxup sixth , xxmaj king of xxmaj france 
▁ xxup lewis , the xxmaj dauphin xxup duke xxup of xxup burgundy 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup orleans xxup duke xxup of xxup britaine 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup bourbon xxup the xxup constable xxup of xxup france 
▁ xxup rambures , xxmaj french xxmaj lord 
▁ xxup grandpre , " " 
▁ xxup governor xxup of xxup harfleur xxup montjoy , a xxmaj french herald 
▁ xxup ambassadors to the xxmaj king of xxmaj england 

▁ xxup isabel , xxmaj queen of xxmaj france 
▁ xxup katherine , daughter to xxmaj charles and xxmaj isabel 
▁ xxup alice , a lady attending her 
▁ xxup hostess of the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head , xxmaj eastcheap ; formerly xxmaj mrs . xxmaj quickly , now 
▁ married to xxmaj pistol 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj ladies , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj attendants 


▁ xxup scene : 
▁ xxmaj england and xxmaj france 

 xxup prologue 
▁ xxup prologue . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup chorus 

▁ xxup chorus . o for a xxmaj muse of fire , that would ascend 
▁ xxmaj the brightest heaven of invention , 
▁ a kingdom for a stage , princes to act , 
▁ xxmaj and monarchs to behold the swelling scene ! 
▁ xxmaj then should the warlike xxmaj harry , like himself , 
▁ xxmaj assume the port of xxmaj mars ; and at his heels , 
▁ xxmaj leash'd in like hounds , should famine , sword , and fire , 
▁ xxmaj crouch for employment . xxmaj but pardon , gentles all , 
▁ xxmaj the flat unraised spirits that hath dar'd 
▁ xxmaj on this unworthy scaffold to bring forth 
▁ xxmaj so great an object . xxmaj can this cockpit hold 
▁ xxmaj the vasty fields of xxmaj france ? xxmaj or may we cram 
▁ xxmaj within this wooden o the very casques 
▁ xxmaj that did affright the air at xxmaj agincourt ? 
▁ xxup o , pardon ! since a crooked figure may 
▁ xxmaj attest in little place a million ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us , ciphers to this great accompt , 
▁ xxmaj on your imaginary forces work . 
▁ xxmaj suppose within the girdle of these walls 
▁ xxmaj are now confin'd two mighty monarchies , 
▁ xxmaj whose high upreared and abutting fronts 
▁ xxmaj the perilous narrow ocean parts asunder . 
▁ xxmaj piece out our imperfections with your thoughts : 
▁ xxmaj into a thousand parts divide one man , 
▁ xxmaj and make imaginary puissance ; 
▁ xxmaj think , when we talk of horses , that you see them 
▁ xxmaj printing their proud hoofs i ' th ' receiving earth ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings , 
▁ xxmaj carry them here and there , jumping o'er times , 
▁ xxmaj turning th ' accomplishment of many years 
▁ xxmaj into an hour - glass ; for the which supply , 
▁ xxmaj admit me xxmaj chorus to this history ; 
▁ xxmaj who prologue - like , your humble patience pray 
▁ xxmaj gently to hear , kindly to judge , our play . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj an ante - chamber in the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury and the xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely 

▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj my lord , xxmaj i 'll tell you : that self bill is urg'd 
▁ xxmaj which in th ' eleventh year of the last king 's reign 
▁ xxmaj was like , and had indeed against us pass'd 
▁ xxmaj but that the scambling and unquiet time 
▁ xxmaj did push it out of farther question . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj but how , my lord , shall we resist it now ? 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj it must be thought on . xxmaj if it pass against us , 
▁ xxmaj we lose the better half of our possession ; 
▁ xxmaj for all the temporal lands which men devout 
▁ xxmaj by testament have given to the church 
▁ xxmaj would they strip from us ; being valu'd thus- 
▁ xxmaj as much as would maintain , to the xxmaj king 's honour , 
▁ xxmaj full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights , 
▁ xxmaj six thousand and two hundred good esquires ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to relief of lazars and weak age , 
▁ xxmaj of indigent faint souls , past corporal toil , 
▁ a hundred alms - houses right well supplied ; 
▁ xxmaj and to the coffers of the xxmaj king , beside , 
▁ a thousand pounds by th ' year : thus runs the bill . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj this would drink deep . 
▁ xxup canterbury . ' t would drink the cup and all . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj but what prevention ? 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj the xxmaj king is full of grace and fair regard . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj and a true lover of the holy xxmaj church . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj the courses of his youth promis'd it not . 
▁ xxmaj the breath no sooner left his father 's body 
▁ xxmaj but that his wildness , mortified in him , 
▁ xxmaj seem'd to die too ; yea , at that very moment , 
▁ xxmaj consideration like an angel came 
▁ xxmaj and whipp'd th ' offending xxmaj adam out of him , 
▁ xxmaj leaving his body as a paradise 
▁ xxmaj t'envelop and contain celestial spirits . 
▁ xxmaj never was such a sudden scholar made ; 
▁ xxmaj never came reformation in a flood , 
▁ xxmaj with such a heady currance , scouring faults ; 
▁ xxmaj nor never xxmaj hydra - headed wilfulnes 
▁ xxmaj so soon did lose his seat , and all at once , 
▁ xxmaj as in this king . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj we are blessed in the change . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj hear him but reason in divinity , 
▁ xxmaj and , all - admiring , with an inward wish 
▁ xxmaj you would desire the xxmaj king were made a prelate ; 
▁ xxmaj hear him debate of commonwealth affairs , 
▁ xxmaj you would say it hath been all in all his study ; 
▁ xxmaj list his discourse of war , and you shall hear 
▁ a fearful battle rend'red you in music . 
▁ xxmaj turn him to any cause of policy , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj gordian knot of it he will unloose , 
▁ xxmaj familiar as his garter ; that , when he speaks , 
▁ xxmaj the air , a charter'd libertine , is still , 
▁ xxmaj and the mute wonder lurketh in men 's ears 
▁ xxmaj to steal his sweet and honey'd sentences ; 
▁ xxmaj so that the art and practic part of life 
▁ xxmaj must be the mistress to this theoric ; 
▁ xxmaj which is a wonder how his xxmaj grace should glean it , 
▁ xxmaj since his addiction was to courses vain , 
▁ xxmaj his companies unletter'd , rude , and shallow , 
▁ xxmaj his hours fill'd up with riots , banquets , sports ; 
▁ xxmaj and never noted in him any study , 
▁ xxmaj any retirement , any sequestration 
▁ xxmaj from open haunts and popularity . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj the strawberry grows underneath the nettle , 
▁ xxmaj and wholesome berries thrive and ripen best 
▁ xxmaj neighbour'd by fruit of baser quality ; 
▁ xxmaj and so the xxmaj prince obscur'd his contemplation 
▁ xxmaj under the veil of wildness ; which , no doubt , 
▁ xxmaj grew like the summer grass , fastest by night , 
▁ xxmaj unseen , yet crescive in his faculty . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj it must be so ; for miracles are ceas'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore we must needs admit the means 
▁ xxmaj how things are perfected . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj but , my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj how now for mitigation of this bill 
▁ xxmaj urg'd by the xxmaj commons ? xxmaj doth his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj incline to it , or no ? 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj he seems indifferent 
▁ xxmaj or rather swaying more upon our part 
▁ xxmaj than cherishing th ' exhibiters against us ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have made an offer to his xxmaj majesty- 
▁ xxmaj upon our spiritual convocation 
▁ xxmaj and in regard of causes now in hand , 
▁ xxmaj which i have open'd to his xxmaj grace at large , 
▁ xxmaj as touching xxmaj france- to give a greater sum 
▁ xxmaj than ever at one time the clergy yet 
▁ xxmaj did to his predecessors part withal . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj how did this offer seem receiv'd , my lord ? 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj with good acceptance of his xxmaj majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj save that there was not time enough to hear , 
▁ xxmaj as i perceiv'd his xxmaj grace would fain have done , 
▁ xxmaj the severals and unhidden passages 
▁ xxmaj of his true tides to some certain dukedoms , 
▁ xxmaj and generally to the crown and seat of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj deriv'd from xxmaj edward , his great - grandfather . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj what was th ' impediment that broke this off ? 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj the xxmaj french ambassador upon that instant 
▁ xxmaj crav'd audience ; and the hour , i think , is come 
▁ xxmaj to give him hearing : is it four o'clock ? 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj it is . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj then go we in , to know his embassy ; 
▁ xxmaj which i could with a ready guess declare , 
▁ xxmaj before the xxmaj frenchman speak a word of it . 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj i 'll wait upon you , and i long to hear it . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj presence xxmaj chamber in the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup gloucester , xxup bedford , xxup exeter , xxup warwick , xxup westmoreland , 
 and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj where is my gracious xxmaj lord of xxmaj canterbury ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj not here in presence . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj send for him , good uncle . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj shall we call in th ' ambassador , my liege ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj not yet , my cousin ; we would be resolv'd , 
▁ xxmaj before we hear him , of some things of weight 
▁ xxmaj that task our thoughts , concerning us and xxmaj france . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury and 
▁ the xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely 

▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj god and his angels guard your sacred throne , 
▁ xxmaj and make you long become it ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj sure , we thank you . 
▁ xxmaj my learned lord , we pray you to proceed , 
▁ xxmaj and justly and religiously unfold 
▁ xxmaj why the law xxmaj salique , that they have in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj or should or should not bar us in our claim ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj god forbid , my dear and faithful lord , 
▁ xxmaj that you should fashion , wrest , or bow your reading , 
▁ xxmaj or nicely charge your understanding soul 
▁ xxmaj with opening titles miscreate whose right 
▁ xxmaj suits not in native colours with the truth ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god doth know how many , now in health , 
▁ xxmaj shall drop their blood in approbation 
▁ xxmaj of what your reverence shall incite us to . 
▁ xxmaj therefore take heed how you impawn our person , 
▁ xxmaj how you awake our sleeping sword of war- 
▁ xxmaj we charge you , in the name of xxmaj god , take heed ; 
▁ xxmaj for never two such kingdoms did contend 
▁ xxmaj without much fall of blood ; whose guiltless drops 
▁ xxmaj are every one a woe , a sore complaint , 
▁ ' gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords 
▁ xxmaj that makes such waste in brief mortality . 
▁ xxmaj under this conjuration speak , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj for we will hear , note , and believe in heart , 
▁ xxmaj that what you speak is in your conscience wash'd 
▁ xxmaj as pure as sin with baptism . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj then hear me , gracious sovereign , and you peers , 
▁ xxmaj that owe yourselves , your lives , and services , 
▁ xxmaj to this imperial throne . xxmaj there is no bar 
▁ xxmaj to make against your xxmaj highness ' claim to xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj but this , which they produce from xxmaj pharamond : 
▁ ' in terram xxmaj salicam mulieres ne succedant'- 
▁ ' no woman shall succeed in xxmaj salique land ' ; 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj salique land the xxmaj french unjustly gloze 
▁ xxmaj to be the realm of xxmaj france , and xxmaj pharamond 
▁ xxmaj the founder of this law and female bar . 
▁ xxmaj yet their own authors faithfully affirm 
▁ xxmaj that the land xxmaj salique is in xxmaj germany , 
▁ xxmaj between the floods of xxmaj sala and of xxmaj elbe ; 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj charles the xxmaj great , having subdu'd the xxmaj saxons , 
▁ xxmaj there left behind and settled certain xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj who , holding in disdain the xxmaj german women 
▁ xxmaj for some dishonest manners of their life , 
▁ xxmaj establish'd then this law : to wit , no female 
▁ xxmaj should be inheritrix in xxmaj salique land ; 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj salique , as i said , ' twixt xxmaj elbe and xxmaj sala , 
▁ xxmaj is at this day in xxmaj germany call'd xxmaj meisen . 
▁ xxmaj then doth it well appear the xxmaj salique law 
▁ xxmaj was not devised for the realm of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj nor did the xxmaj french possess the xxmaj salique land 
▁ xxmaj until four hundred one and twenty years 
▁ xxmaj after defunction of xxmaj king xxmaj pharamond , 
▁ xxmaj idly suppos'd the founder of this law ; 
▁ xxmaj who died within the year of our redemption 
▁ xxmaj four hundred twenty - six ; and xxmaj charles the xxmaj great 
▁ xxmaj subdu'd the xxmaj saxons , and did seat the xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj beyond the river xxmaj sala , in the year 
▁ xxmaj eight hundred five . xxmaj besides , their writers say , 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj pepin , which deposed xxmaj childeric , 
▁ xxmaj did , as heir general , being descended 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj blithild , which was daughter to xxmaj king xxmaj clothair , 
▁ xxmaj make claim and title to the crown of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj hugh xxmaj capet also , who usurp'd the crown 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj charles the xxmaj duke of xxmaj lorraine , sole heir male 
▁ xxmaj of the true line and stock of xxmaj charles the xxmaj great , 
▁ xxmaj to find his title with some shows of truth- 
▁ xxmaj though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught- 
▁ xxmaj convey'd himself as th ' heir to th ' xxmaj lady xxmaj lingare , 
▁ xxmaj daughter to xxmaj charlemain , who was the son 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj lewis the xxmaj emperor , and xxmaj lewis the son 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj charles the xxmaj great . xxmaj also xxmaj king xxmaj lewis the xxmaj tenth , 
▁ xxmaj who was sole heir to the usurper xxmaj capet , 
▁ xxmaj could not keep quiet in his conscience , 
▁ xxmaj wearing the crown of xxmaj france , till satisfied 
▁ xxmaj that fair xxmaj queen xxmaj isabel , his grandmother , 
▁ xxmaj was lineal of the xxmaj lady xxmaj ermengare , 
▁ xxmaj daughter to xxmaj charles the foresaid xxmaj duke of xxmaj lorraine ; 
▁ xxmaj by the which marriage the line of xxmaj charles the xxmaj great 
▁ xxmaj was re - united to the xxmaj crown of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj so that , as clear as is the summer 's sun , 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj pepin 's title , and xxmaj hugh xxmaj capet 's claim , 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj lewis his satisfaction , all appear 
▁ xxmaj to hold in right and tide of the female ; 
▁ xxmaj so do the kings of xxmaj france unto this day , 
▁ xxmaj howbeit they would hold up this xxmaj salique law 
▁ xxmaj to bar your xxmaj highness claiming from the female ; 
▁ xxmaj and rather choose to hide them in a net 
▁ xxmaj than amply to imbar their crooked tides 
▁ xxmaj usurp'd from you and your progenitors . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj may i with right and conscience make this claim ? 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj the sin upon my head , dread sovereign ! 
▁ xxmaj for in the book of xxmaj numbers is it writ , 
▁ xxmaj when the man dies , let the inheritance 
▁ xxmaj descend unto the daughter . xxmaj gracious lord , 
▁ xxmaj stand for your own , unwind your bloody flag , 
▁ xxmaj look back into your mighty ancestors . 
▁ xxmaj go , my dread lord , to your great - grandsire 's tomb , 
▁ xxmaj from whom you claim ; invoke his warlike spirit , 
▁ xxmaj and your great - uncle 's , xxmaj edward the xxmaj black xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj who on the xxmaj french ground play'd a tragedy , 
▁ xxmaj making defeat on the fun power of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj whiles his most mighty father on a hill 
▁ xxmaj stood smiling to behold his lion 's whelp 
▁ xxmaj forage in blood of xxmaj french nobility . 
▁ o noble xxmaj english , that could entertain 
▁ xxmaj with half their forces the full pride of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and let another half stand laughing by , 
▁ xxmaj all out of work and cold for action ! 
▁ xxup ely . xxmaj awake remembrance of these valiant dead , 
▁ xxmaj and with your puissant arm renew their feats . 
▁ xxmaj you are their heir ; you sit upon their throne ; 
▁ xxmaj the blood and courage that renowned them 
▁ xxmaj runs in your veins ; and my thrice - puissant liege 
▁ xxmaj is in the very xxmaj may - morn of his youth , 
▁ xxmaj ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj your brother kings and monarchs of the earth 
▁ xxmaj do all expect that you should rouse yourself , 
▁ xxmaj as did the former lions of your blood . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj they know your xxmaj grace hath cause and means and might- 
▁ xxmaj so hath your xxmaj highness ; never xxmaj king of xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj had nobles richer and more loyal subjects , 
▁ xxmaj whose hearts have left their bodies here in xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj and lie pavilion'd in the fields of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxup o , let their bodies follow , my dear liege , 
▁ xxmaj with blood and sword and fire to win your right ! 
▁ xxmaj in aid whereof we of the spiritualty 
▁ xxmaj will raise your xxmaj highness such a mighty sum 
▁ xxmaj as never did the clergy at one time 
▁ xxmaj bring in to any of your ancestors . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we must not only arm t ' invade the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj but lay down our proportions to defend 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj scot , who will make road upon us 
▁ xxmaj with all advantages . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj they of those marches , gracious sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj shall be a wall sufficient to defend 
▁ xxmaj our inland from the pilfering borderers . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we do not mean the coursing snatchers only , 
▁ xxmaj but fear the main intendment of the xxmaj scot , 
▁ xxmaj who hath been still a giddy neighbour to us ; 
▁ xxmaj for you shall read that my great - grandfather 
▁ xxmaj never went with his forces into xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj but that the xxmaj scot on his unfurnish'd kingdom 
▁ xxmaj came pouring , like the tide into a breach , 
▁ xxmaj with ample and brim fulness of his force , 
▁ xxmaj galling the gleaned land with hot assays , 
▁ xxmaj girdling with grievous siege castles and towns ; 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj england , being empty of defence , 
▁ xxmaj hath shook and trembled at th ' ill neighbourhood . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj she hath been then more fear'd than harm'd , my liege ; 
▁ xxmaj for hear her but exampled by herself : 
▁ xxmaj when all her chivalry hath been in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and she a mourning widow of her nobles , 
▁ xxmaj she hath herself not only well defended 
▁ xxmaj but taken and impounded as a stray 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king of xxmaj scots ; whom she did send to xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj to fill xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's fame with prisoner kings , 
▁ xxmaj and make her chronicle as rich with praise 
▁ xxmaj as is the ooze and bottom of the sea 
▁ xxmaj with sunken wreck and sumless treasuries . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj but there 's a saying , very old and true : 

▁ ' if that you will xxmaj france win , 
▁ xxmaj then with xxmaj scotland first begin . ' 
▁
▁ xxmaj for once the eagle xxmaj england being in prey , 
▁ xxmaj to her unguarded nest the weasel xxmaj scot 
▁ xxmaj comes sneaking , and so sucks her princely eggs , 
▁ xxmaj playing the mouse in absence of the cat , 
▁ xxmaj to tear and havoc more than she can eat . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj it follows , then , the cat must stay at home ; 
▁ xxmaj yet that is but a crush'd necessity , 
▁ xxmaj since we have locks to safeguard necessaries 
▁ xxmaj and pretty traps to catch the petty thieves . 
▁ xxmaj while that the armed hand doth fight abroad , 
▁ xxmaj th ' advised head defends itself at home ; 
▁ xxmaj for government , though high , and low , and lower , 
▁ xxmaj put into parts , doth keep in one consent , 
▁ xxmaj congreeing in a full and natural close , 
▁ xxmaj like music . 
▁ xxup canterbury . xxmaj therefore doth heaven divide 
▁ xxmaj the state of man in divers functions , 
▁ xxmaj setting endeavour in continual motion ; 
▁ xxmaj to which is fixed as an aim or but 
▁ xxmaj obedience ; for so work the honey bees , 
▁ xxmaj creatures that by a rule in nature teach 
▁ xxmaj the act of order to a peopled kingdom . 
▁ xxmaj they have a king , and officers of sorts , 
▁ xxmaj where some like magistrates correct at home ; 
▁ xxmaj others like merchants venture trade abroad ; 
▁ xxmaj others like soldiers , armed in their stings , 
▁ xxmaj make boot upon the summer 's velvet buds , 
▁ xxmaj which pillage they with merry march bring home 
▁ xxmaj to the tent - royal of their emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj who , busied in his majesty , surveys 
▁ xxmaj the singing masons building roofs of gold , 
▁ xxmaj the civil citizens kneading up the honey , 
▁ xxmaj the poor mechanic porters crowding in 
▁ xxmaj their heavy burdens at his narrow gate , 
▁ xxmaj the sad - ey'd justice , with his surly hum , 
▁ xxmaj delivering o'er to executors pale 
▁ xxmaj the lazy yawning drone . i this infer , 
▁ xxmaj that many things , having full reference 
▁ xxmaj to one consent , may work contrariously ; 
▁ xxmaj as many arrows loosed several ways 
▁ xxmaj come to one mark , as many ways meet in one town , 
▁ xxmaj as many fresh streams meet in one salt sea , 
▁ xxmaj as many lines close in the dial 's centre ; 
▁ xxmaj so many a thousand actions , once afoot , 
▁ xxmaj end in one purpose , and be all well home 
▁ xxmaj without defeat . xxmaj therefore to xxmaj france , my liege . 
▁ xxmaj divide your happy xxmaj england into four ; 
▁ xxmaj whereof take you one quarter into xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and you withal shall make all xxmaj gallia shake . 
▁ xxmaj if we , with thrice such powers left at home , 
▁ xxmaj can not defend our own doors from the dog , 
▁ xxmaj let us be worried , and our nation lose 
▁ xxmaj the name of hardiness and policy . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj call in the messengers sent from the xxmaj dauphin . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt some attendants 
▁ xxmaj now are we well resolv'd ; and , by xxmaj god 's help 
▁ xxmaj and yours , the noble sinews of our power , 
▁ xxmaj france being ours , we 'll bend it to our awe , 
▁ xxmaj or break it all to pieces ; or there we 'll sit , 
▁ xxmaj ruling in large and ample empery 
▁ xxmaj o'er xxmaj france and all her almost kingly dukedoms , 
▁ xxmaj or lay these bones in an unworthy urn , 
▁ xxmaj tombless , with no remembrance over them . 
▁ xxmaj either our history shall with full mouth 
▁ xxmaj speak freely of our acts , or else our grave , 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj turkish mute , shall have a tongueless mouth , 
▁ xxmaj not worshipp'd with a waxen epitaph . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ambassadors of xxmaj france 

▁ xxmaj now are we well prepar'd to know the pleasure 
▁ xxmaj of our fair cousin xxmaj dauphin ; for we hear 
▁ xxmaj your greeting is from him , not from the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup ambassador . xxmaj may't please your xxmaj majesty to give us leave 
▁ xxmaj freely to render what we have in charge ; 
▁ xxmaj or shall we sparingly show you far of 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin 's meaning and our embassy ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we are no tyrant , but a xxmaj christian king , 
▁ xxmaj unto whose grace our passion is as subject 
▁ xxmaj as are our wretches fett'red in our prisons ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness 
▁ xxmaj tell us the xxmaj dauphin 's mind . 
▁ xxup ambassador . xxmaj thus then , in few . 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness , lately sending into xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj did claim some certain dukedoms in the right 
▁ xxmaj of your great predecessor , xxmaj king xxmaj edward the xxmaj third . 
▁ xxmaj in answer of which claim , the xxmaj prince our master 
▁ xxmaj says that you savour too much of your youth , 
▁ xxmaj and bids you be advis'd there 's nought in xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj that can be with a nimble galliard won ; 
▁ xxmaj you can not revel into dukedoms there . 
▁ xxmaj he therefore sends you , meeter for your spirit , 
▁ xxmaj this tun of treasure ; and , in lieu of this , 
▁ xxmaj desires you let the dukedoms that you claim 
▁ xxmaj hear no more of you . xxmaj this the xxmaj dauphin speaks . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what treasure , uncle ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj tennis - balls , my liege . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we are glad the xxmaj dauphin is so pleasant with us ; 
▁ xxmaj his present and your pains we thank you for . 
▁ xxmaj when we have match'd our rackets to these balls , 
▁ xxmaj we will in xxmaj france , by xxmaj god 's grace , play a set 
▁ xxmaj shall strike his father 's crown into the hazard . 
▁ xxmaj tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangler 
▁ xxmaj that all the courts of xxmaj france will be disturb'd 
▁ xxmaj with chaces . xxmaj and we understand him well , 
▁ xxmaj how he comes o'er us with our wilder days , 
▁ xxmaj not measuring what use we made of them . 
▁ xxmaj we never valu'd this poor seat of xxmaj england ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , living hence , did give ourself 
▁ xxmaj to barbarous licence ; as ' tis ever common 
▁ xxmaj that men are merriest when they are from home . 
▁ xxmaj but tell the xxmaj dauphin i will keep my state , 
▁ xxmaj be like a king , and show my sail of greatness , 
▁ xxmaj when i do rouse me in my throne of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj for that i have laid by my majesty 
▁ xxmaj and plodded like a man for working - days ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will rise there with so full a glory 
▁ xxmaj that i will dazzle all the eyes of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj yea , strike the xxmaj dauphin blind to look on us . 
▁ xxmaj and tell the pleasant xxmaj prince this mock of his 
▁ xxmaj hath turn'd his balls to gun - stones , and his soul 
▁ xxmaj shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance 
▁ xxmaj that shall fly with them ; for many a thousand widows 
▁ xxmaj shall this his mock mock of their dear husbands ; 
▁ xxmaj mock mothers from their sons , mock castles down ; 
▁ xxmaj and some are yet ungotten and unborn 
▁ xxmaj that shall have cause to curse the xxmaj dauphin 's scorn . 
▁ xxmaj but this lies all within the will of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj to whom i do appeal ; and in whose name , 
▁ xxmaj tell you the xxmaj dauphin , i am coming on , 
▁ xxmaj to venge me as i may and to put forth 
▁ xxmaj my rightful hand in a well - hallow'd cause . 
▁ xxmaj so get you hence in peace ; and tell the xxmaj dauphin 
▁ xxmaj his jest will savour but of shallow wit , 
▁ xxmaj when thousands weep more than did laugh at it . 
▁ xxmaj convey them with safe conduct . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup ambassadors