xxbos xxup exeter . xxmaj this was a merry message . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we hope to make the sender blush at it . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , my lords , omit no happy hour 
▁ xxmaj that may give furth'rance to our expedition ; 
▁ xxmaj for we have now no thought in us but xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj save those to xxmaj god , that run before our business . 
▁ xxmaj therefore let our proportions for these wars 
▁ xxmaj be soon collected , and all things thought upon 
▁ xxmaj that may with reasonable swiftness ad 
▁ xxmaj more feathers to our wings ; for , xxmaj god before , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll chide this xxmaj dauphin at his father 's door . 
▁ xxmaj therefore let every man now task his thought 
▁ xxmaj that this fair action may on foot be brought . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup prologue . 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup chorus 

▁ xxup chorus . xxmaj now all the youth of xxmaj england are on fire , 
▁ xxmaj and silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies ; 
▁ xxmaj now thrive the armourers , and honour 's thought 
▁ xxmaj reigns solely in the breast of every man ; 
▁ xxmaj they sell the pasture now to buy the horse , 
▁ xxmaj following the mirror of all xxmaj christian kings 
▁ xxmaj with winged heels , as xxmaj english xxmaj mercuries . 
▁ xxmaj for now sits xxmaj expectation in the air , 
▁ xxmaj and hides a sword from hilts unto the point 
▁ xxmaj with crowns imperial , crowns , and coronets , 
▁ xxmaj promis'd to xxmaj harry and his followers . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french , advis'd by good intelligence 
▁ xxmaj of this most dreadful preparation , 
▁ xxmaj shake in their fear and with pale policy 
▁ xxmaj seek to divert the xxmaj english purposes . 
▁ o xxmaj england ! model to thy inward greatness , 
▁ xxmaj like little body with a mighty heart , 
▁ xxmaj what mightst thou do that honour would thee do , 
▁ xxmaj were all thy children kind and natural ! 
▁ xxmaj but see thy fault ! xxmaj france hath in thee found out 
▁ a nest of hollow bosoms , which he fills 
▁ xxmaj with treacherous crowns ; and three corrupted men- 
▁ xxmaj one , xxmaj richard xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , and the second , 
▁ xxmaj henry xxmaj lord xxmaj scroop of xxmaj masham , and the third , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj grey , knight , of xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj have , for the gilt of xxmaj france- o guilt indeed!- 
▁ xxmaj confirm'd conspiracy with fearful xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj and by their hands this grace of kings must die- 
▁ xxmaj if hell and treason hold their promises , 
▁ xxmaj ere he take ship for xxmaj france- and in xxmaj southampton . 
▁ xxmaj linger your patience on , and we 'll digest 
▁ xxmaj th ' abuse of distance , force a play . 
▁ xxmaj the sum is paid , the traitors are agreed , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is set from xxmaj london , and the scene 
▁ xxmaj is now transported , gentles , to xxmaj southampton ; 
▁ xxmaj there is the play - house now , there must you sit , 
▁ xxmaj and thence to xxmaj france shall we convey you safe 
▁ xxmaj and bring you back , charming the narrow seas 
▁ xxmaj to give you gentle pass ; for , if we may , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll not offend one stomach with our play . 
▁ xxmaj but , till the xxmaj king come forth , and not till then , 
▁ xxmaj unto xxmaj southampton do we shift our scene . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj before the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head xxmaj tavern , xxmaj eastcheap 

 xxmaj enter xxup corporal xxup nym and xxup lieutenant xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj well met , xxmaj corporal xxmaj nym . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj lieutenant xxmaj bardolph . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj what , are xxmaj ancient xxmaj pistol and you friends yet ? 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj for my part , i care not ; i say little , but when time shall 
▁ serve , there shall be smiles- but that shall be as it may . i dare 
▁ not fight ; but i will wink and hold out mine iron . xxmaj it is a simple 
▁ one ; but what though ? xxmaj it will toast cheese , and it will endure 
▁ cold as another man 's sword will ; and there 's an end . 
▁ xxup bardolph . i will bestow a breakfast to make you friends ; and we 'll 
▁ be all three sworn brothers to xxmaj france . xxmaj let't be so , good xxmaj corporal 
▁ xxmaj nym . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj faith , i will live so long as i may , that 's the certain of it ; 
▁ and when i can not live any longer , i will do as i may . xxmaj that is my 
▁ rest , that is the rendezvous of it . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj it is certain , xxmaj corporal , that he is married to xxmaj nell 
▁ xxmaj quickly ; and certainly she did you wrong , for you were 
▁ troth - plight to her . 
▁ xxup nym . i can not tell ; things must be as they may . xxmaj men may sleep , and 
▁ they may have their throats about them at that time ; and some say 
▁ knives have edges . xxmaj it must be as it may ; though patience be a 
▁ tired mare , yet she will plod . xxmaj there must be conclusions . xxmaj well , i 
▁ can not tell . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pistol and xxup hostess 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj here comes xxmaj ancient xxmaj pistol and his wife . xxmaj good xxmaj corporal , be 
▁ patient here . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj how now , mine host xxmaj pistol ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj base tike , call'st thou me host ? 
▁ xxmaj now by this hand , i swear i scorn the term ; 
▁ xxmaj nor shall my xxmaj nell keep lodgers . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj no , by my troth , not long ; for we can not lodge and board a 
▁ dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of 
▁ their needles , but it will be thought we keep a bawdy - house 
▁ straight . [ nym draws ] o well - a - day , xxmaj lady , if he be not drawn ! xxmaj now 
▁ we shall see wilful adultery and murder committed . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj good xxmaj lieutenant , good xxmaj corporal , offer nothing here . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj pish ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj pish for thee , xxmaj iceland dog ! thou prick - ear'd cur of 
▁ xxmaj iceland ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj good xxmaj corporal xxmaj nym , show thy valour , and put up your sword . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj will you shog off ? i would have you solus . 
▁ xxup pistol . ' solus , ' egregious dog ? o viper vile ! 
▁ xxmaj the ' solus ' in thy most mervailous face ; 
▁ xxmaj the ' solus ' in thy teeth , and in thy throat , 
▁ xxmaj and in thy hateful lungs , yea , in thy maw , perdy ; 
▁ xxmaj and , which is worse , within thy nasty mouth ! 
▁ i do retort the ' solus ' in thy bowels ; 
▁ xxmaj for i can take , and xxmaj pistol 's cock is up , 
▁ xxmaj and flashing fire will follow . 
▁ xxup nym . i am not xxmaj barbason : you can not conjure me . i have an humour to 
▁ knock you indifferently well . xxmaj if you grow foul with me , xxmaj pistol , i 
▁ will scour you with my rapier , as i may , in fair terms ; if you 
▁ would walk off i would prick your guts a little , in good terms , 
▁ as i may , and thaes the humour of it . 
▁ xxup pistol . o braggart vile and damned furious wight ! 
▁ xxmaj the grave doth gape and doting death is near ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore exhale . [ pistol draws ] 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj hear me , hear me what i say : he that strikes the first 
▁ stroke xxmaj i 'll run him up to the hilts , as i am a soldier . 
▁ [ draws ] 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj an oath of mickle might ; and fury shall abate . 
▁ [ pistol and xxmaj nym sheathe their swords ] 
▁ xxmaj give me thy fist , thy fore - foot to me give ; 
▁ xxmaj thy spirits are most tall . 
▁ xxup nym . i will cut thy throat one time or other , in fair terms ; that 
▁ is the humour of it . 
▁ xxup pistol . ' couple a gorge ! ' 
▁ xxmaj that is the word . i thee defy again . 
▁ o hound of xxmaj crete , think'st thou my spouse to get ? 
▁ xxmaj no ; to the spital go , 
▁ xxmaj and from the powd'ring tub of infamy 
▁ xxmaj fetch forth the lazar kite of xxmaj cressid 's kind , 
▁ xxmaj doll xxmaj tearsheet she by name , and her espouse . 
▁ i have , and i will hold , the quondam xxmaj quickly 
▁ xxmaj for the only she ; and- pauca , there 's enough . 
▁ xxmaj go to . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj boy 

▁ xxup boy . xxmaj mine host xxmaj pistol , you must come to my master ; and your 
▁ hostess- he is very sick , and would to bed . xxmaj good xxmaj bardolph , put 
▁ thy face between his sheets , and do the office of a warming - pan . 
▁ xxmaj faith , he 's very ill . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj away , you rogue . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj by my troth , he 'll yield the crow a pudding one of these 
▁ days : the xxmaj king has kill'd his heart . xxmaj good husband , come home 
▁ presently . xxmaj exeunt xxup hostess and xxup boy 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj come , shall i make you two friends ? xxmaj we must to xxmaj france 
▁ together ; why the devil should we keep knives to cut one 
▁ another 's throats ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj let floods o'erswell , and fiends for food howl on ! 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj you 'll pay me the eight shillings i won of you at betting ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj base is the slave that pays . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj that now i will have ; that 's the humour of it . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj as manhood shall compound : push home . 
▁ [ pistol and xxmaj nym draw ] 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj by this sword , he that makes the first thrust xxmaj i 'll kill 
▁ him ; by this sword , i will . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj sword is an oath , and oaths must have their course . 
▁ [ sheathes his sword ] 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj corporal xxmaj nym , an thou wilt be friends , be friends ; an 
▁ thou wilt not , why then be enemies with me too . xxmaj prithee put up . 
▁ xxup nym . i shall have my eight shillings i won of you at betting ? 
▁ xxup pistol . a noble shalt thou have , and present pay ; 
▁ xxmaj and liquor likewise will i give to thee , 
▁ xxmaj and friendship shall combine , and brotherhood . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll live by xxmaj nym and xxmaj nym shall live by me . 
▁ xxmaj is not this just ? xxmaj for i shall sutler be 
▁ xxmaj unto the camp , and profits will accrue . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand . 
▁ xxup nym . [ sheathing his sword ] i shall have my noble ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj in cash most justly paid . 
▁ xxup nym . [ shaking hands ] xxmaj well , then , that 's the humour of't . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup hostess 

▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj as ever you come of women , come in quickly to xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj ah , poor heart ! he is so shak'd of a burning quotidian tertian 
▁ that it is most lamentable to behold . xxmaj sweet men , come to him . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath run bad humours on the knight ; that 's the even 
▁ of it . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj nym , thou hast spoke the right ; 
▁ xxmaj his heart is fracted and corroborate . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj the xxmaj king is a good king , but it must be as it may ; he passes 
▁ some humours and careers . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj let us condole the knight ; for , lambkins , we will live . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj southampton . a council - chamber 

 xxmaj enter xxup exeter , xxup bedford , and xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj fore xxmaj god , his xxmaj grace is bold , to trust these traitors . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj they shall be apprehended by and by . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj how smooth and even they do bear themselves , 
▁ xxmaj as if allegiance in their bosoms sat , 
▁ xxmaj crowned with faith and constant loyalty ! 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath note of all that they intend , 
▁ xxmaj by interception which they dream not of . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj nay , but the man that was his bedfellow , 
▁ xxmaj whom he hath dull'd and cloy'd with gracious favours- 
▁ xxmaj that he should , for a foreign purse , so sell 
▁ xxmaj his sovereign 's life to death and treachery ! 

▁ xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup scroop , 
▁ xxup cambridge , xxup grey , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj now sits the wind fair , and we will aboard . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj cambridge , and my kind xxmaj lord of xxmaj masham , 
▁ xxmaj and you , my gentle knight , give me your thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj think you not that the pow'rs we bear with us 
▁ xxmaj will cut their passage through the force of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj doing the execution and the act 
▁ xxmaj for which we have in head assembled them ? 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj no doubt , my liege , if each man do his best . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i doubt not that , since we are well persuaded 
▁ xxmaj we carry not a heart with us from hence 
▁ xxmaj that grows not in a fair consent with ours ; 
▁ xxmaj nor leave not one behind that doth not wish 
▁ xxmaj success and conquest to attend on us . 
▁ xxup cambridge . xxmaj never was monarch better fear'd and lov'd 
▁ xxmaj than is your xxmaj majesty . xxmaj there 's not , i think , a subject 
▁ xxmaj that sits in heart - grief and uneasines 
▁ xxmaj under the sweet shade of your government . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj true : those that were your father 's enemies 
▁ xxmaj have steep'd their galls in honey , and do serve you 
▁ xxmaj with hearts create of duty and of zeal . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we therefore have great cause of thankfulness , 
▁ xxmaj and shall forget the office of our hand 
▁ xxmaj sooner than quittance of desert and merit 
▁ xxmaj according to the weight and worthiness . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj so service shall with steeled sinews toil , 
▁ xxmaj and labour shall refresh itself with hope , 
▁ xxmaj to do your xxmaj grace incessant services . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we judge no less . xxmaj uncle of xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj enlarge the man committed yesterday 
▁ xxmaj that rail'd against our person . xxmaj we consider 
▁ xxmaj it was excess of wine that set him on ; 
▁ xxmaj and on his more advice we pardon him . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj that 's mercy , but too much security . 
▁ xxmaj let him be punish'd , sovereign , lest example 
▁ xxmaj breed , by his sufferance , more of such a kind . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxup o , let us yet be merciful ! 
▁ xxup cambridge . xxmaj so may your xxmaj highness , and yet punish too . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj you show great mercy if you give him life , 
▁ xxmaj after the taste of much correction . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj alas , your too much love and care of me 
▁ xxmaj are heavy orisons ' gainst this poor wretch ! 
▁ xxmaj if little faults proceeding on distemper 
▁ xxmaj shall not be wink'd at , how shall we stretch our eye 
▁ xxmaj when capital crimes , chew'd , swallow'd , and digested , 
▁ xxmaj appear before us ? xxmaj we 'll yet enlarge that man , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj cambridge , xxmaj scroop , and xxmaj grey , in their dear care 
▁ xxmaj and tender preservation of our person , 
▁ xxmaj would have him punish'd . xxmaj and now to our xxmaj french causes : 
▁ xxmaj who are the late commissioners ? 
▁ xxup cambridge . i one , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness bade me ask for it to - day . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj so did you me , my liege . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj and xxup i , my royal sovereign . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj then , xxmaj richard xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , there is yours ; 
▁ xxmaj there yours , xxmaj lord xxmaj scroop of xxmaj masham ; and , xxmaj sir xxmaj knight , 
▁ xxmaj grey of xxmaj northumberland , this same is yours . 
▁ xxmaj read them , and know i know your worthiness . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland , and uncle xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj we will aboard to - night . xxmaj why , how now , gentlemen ? 
▁ xxmaj what see you in those papers , that you lose 
▁ xxmaj so much complexion ? xxmaj look ye how they change ! 
▁ xxmaj their cheeks are paper . xxmaj why , what read you there 
▁ xxmaj that have so cowarded and chas'd your blood 
▁ xxmaj out of appearance ? 
▁ xxup cambridge . i do confess my fault , 
▁ xxmaj and do submit me to your xxmaj highness ' mercy . 
▁ xxup grey , xxup scroop . xxmaj to which we all appeal . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj the mercy that was quick in us but late 
▁ xxmaj by your own counsel is suppress'd and kill'd . 
▁ xxmaj you must not dare , for shame , to talk of mercy ; 
▁ xxmaj for your own reasons turn into your bosoms 
▁ xxmaj as dogs upon their masters , worrying you . 
▁ xxmaj see you , my princes and my noble peers , 
▁ xxmaj these xxmaj english monsters ! xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj cambridge here- 
▁ xxmaj you know how apt our love was to accord 
▁ xxmaj to furnish him with an appertinents 
▁ xxmaj belonging to his honour ; and this man 
▁ xxmaj hath , for a few light crowns , lightly conspir'd , 
▁ xxmaj and sworn unto the practices of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj to kill us here in xxmaj hampton ; to the which 
▁ xxmaj this knight , no less for bounty bound to us 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj cambridge is , hath likewise sworn . xxmaj but , xxup o , 
▁ xxmaj what shall i say to thee , xxmaj lord xxmaj scroop , thou cruel , 
▁ xxmaj ingrateful , savage , and inhuman creature ? 
▁ xxmaj thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels , 
▁ xxmaj that knew'st the very bottom of my soul , 
▁ xxmaj that almost mightst have coin'd me into gold , 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou have practis'd on me for thy use- 
▁ xxmaj may it be possible that foreign hire 
▁ xxmaj could out of thee extract one spark of evil 
▁ xxmaj that might annoy my finger ? ' tis so strange 
▁ xxmaj that , though the truth of it stands off as gross 
▁ xxmaj as black and white , my eye will scarcely see it . 
▁ xxmaj treason and murder ever kept together , 
▁ xxmaj as two yoke - devils sworn to either 's purpose , 
▁ xxmaj working so grossly in a natural cause 
▁ xxmaj that admiration did not whoop at them ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou , ' gainst all proportion , didst bring in 
▁ xxmaj wonder to wait on treason and on murder ; 
▁ xxmaj and whatsoever cunning fiend it was 
▁ xxmaj that wrought upon thee so preposterously 
▁ xxmaj hath got the voice in hell for excellence ; 
▁ xxmaj and other devils that suggest by treasons 
▁ xxmaj do botch and bungle up damnation 
▁ xxmaj with patches , colours , and with forms , being fetch'd 
▁ xxmaj from glist'ring semblances of piety ; 
▁ xxmaj but he that temper'd thee bade thee stand up , 
▁ xxmaj gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason , 
▁ xxmaj unless to dub thee with the name of traitor . 
▁ xxmaj if that same demon that hath gull'd thee thus 
▁ xxmaj should with his lion gait walk the whole world , 
▁ xxmaj he might return to vasty xxmaj tartar back , 
▁ xxmaj and tell the legions ' i can never win 
▁ a soul so easy as that xxmaj englishman 's . ' 
▁ xxup o , how hast thou with jealousy infected 
▁ xxmaj the sweetness of affiance ! xxmaj show men dutiful ? 
▁ xxmaj why , so didst thou . xxmaj seem they grave and learned ? 
▁ xxmaj why , so didst thou . xxmaj come they of noble family ? 
▁ xxmaj why , so didst thou . xxmaj seem they religious ? 
▁ xxmaj why , so didst thou . xxmaj or are they spare in diet , 
▁ xxmaj free from gross passion or of mirth or anger , 
▁ xxmaj constant in spirit , not swerving with the blood , 
▁ xxmaj garnish'd and deck'd in modest complement , 
▁ xxmaj not working with the eye without the ear , 
▁ xxmaj and but in purged judgment trusting neither ? 
▁ xxmaj such and so finely bolted didst thou seem ; 
▁ xxmaj and thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot 
▁ xxmaj to mark the full - fraught man and best indued 
▁ xxmaj with some suspicion . i will weep for thee ; 
▁ xxmaj for this revolt of thine , methinks , is like 
▁ xxmaj another fall of man . xxmaj their faults are open . 
▁ xxmaj arrest them to the answer of the law ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj god acquit them of their practices ! 
▁ xxup exeter . i arrest thee of high treason , by the name of xxmaj richard xxmaj earl 
▁ of xxmaj cambridge . 
▁ i arrest thee of high treason , by the name of xxmaj henry xxmaj lord xxmaj scroop 
▁ of xxmaj masham . 
▁ i arrest thee of high treason , by the name of xxmaj thomas xxmaj grey , 
▁ knight , of xxmaj northumberland . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj our purposes xxmaj god justly hath discover'd , 
▁ xxmaj and i repent my fault more than my death ; 
▁ xxmaj which i beseech your xxmaj highness to forgive , 
▁ xxmaj although my body pay the price of it . 
▁ xxup cambridge . xxmaj for me , the gold of xxmaj france did not seduce , 
▁ xxmaj although i did admit it as a motive 
▁ xxmaj the sooner to effect what i intended ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj god be thanked for prevention , 
▁ xxmaj which i in sufferance heartily will rejoice , 
▁ xxmaj beseeching xxmaj god and you to pardon me . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj never did faithful subject more rejoice 
▁ xxmaj at the discovery of most dangerous treason 
▁ xxmaj than i do at this hour joy o'er myself , 
▁ xxmaj prevented from a damned enterprise . 
▁ xxmaj my fault , but not my body , pardon , sovereign . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj god quit you in his mercy ! xxmaj hear your sentence . 
▁ xxmaj you have conspir'd against our royal person , 
▁ xxmaj join'd with an enemy proclaim'd , and from his coffers 
▁ xxmaj receiv'd the golden earnest of our death ; 
▁ xxmaj wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter , 
▁ xxmaj his princes and his peers to servitude , 
▁ xxmaj his subjects to oppression and contempt , 
▁ xxmaj and his whole kingdom into desolation . 
▁ xxmaj touching our person seek we no revenge ; 
▁ xxmaj but we our kingdom 's safety must so tender , 
▁ xxmaj whose ruin you have sought , that to her laws 
▁ xxmaj we do deliver you . xxmaj get you therefore hence , 
▁ xxmaj poor miserable wretches , to your death ; 
▁ xxmaj the taste whereof xxmaj god of his mercy give 
▁ xxmaj you patience to endure , and true repentance 
▁ xxmaj of all your dear offences . xxmaj bear them hence . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cambridge , xxup scroop , and xxup grey , guarded 
▁ xxmaj now , lords , for xxmaj france ; the enterprise whereof 
▁ xxmaj shall be to you as us like glorious . 
▁ xxmaj we doubt not of a fair and lucky war , 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj god so graciously hath brought to light 
▁ xxmaj this dangerous treason , lurking in our way 
▁ xxmaj to hinder our beginnings ; we doubt not now 
▁ xxmaj but every rub is smoothed on our way . 
▁ xxmaj then , forth , dear countrymen ; let us deliver 
▁ xxmaj our puissance into the hand of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj putting it straight in expedition . 
▁ xxmaj cheerly to sea ; the signs of war advance ; 
▁ xxmaj no king of xxmaj england , if not king of xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj eastcheap . xxmaj before the xxmaj boar 's xxmaj head tavern 

 xxmaj enter xxup pistol , xxup hostess , xxup nym , xxup bardolph , and xxmaj boy 

▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj prithee , honey - sweet husband , let me bring thee to 
▁ xxmaj staines . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj no ; for my manly heart doth earn . 
▁ xxmaj bardolph , be blithe ; xxmaj nym , rouse thy vaunting veins ; 
▁ xxmaj boy , bristle thy courage up . xxmaj for xxmaj falstaff he is dead , 
▁ xxmaj and we must earn therefore . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj would i were with him , wheresome'er he is , either in 
▁ heaven or in hell ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj nay , sure , he 's not in hell : he 's in xxmaj arthur 's bosom , if 
▁ ever man went to xxmaj arthur 's bosom . ' a made a finer end , and went 
▁ away an it had been any christom child ; ' a parted ev'n just 
▁ between twelve and one , ev'n at the turning o ' th ' tide ; for 
▁ after i saw him fumble with the sheets , and play with flowers , 
▁ and smile upon his fingers ' end , i knew there was but one way ; 
▁ for his nose was as sharp as a pen , and ' a babbl'd of green 
▁ fields . ' how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! ' quoth i ' what , man , be o ' good 
▁ cheer . ' xxmaj so ' a cried out ' god , xxmaj god , xxmaj god ! ' three or four times . xxmaj now 
▁ xxup i , to comfort him , bid him ' a should not think of xxmaj god ; i hop'd 
▁ there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet . 
▁ xxmaj so ' a bade me lay more clothes on his feet ; i put my hand into 
▁ the bed and felt them , and they were as cold as any stone ; then i 
▁ felt to his knees , and so upward and upward , and all was as cold 
▁ as any stone . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj they say he cried out of sack . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj ay , that ' a did . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj and of women . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj nay , that ' a did not . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj yes , that ' a did , and said they were devils incarnate . 
▁ xxup hostess . ' a could never abide carnation ; ' twas a colour he never 
▁ liked . 
▁ xxup boy . ' a said once the devil would have him about women . 
▁ xxup hostess . ' a did in some sort , indeed , handle women ; but then he was 
▁ rheumatic , and talk'd of the xxmaj whore of xxmaj babylon . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj do you not remember ' a saw a flea stick upon xxmaj bardolph 's nose , 
▁ and ' a said it was a black soul burning in hell ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj well , the fuel is gone that maintain'd that fire : that 's 
▁ all the riches i got in his service . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj shall we shog ? xxmaj the xxmaj king will be gone from xxmaj southampton . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj come , let 's away . xxmaj my love , give me thy lips . 
▁ xxmaj look to my chattles and my moveables ; 
▁ xxmaj let senses rule . xxmaj the word is ' pitch and xxmaj pay . ' 
▁ xxmaj trust none ; 
▁ xxmaj for oaths are straws , men 's faiths are wafer - cakes , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj holdfast is the only dog , my duck . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , xxmaj caveto be thy counsellor . 
▁ xxmaj go , clear thy crystals . xxmaj yoke - fellows in arms , 
▁ xxmaj let us to xxmaj france , like horse - leeches , my boys , 
▁ xxmaj to suck , to suck , the very blood to suck . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj and that 's but unwholesome food , they say . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj touch her soft mouth and march . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj farewell , hostess . [ kissing her ] 
▁ xxup nym . i can not kiss , that is the humour of it ; but adieu . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj let housewifery appear ; keep close , i thee command . 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj farewell ; adieu . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj france . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter the xxup french xxup king , the xxup dauphin , the xxup dukes xxup of xxup berri 
 and xxup britaine , the xxup constable , and others 

▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj thus comes the xxmaj english with full power upon us ; 
▁ xxmaj and more than carefully it us concerns 
▁ xxmaj to answer royally in our defences . 
▁ xxmaj therefore the xxmaj dukes of xxmaj berri and of xxmaj britaine , 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj brabant and of xxmaj orleans , shall make forth , 
▁ xxmaj and you , xxmaj prince xxmaj dauphin , with all swift dispatch , 
▁ xxmaj to line and new repair our towns of war 
▁ xxmaj with men of courage and with means defendant ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj england his approaches makes as fierce 
▁ xxmaj as waters to the sucking of a gulf . 
▁ xxmaj it fits us , then , to be as provident 
▁ xxmaj as fear may teach us , out of late examples 
▁ xxmaj left by the fatal and neglected xxmaj english 
▁ xxmaj upon our fields . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj my most redoubted father , 
▁ xxmaj it is most meet we arm us ' gainst the foe ; 
▁ xxmaj for peace itself should not so dull a kingdom , 
▁ xxmaj though war nor no known quarrel were in question , 
▁ xxmaj but that defences , musters , preparations , 
▁ xxmaj should be maintain'd , assembled , and collected , 
▁ xxmaj as were a war in expectation . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , i say , ' tis meet we all go forth 
▁ xxmaj to view the sick and feeble parts of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us do it with no show of fear- 
▁ xxmaj no , with no more than if we heard that xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj were busied with a xxmaj whitsun morris - dance ; 
▁ xxmaj for , my good liege , she is so idly king'd , 
▁ xxmaj her sceptre so fantastically borne 
▁ xxmaj by a vain , giddy , shallow , humorous youth , 
▁ xxmaj that fear attends her not . 
▁ xxup constable . o peace , xxmaj prince xxmaj dauphin ! 
▁ xxmaj you are too much mistaken in this king . 
▁ xxmaj question your xxmaj grace the late ambassadors 
▁ xxmaj with what great state he heard their embassy , 
▁ xxmaj how well supplied with noble counsellors , 
▁ xxmaj how modest in exception , and withal 
▁ xxmaj how terrible in constant resolution , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall find his vanities forespent 
▁ xxmaj were but the outside of the xxmaj roman xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj covering discretion with a coat of folly ; 
▁ xxmaj as gardeners do with ordure hide those roots 
▁ xxmaj that shall first spring and be most delicate . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj well , ' tis not so , my xxmaj lord xxmaj high xxmaj constable ; 
▁ xxmaj but though we think it so , it is no matter . 
▁ xxmaj in cases of defence ' tis best to weigh 
▁ xxmaj the enemy more mighty than he seems ; 
▁ xxmaj so the proportions of defence are fill'd ; 
▁ xxmaj which of a weak and niggardly projection 
▁ xxmaj doth like a miser spoil his coat with scanting 
▁ a little cloth . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj think we xxmaj king xxmaj harry strong ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj princes , look you strongly arm to meet him . 
▁ xxmaj the kindred of him hath been flesh'd upon us ; 
▁ xxmaj and he is bred out of that bloody strain 
▁ xxmaj that haunted us in our familiar paths . 
▁ xxmaj witness our too much memorable shame 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj cressy battle fatally was struck , 
▁ xxmaj and all our princes capdv'd by the hand 
▁ xxmaj of that black name , xxmaj edward , xxmaj black xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales ; 
▁ xxmaj whiles that his mountain sire- on mountain standing , 
▁ xxmaj up in the air , crown'd with the golden sun- 
▁ xxmaj saw his heroical seed , and smil'd to see him , 
▁ xxmaj mangle the work of nature , and deface 
▁ xxmaj the patterns that by xxmaj god and by xxmaj french fathers 
▁ xxmaj had twenty years been made . xxmaj this is a stern 
▁ xxmaj of that victorious stock ; and let us fear 
▁ xxmaj the native mightiness and fate of him . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj ambassadors from xxmaj harry xxmaj king of xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj do crave admittance to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj we 'll give them present audience . xxmaj go and bring them . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup messenger and certain xxup lords 
▁ xxmaj you see this chase is hotly followed , friends . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj turn head and stop pursuit ; for coward dogs 
▁ xxmaj most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten 
▁ xxmaj runs far before them . xxmaj good my sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj take up the xxmaj english short , and let them know 
▁ xxmaj of what a monarchy you are the head . 
▁ xxmaj self - love , my liege , is not so vile a sin 
▁ xxmaj as self - neglecting . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lords , with xxup exeter and train 

▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj from our brother of xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj from him , and thus he greets your xxmaj majesty : 
▁ xxmaj he wills you , in the name of xxmaj god xxmaj almighty , 
▁ xxmaj that you divest yourself , and lay apart 
▁ xxmaj the borrowed glories that by gift of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj by law of nature and of nations , ' longs 
▁ xxmaj to him and to his heirs- namely , the crown , 
▁ xxmaj and all wide - stretched honours that pertain , 
▁ xxmaj by custom and the ordinance of times , 
▁ xxmaj unto the crown of xxmaj france . xxmaj that you may know 
▁ ' tis no sinister nor no awkward claim , 
▁ xxmaj pick'd from the worm - holes of long - vanish'd days , 
▁ xxmaj nor from the dust of old oblivion rak'd , 
▁ xxmaj he sends you this most memorable line , [ gives a paper ] 
▁ xxmaj in every branch truly demonstrative ; 
▁ xxmaj willing you overlook this pedigree . 
▁ xxmaj and when you find him evenly deriv'd 
▁ xxmaj from his most fam'd of famous ancestors , 
▁ xxmaj edward the xxmaj third , he bids you then resign 
▁ xxmaj your crown and kingdom , indirectly held 
▁ xxmaj from him , the native and true challenger . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj or else what follows ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj bloody constraint ; for if you hide the crown 
▁ xxmaj even in your hearts , there will he rake for it . 
▁ xxmaj therefore in fierce tempest is he coming , 
▁ xxmaj in thunder and in earthquake , like a xxmaj jove , 
▁ xxmaj that if requiring fail , he will compel ; 
▁ xxmaj and bids you , in the bowels of the xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxmaj deliver up the crown ; and to take mercy 
▁ xxmaj on the poor souls for whom this hungry war 
▁ xxmaj opens his vasty jaws ; and on your head 
▁ xxmaj turning the widows ' tears , the orphans ' cries , 
▁ xxmaj the dead men 's blood , the privy maidens ' groans , 
▁ xxmaj for husbands , fathers , and betrothed lovers , 
▁ xxmaj that shall be swallowed in this controversy . 
▁ xxmaj this is his claim , his threat'ning , and my message ; 
▁ xxmaj unless the xxmaj dauphin be in presence here , 
▁ xxmaj to whom expressly i bring greeting too . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj for us , we will consider of this further ; 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow shall you bear our full intent 
▁ xxmaj back to our brother of xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj for the xxmaj dauphin : 
▁ i stand here for him . xxmaj what to him from xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj scorn and defiance , slight regard , contempt , 
▁ xxmaj and anything that may not misbecome 
▁ xxmaj the mighty sender , doth he prize you at . 
▁ xxmaj thus says my king : an if your father 's xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj do not , in grant of all demands at large , 
▁ xxmaj sweeten the bitter mock you sent his xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll call you to so hot an answer of it 
▁ xxmaj that caves and womby vaultages of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj shall chide your trespass and return your mock 
▁ xxmaj in second accent of his ordinance . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj say , if my father render fair return , 
▁ xxmaj it is against my will ; for i desire 
▁ xxmaj nothing but odds with xxmaj england . xxmaj to that end , 
▁ xxmaj as matching to his youth and vanity , 
▁ i did present him with the xxmaj paris balls . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj he 'll make your xxmaj paris xxmaj louvre shake for it , 
▁ xxmaj were it the mistress court of mighty xxmaj europe ; 
▁ xxmaj and be assur'd you 'll find a difference , 
▁ xxmaj as we his subjects have in wonder found , 
▁ xxmaj between the promise of his greener days 
▁ xxmaj and these he masters now . xxmaj now he weighs time 
▁ xxmaj even to the utmost grain ; that you shall read 
▁ xxmaj in your own losses , if he stay in xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj to - morrow shall you know our mind at full . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj dispatch us with all speed , lest that our king 
▁ xxmaj come here himself to question our delay ; 
▁ xxmaj for he is footed in this land already . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj you shall be soon dispatch'd with fair conditions . 
▁ a night is but small breath and little pause 
▁ xxmaj to answer matters of this consequence . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup prologue . 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup chorus 

▁ xxup chorus . xxmaj thus with imagin'd wing our swift scene flies , 
▁ xxmaj in motion of no less celerity 
▁ xxmaj than that of thought . xxmaj suppose that you have seen 
▁ xxmaj the well - appointed xxmaj king at xxmaj hampton pier 
▁ xxmaj embark his royalty ; and his brave fleet 
▁ xxmaj with silken streamers the young xxmaj phorbus fanning . 
▁ xxmaj play with your fancies ; and in them behold 
▁ xxmaj upon the hempen tackle ship - boys climbing ; 
▁ xxmaj hear the shrill whistle which doth order give 
▁ xxmaj to sounds confus'd ; behold the threaden sails , 
▁ xxmaj borne with th ' invisible and creeping wind , 
▁ xxmaj draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea , 
▁ xxmaj breasting the lofty surge . xxup o , do but think 
▁ xxmaj you stand upon the rivage and behold 
▁ a city on th ' inconstant billows dancing ; 
▁ xxmaj for so appears this fleet majestical , 
▁ xxmaj holding due course to xxmaj harfleur . xxmaj follow , follow ! 
▁ xxmaj grapple your minds to sternage of this navy 
▁ xxmaj and leave your xxmaj england as dead midnight still , 
▁ xxmaj guarded with grandsires , babies , and old women , 
▁ xxmaj either past or not arriv'd to pith and puissance ; 
▁ xxmaj for who is he whose chin is but enrich'd 
▁ xxmaj with one appearing hair that will not follow 
▁ xxmaj these cull'd and choice - drawn cavaliers to xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxmaj work , work your thoughts , and therein see a siege ; 
▁ xxmaj behold the ordnance on their carriages , 
▁ xxmaj with fatal mouths gaping on girded xxmaj harfleur . 
▁ xxmaj suppose th ' ambassador from the xxmaj french comes back ; 
▁ xxmaj tells xxmaj harry that the xxmaj king doth offer him 
▁ xxmaj katherine his daughter , and with her to dowry 
▁ xxmaj some petty and unprofitable dukedoms . 
▁ xxmaj the offer likes not ; and the nimble gunner 
▁ xxmaj with linstock now the devilish cannon touches , 
▁ [ alarum , and chambers go off ] 
▁ xxmaj and down goes an before them . xxmaj still be kind , 
▁ xxmaj and eke out our performance with your mind . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj france . xxmaj before xxmaj harfleur 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup exeter , xxup bedford , xxup gloucester , 
 and soldiers with scaling - ladders 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj once more unto the breach , dear friends , once more ; 
▁ xxmaj or close the wall up with our xxmaj english dead . 
▁ xxmaj in peace there 's nothing so becomes a man 
▁ xxmaj as modest stillness and humility ; 
▁ xxmaj but when the blast of war blows in our ears , 
▁ xxmaj then imitate the action of the tiger : 
▁ xxmaj stiffen the sinews , summon up the blood , 
▁ xxmaj disguise fair nature with hard - favour'd rage ; 
▁ xxmaj then lend the eye a terrible aspect ; 
▁ xxmaj let it pry through the portage of the head 
▁ xxmaj like the brass cannon : let the brow o'erwhelm it 
▁ xxmaj as fearfully as doth a galled rock 
▁ xxmaj o'erhang and jutty his confounded base , 
▁ xxmaj swill'd with the wild and wasteful ocean . 
▁ xxmaj now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide ; 
▁ xxmaj hold hard the breath , and bend up every spirit 
▁ xxmaj to his full height . xxmaj on , on , you noblest xxmaj english , 
▁ xxmaj whose blood is fet from fathers of war - proof- 
▁ xxmaj fathers that like so many xxmaj alexanders 
▁ xxmaj have in these parts from morn till even fought , 
▁ xxmaj and sheath'd their swords for lack of argument . 
▁ xxmaj dishonour not your mothers ; now attest 
▁ xxmaj that those whom you call'd fathers did beget you . 
▁ xxmaj be copy now to men of grosser blood , 
▁ xxmaj and teach them how to war . xxmaj and you , good yeomen , 
▁ xxmaj whose limbs were made in xxmaj england , show us here 
▁ xxmaj the mettle of your pasture ; let us swear 
▁ xxmaj that you are worth your breeding- which i doubt not ; 
▁ xxmaj for there is none of you so mean and base 
▁ xxmaj that hath not noble lustre in your eyes . 
▁ i see you stand like greyhounds in the slips , 
▁ xxmaj straining upon the start . xxmaj the game 's afoot : 
▁ xxmaj follow your spirit ; and upon this charge 
▁ xxmaj cry ' god for xxmaj harry , xxmaj england , and xxmaj saint xxmaj george ! ' 
▁ [ exeunt . xxmaj alarum , and chambers go off ] 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj harfleur 

 xxmaj enter xxup nym , xxup bardolph , xxup pistol , and xxup boy 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj on , on , on , on , on ! to the breach , to the breach ! 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj pray thee , xxmaj corporal , stay ; the knocks are too hot , and for 
▁ mine own part i have not a case of lives . xxmaj the humour of it is too 
▁ hot ; that is the very plain - song of it . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj the plain - song is most just ; for humours do abound : 

▁ xxmaj knocks go and come ; xxmaj god 's vassals drop and die ; 
▁ xxmaj and sword and shield 
▁ xxmaj in bloody field 
▁ xxmaj doth win immortal fame . 

▁ xxup boy . xxmaj would i were in an alehouse in xxmaj london ! i wouid give all my 
▁ fame for a pot of ale and safety . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj and xxup i : 

▁ xxmaj if wishes would prevail with me , 
▁ xxmaj my purpose should not fail with me , 
▁ xxmaj but thither would i hie . 

▁ xxup boy . xxmaj as duly , but not as truly , 
▁ xxmaj as bird doth sing on bough . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup fluellen 

▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj up to the breach , you dogs ! 
▁ xxmaj avaunt , you cullions ! [ driving them forward ] 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj be merciful , great duke , to men of mould . 
▁ xxmaj abate thy rage , abate thy manly rage ; 
▁ xxmaj abate thy rage , great duke . 
▁ xxmaj good bawcock , bate thy rage . xxmaj use lenity , sweet chuck . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj these be good humours . xxmaj your honour wins bad humours . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup boy 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj as young as i am , i have observ'd these three swashers . i am 
▁ boy to them all three ; but all they three , though they would 
▁ serve me , could not be man to me ; for indeed three such antics do 
▁ not amount to a man . xxmaj for xxmaj bardolph , he is white - liver'd and 
▁ red - fac'd ; by the means whereof ' a faces it out , but fights not . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj pistol , he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword ; by the 
▁ means whereof ' a breaks words and keeps whole weapons . xxmaj for xxmaj nym , 
▁ he hath heard that men of few words are the best men , and 
▁ therefore he scorns to say his prayers lest ' a should be thought 
▁ a coward ; but his few bad words are match'd with as few good 
▁ deeds ; for ' a never broke any man 's head but his own , and that 
▁ was against a post when he was drunk . xxmaj they will steal anything , 
▁ and call it purchase . xxmaj bardolph stole a lute - case , bore it twelve 
▁ leagues , and sold it for three halfpence . xxmaj nym and xxmaj bardolph are 
▁ sworn brothers in filching , and in xxmaj calais they stole a 
▁ fire - shovel ; i knew by that piece of service the men would carry 
▁ coals . xxmaj they would have me as familiar with men 's pockets as their 
▁ gloves or their handkerchers ; which makes much against my 
▁ manhood , if i should take from another 's pocket to put into mine ; 
▁ for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs . i must leave them and 
▁ seek some better service ; their villainy goes against my weak 
▁ stomach , and therefore i must cast it up . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup fluellen , xxup gower following 

▁ xxup gower . xxmaj captain xxmaj fluellen , you must come presently to the mines ; the 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester would speak with you . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj to the mines ! xxmaj tell you the xxmaj duke it is not so good to come 
▁ to the mines ; for , look you , the mines is not according to the 
▁ disciplines of the war ; the concavities of it is not sufficient . 
▁ xxmaj for , look you , th ' athversary- you may discuss unto the xxmaj duke , 
▁ look you- is digt himself four yard under the countermines ; by 
▁ xxmaj cheshu , i think ' a will plow up all , if there is not better 
▁ directions . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester , to whom the order of the siege is 
▁ given , is altogether directed by an xxmaj irishman- a very vallant 
▁ gentleman , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj it is xxmaj captain xxmaj macmorris , is it not ? 
▁ xxup gower . i think it be . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj by xxmaj cheshu , he is an ass , as in the world : i will verify 
▁ as much in his beard ; he has no more directions in the true 
▁ disciplines of the wars , look you , of the xxmaj roman disciplines , than 
▁ is a puppy - dog . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup macmorris and xxup captain xxup jamy 
▁
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj here ' a comes ; and the xxmaj scots captain , xxmaj captain xxmaj jamy , with 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj captain xxmaj jamy is a marvellous falorous gentleman , that is 
▁ certain , and of great expedition and knowledge in th ' aunchient 
▁ wars , upon my particular knowledge of his directions . xxmaj by xxmaj cheshu , 
▁ he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the 
▁ world , in the disciplines of the pristine wars of the xxmaj romans . 
▁ xxup jamy . i say gud day , xxmaj captain xxmaj fluellen . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj god - den to your worship , good xxmaj captain xxmaj james . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj how now , xxmaj captain xxmaj macmorris ! xxmaj have you quit the mines ? xxmaj have 
▁ the pioneers given o'er ? 
▁ xxup macmorris . xxmaj by xxmaj chrish , la , tish ill done ! xxmaj the work ish give over , 
▁ the trompet sound the retreat . xxmaj by my hand , i swear , and my 
▁ father 's soul , the work ish ill done ; it ish give over ; i would 
▁ have blowed up the town , so xxmaj chrish save me , la , in an hour . xxup o , 
▁ tish ill done , tish ill done ; by my hand , tish ill done ! 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj captain xxmaj macmorris , i beseech you now , will you voutsafe 
▁ me , look you , a few disputations with you , as partly touching or 
▁ concerning the disciplines of the war , the xxmaj roman wars , in the way 
▁ of argument , look you , and friendly communication ; partly to 
▁ satisfy my opinion , and partly for the satisfaction , look you , of 
▁ my mind , as touching the direction of the military discipline , 
▁ that is the point . 
▁ xxup jamy . xxmaj it sall be vary gud , gud feith , gud captains bath ; and i sall 
▁ quit you with gud leve , as i may pick occasion ; that sall xxup i , 
▁ marry . 
▁ xxup macmorris . xxmaj it is no time to discourse , so xxmaj chrish save me . xxmaj the day 
▁ is hot , and the weather , and the wars , and the xxmaj king , and the 
▁ xxmaj dukes ; it is no time to discourse . xxmaj the town is beseech'd , and the 
▁ trumpet call us to the breach ; and we talk and , be xxmaj chrish , do 
▁ nothing . ' tis shame for us all , so xxmaj god sa ' me , ' tis shame to 
▁ stand still ; it is shame , by my hand ; and there is throats to be 
▁ cut , and works to be done ; and there ish nothing done , so xxmaj chrish 
▁ sa ' me , la . 
▁ xxup jamy . xxmaj by the mess , ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to 
▁ slomber , ay'll de gud service , or xxmaj i 'll lig i ' th ' grund for it ; 
▁ ay , or go to death . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll pay't as valorously as i may , that 
▁ sall i suerly do , that is the breff and the long . xxmaj marry , i wad 
▁ full fain heard some question ' tween you tway . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj captain xxmaj macmorris , i think , look you , under your 
▁ correction , there is not many of your nation- 
▁ xxup macmorris . xxmaj of my nation ? xxmaj what ish my nation ? xxmaj ish a villain , and a 
▁ bastard , and a knave , and a rascal . xxmaj what ish my nation ? xxmaj who talks 
▁ of my nation ? 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj look you , if you take the matter otherwise than is meant , 
▁ xxmaj captain xxmaj macmorris , peradventure i shall think you do not use me 
▁ with that affability as in discretion you ought to use me , look 
▁ you ; being as good a man as yourself , both in the disciplines of 
▁ war and in the derivation of my birth , and in other 
▁ particularities . 
▁ xxup macmorris . i do not know you so good a man as myself ; so 
▁ xxmaj chrish save me , i will cut off your head . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj gentlemen both , you will mistake each other . 
▁ xxup jamy . xxmaj ah ! that 's a foul fault . [ a parley sounded ] 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj the town sounds a parley . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj captain xxmaj macmorris , when there is more better opportunity 
▁ to be required , look you , i will be so bold as to tell you i know 
▁ the disciplines of war ; and there is an end . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj before the gates of xxmaj harfleur 

 xxmaj enter the xxup governor and some citizens on the walls . xxmaj enter the xxup king 
 and all his train before the gates 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how yet resolves the xxmaj governor of the town ? 
▁ xxmaj this is the latest parle we will admit ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore to our best mercy give yourselves 
▁ xxmaj or , like to men proud of destruction , 
▁ xxmaj defy us to our worst ; for , as i am a soldier , 
▁ a name that in my thoughts becomes me best , 
▁ xxmaj if i begin the batt'ry once again , 
▁ i will not leave the half - achieved xxmaj harfleur 
▁ xxmaj till in her ashes she lie buried . 
▁ xxmaj the gates of mercy shall be all shut up , 
▁ xxmaj and the flesh'd soldier , rough and hard of heart , 
▁ xxmaj in liberty of bloody hand shall range 
▁ xxmaj with conscience wide as hell , mowing like grass 
▁ xxmaj your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants . 
▁ xxmaj what is it then to me if impious war , 
▁ xxmaj array'd in flames , like to the prince of fiends , 
▁ xxmaj do , with his smirch'd complexion , all fell feats 
▁ xxmaj enlink'd to waste and desolation ? 
▁ xxmaj what is't to me when you yourselves are cause , 
▁ xxmaj if your pure maidens fall into the hand 
▁ xxmaj of hot and forcing violation ? 
▁ xxmaj what rein can hold licentious wickednes 
▁ xxmaj when down the hill he holds his fierce career ? 
▁ xxmaj we may as bootless spend our vain command 
▁ xxmaj upon th ' enraged soldiers in their spoil , 
▁ xxmaj as send precepts to the xxmaj leviathan 
▁ xxmaj to come ashore . xxmaj therefore , you men of xxmaj harfleur , 
▁ xxmaj take pity of your town and of your people 
▁ xxmaj whiles yet my soldiers are in my command ; 
▁ xxmaj whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace 
▁ xxmaj o'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds 
▁ xxmaj of heady murder , spoil , and villainy . 
▁ xxmaj if not- why , in a moment look to see 
▁ xxmaj the blind and bloody with foul hand 
▁ xxmaj defile the locks of your shrill - shrieking daughters ; 
▁ xxmaj your fathers taken by the silver beards , 
▁ xxmaj and their most reverend heads dash'd to the walls ; 
▁ xxmaj your naked infants spitted upon pikes , 
▁ xxmaj whiles the mad mothers with their howls confus'd 
▁ xxmaj do break the clouds , as did the wives of xxmaj jewry 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj herod 's bloody - hunting slaughtermen . 
▁ xxmaj what say you ? xxmaj will you yield , and this avoid ? 
▁ xxmaj or , guilty in defence , be thus destroy'd ? 
▁ xxup governor . xxmaj our expectation hath this day an end : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin , whom of succours we entreated , 
▁ xxmaj returns us that his powers are yet not ready 
▁ xxmaj to raise so great a siege . xxmaj therefore , great xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj we yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy . 
▁ xxmaj enter our gates ; dispose of us and ours ; 
▁ xxmaj for we no longer are defensible . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj open your gates . [ exit xxup governor ] xxmaj come , uncle xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj go you and enter xxmaj harfleur ; there remain , 
▁ xxmaj and fortify it strongly ' gainst the xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj use mercy to them all . xxmaj for us , dear uncle , 
▁ xxmaj the winter coming on , and sickness growing 
▁ xxmaj upon our soldiers , we will retire to xxmaj calais . 
▁ xxmaj to - night in xxmaj harfleur will we be your guest ; 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow for the march are we addrest . 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj the xxup king and his train enter the town ] 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rouen . xxmaj the xxup french xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup katherine and xxup alice 

▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj alice , tu as ete en xxmaj angleterre , et tu parles bien le 
▁ langage . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj un peu , madame . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj je te prie , m'enseignez ; il faut que j'apprenne a 
▁ parler . xxmaj comment appelez - vous la main en xxmaj anglais ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj la main ? xxmaj elle est appelee de hand . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj de hand . xxmaj et les doigts ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj les doigts ? xxmaj ma foi , j'oublie les doigts ; mais je me 
▁ souviendrai . xxmaj les doigts ? xxmaj je pense qu'ils sont appeles de fingres ; 
▁ oui , de fingres . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj la main , de hand ; les doigts , de fingres . xxmaj je pense que 
▁ je suis le bon ecolier ; j'ai gagne deux mots d'anglais vitement . 
▁ xxmaj comment appelez - vous les ongles ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj les ongles ? xxmaj nous les appelons de nails . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj de nails . xxmaj ecoutez ; dites - moi si je parle bien : de hand ,