xxbos de fingres , et de nails . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj c'est bien dit , madame ; il est fort bon xxmaj anglais . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj dites - moi l'anglais pour le bras . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj de arm , madame . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj et le coude ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj d'elbow . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj d'elbow . xxmaj je m'en fais la repetition de tous les mots que 
▁ vous m'avez appris des a present . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj il est trop difficile , madame , comme je pense . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj excusez - moi , xxmaj alice ; ecoutez : d'hand , de fingre , de 
▁ nails , d'arma , de bilbow . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj d'elbow , madame . 
▁ xxup katherine . o xxmaj seigneur xxmaj dieu , je m'en oublie ! xxmaj d'elbow . 
▁ xxmaj comment appelez - vous le col ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj de nick , madame . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj de nick . xxmaj et le menton ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj de chin . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj de sin . xxmaj le col , de nick ; le menton , de sin . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj oui . xxmaj sauf votre honneur , en verite , vous prononcez les mots 
▁ aussi droit que les natifs d'angleterre . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj je ne doute point d'apprendre , par la grace de xxmaj dieu , et 
▁ en peu de temps . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj n'avez - vous pas deja oublie ce que je vous ai enseigne ? 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj non , je reciterai a vous promptement : d'hand , de fingre , 
▁ de mails- 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj de nails , madame . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj de nails , de arm , de ilbow . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj sauf votre honneur , d'elbow . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj ainsi dis - je ; d'elbow , de nick , et de sin . xxmaj comment 
▁ appelez - vous le pied et la robe ? 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj le foot , madame ; et le count . 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj le foot et le count . o xxmaj seigneur xxmaj dieu ! ils sont mots de 
▁ son mauvais , corruptible , gros , et impudique , et non pour les 
▁ dames d'honneur d'user : je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant 
▁ les seigneurs de xxmaj france pour tout le monde . xxmaj foh ! le foot et le 
▁ count ! xxmaj neanmoins , je reciterai une autre fois ma lecon ensemble : 
▁ d'hand , de fingre , de nails , d'arm , d'elbow , de nick , de sin , de 
▁ foot , le count . 
▁ xxup alice . xxmaj excellent , madame ! 
▁ xxup katherine . xxmaj c'est assez pour une fois : allons - nous a diner . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj the xxup french xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king xxup of xxup france , the xxup dauphin , xxup duke xxup of xxup britaine , 
 the xxup constable xxup of xxup france , and others 

▁ xxup french xxup king . ' tis certain he hath pass'd the river xxmaj somme . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj and if he be not fought withal , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj let us not live in xxmaj france ; let us quit an , 
▁ xxmaj and give our vineyards to a barbarous people . 
▁ xxup dauphin . o xxmaj dieu vivant ! xxmaj shall a few sprays of us , 
▁ xxmaj the emptying of our fathers ' luxury , 
▁ xxmaj our scions , put in wild and savage stock , 
▁ xxmaj spirt up so suddenly into the clouds , 
▁ xxmaj and overlook their grafters ? 
▁ xxup britaine . xxmaj normans , but bastard xxmaj normans , xxmaj norman bastards ! 
▁ xxmaj mort xxmaj dieu , ma vie ! if they march along 
▁ xxmaj unfought withal , but i will sell my dukedom 
▁ xxmaj to buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm 
▁ xxmaj in that nook - shotten isle of xxmaj albion . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj dieu de batailles ! where have they this mettle ? 
▁ xxmaj is not their climate foggy , raw , and dull ; 
▁ xxmaj on whom , as in despite , the sun looks pale , 
▁ xxmaj killing their fruit with frowns ? xxmaj can sodden water , 
▁ a drench for sur - rein'd jades , their barley - broth , 
▁ xxmaj decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall our quick blood , spirited with wine , 
▁ xxmaj seem frosty ? xxup o , for honour of our land , 
▁ xxmaj let us not hang like roping icicles 
▁ xxmaj upon our houses ' thatch , whiles a more frosty people 
▁ xxmaj sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields- 
▁ xxmaj poor we call them in their native lords ! 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj by faith and honour , 
▁ xxmaj our madams mock at us and plainly say 
▁ xxmaj our mettle is bred out , and they will give 
▁ xxmaj their bodies to the lust of xxmaj english youth 
▁ xxmaj to new - store xxmaj france with bastard warriors . 
▁ xxup britaine . xxmaj they bid us to the xxmaj english dancing - schools 
▁ xxmaj and teach lavoltas high and swift corantos , 
▁ xxmaj saying our grace is only in our heels 
▁ xxmaj and that we are most lofty runaways . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj where is xxmaj montjoy the herald ? xxmaj speed him hence ; 
▁ xxmaj let him greet xxmaj england with our sharp defiance . 
▁ xxmaj up , xxmaj princes , and , with spirit of honour edged 
▁ xxmaj more sharper than your swords , hie to the field : 
▁ xxmaj charles xxmaj delabreth , xxmaj high xxmaj constable of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj you xxmaj dukes of xxmaj orleans , xxmaj bourbon , and of xxmaj berri , 
▁ xxmaj alengon , xxmaj brabant , xxmaj bar , and xxmaj burgundy ; 
▁ xxmaj jaques xxmaj chatillon , xxmaj rambures , xxmaj vaudemont , 
▁ xxmaj beaumont , xxmaj grandpre , xxmaj roussi , and xxmaj fauconbridge , 
▁ xxmaj foix , xxmaj lestrake , xxmaj bouciqualt , and xxmaj charolois ; 
▁ xxmaj high dukes , great princes , barons , lords , and knights , 
▁ xxmaj for your great seats now quit you of great shames . 
▁ xxmaj bar xxmaj harry xxmaj england , that sweeps through our land 
▁ xxmaj with pennons painted in the blood of xxmaj harfleur . 
▁ xxmaj rush on his host as doth the melted snow 
▁ xxmaj upon the valleys , whose low vassal seat 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj alps doth spit and void his rheum upon ; 
▁ xxmaj go down upon him , you have power enough , 
▁ xxmaj and in a captive chariot into xxmaj rouen 
▁ xxmaj bring him our prisoner . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj this becomes the great . 
▁ xxmaj sorry am i his numbers are so few , 
▁ xxmaj his soldiers sick and famish'd in their march ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am sure , when he shall see our army , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll drop his heart into the sink of fear , 
▁ xxmaj and for achievement offer us his ransom . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj therefore , xxmaj lord xxmaj constable , haste on xxmaj montjoy , 
▁ xxmaj and let him say to xxmaj england that we send 
▁ xxmaj to know what willing ransom he will give . 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj dauphin , you shall stay with us in xxmaj rouen . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj not so , i do beseech your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj be patient , for you shall remain with us . 
▁ xxmaj now forth , xxmaj lord xxmaj constable and xxmaj princes all , 
▁ xxmaj and quickly bring us word of xxmaj england 's fall . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj english camp in xxmaj picardy 

 xxmaj enter xxup captains , xxmaj english and xxmaj welsh , xxup gower and xxup fluellen 

▁ xxup gower . xxmaj how now , xxmaj captain xxmaj fluellen ! xxmaj come you from the bridge ? 
▁ xxup fluellen . i assure you there is very excellent services committed 
▁ at the bridge . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj is the xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter safe ? 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter is as magnanimous as xxmaj agamemnon ; and a 
▁ man that i love and honour with my soul , and my heart , and my 
▁ duty , and my live , and my living , and my uttermost power . xxmaj he is 
▁ not- xxmaj god be praised and blessed!- any hurt in the world , but 
▁ keeps the bridge most valiantly , with excellent discipline . xxmaj there 
▁ is an aunchient xxmaj lieutenant there at the bridge- i think in my 
▁ very conscience he is as valiant a man as xxmaj mark xxmaj antony ; and he is 
▁ man of no estimation in the world ; but i did see him do as 
▁ gallant service . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj what do you call him ? 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj he is call'd xxmaj aunchient xxmaj pistol . 
▁ xxup gower . i know him not . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup pistol 

▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj here is the man . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj captain , i thee beseech to do me favours . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter doth love thee well . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj ay , i praise xxmaj god ; and i have merited some love at his 
▁ hands . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj bardolph , a soldier , firm and sound of heart , 
▁ xxmaj and of buxom valour , hath by cruel fate 
▁ xxmaj and giddy xxmaj fortune 's furious fickle wheel , 
▁ xxmaj that goddess blind , 
▁ xxmaj that stands upon the rolling restless stone- 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj by your patience , xxmaj aunchient xxmaj pistol . xxmaj fortune is painted 
▁ blind , with a muffler afore her eyes , to signify to you that 
▁ xxmaj fortune is blind ; and she is painted also with a wheel , to 
▁ signify to you , which is the moral of it , that she is turning , 
▁ and inconstant , and mutability , and variation ; and her foot , look 
▁ you , is fixed upon a spherical stone , which rolls , and rolls , and 
▁ rolls . xxmaj in good truth , the poet makes a most excellent description 
▁ of it : xxmaj fortune is an excellent moral . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj fortune is xxmaj bardolph 's foe , and frowns on him ; 
▁ xxmaj for he hath stol'n a pax , and hanged must ' a be- 
▁ a damned death ! 
▁ xxmaj let gallows gape for dog ; let man go free , 
▁ xxmaj and let not hemp his windpipe suffocate . 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj exeter hath given the doom of death 
▁ xxmaj for pax of little price . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , go speak- the xxmaj duke will hear thy voice ; 
▁ xxmaj and let not xxmaj bardolph 's vital thread be cut 
▁ xxmaj with edge of penny cord and vile reproach . 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj captain , for his life , and i will thee requite . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj aunchient xxmaj pistol , i do partly understand your meaning . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj why then , rejoice therefore . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj certainly , xxmaj aunchient , it is not a thing to rejoice at ; 
▁ for if , look you , he were my brother , i would desire the xxmaj duke to 
▁ use his good pleasure , and put him to execution ; for discipline 
▁ ought to be used . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj die and be damn'd ! and figo for thy friendship ! 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj it is well . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj the fig of xxmaj spain ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj very good . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj why , this is an arrant counterfeit rascal ; i remember him 
▁ now- a bawd , a cutpurse . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj i 'll assure you , ' a utt'red as prave words at the pridge 
▁ as you shall see in a summer 's day . xxmaj but it is very well ; what he 
▁ has spoke to me , that is well , i warrant you , when time is serve . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj why , ' tis a gull a fool a rogue , that now and then goes to 
▁ the wars to grace himself , at his return into xxmaj london , under the 
▁ form of a soldier . xxmaj and such fellows are perfect in the great 
▁ commanders ' names ; and they will learn you by rote where services 
▁ were done- at such and such a sconce , at such a breach , at such a 
▁ convoy ; who came off bravely , who was shot , who disgrac'd , what 
▁ terms the enemy stood on ; and this they con perfectly in the 
▁ phrase of war , which they trick up with new - tuned oaths ; and what 
▁ a beard of the xxmaj general 's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will 
▁ do among foaming bottles and ale - wash'd wits is wonderful to be 
▁ thought on . xxmaj but you must learn to know such slanders of the age , 
▁ or else you may be marvellously mistook . 
▁ xxup fluellen . i tell you what , xxmaj captain xxmaj gower , i do perceive he is not 
▁ the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is ; if i 
▁ find a hole in his coat i will tell him my mind . [ drum within ] 
▁ xxmaj hark you , the xxmaj king is coming ; and i must speak with him from the 
▁ pridge . 

▁ xxmaj drum and colours . xxmaj enter the xxup king and his poor soldiers , 
▁ and xxup gloucester 

▁ xxmaj god pless your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how now , xxmaj fluellen ! xxmaj cam'st thou from the bridge ? 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj ay , so please your xxmaj majesty . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter has very 
▁ gallantly maintain'd the pridge ; the xxmaj french is gone off , look 
▁ you , and there is gallant and most prave passages . xxmaj marry , th ' 
▁ athversary was have possession of the pridge ; but he is enforced 
▁ to retire , and the xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter is master of the pridge ; i can 
▁ tell your xxmaj majesty the xxmaj duke is a prave man . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what men have you lost , xxmaj fluellen ! 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj the perdition of th ' athversary hath been very great , 
▁ reasonable great ; marry , for my part , i think the xxmaj duke hath lost 
▁ never a man , but one that is like to be executed for robbing a 
▁ church- one xxmaj bardolph , if your xxmaj majesty know the man ; his face is 
▁ all bubukles , and whelks , and knobs , and flames o ' fire ; and his 
▁ lips blows at his nose , and it is like a coal of fire , sometimes 
▁ plue and sometimes red ; but his nose is executed and his fire 's 
▁ out . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we would have all such offenders so cut off . xxmaj and we 
▁ give express charge that in our marches through the country there 
▁ be nothing compell'd from the villages , nothing taken but paid 
▁ for , none of the xxmaj french upbraided or abused in disdainful 
▁ language ; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom the 
▁ gentler gamester is the soonest winner . 

▁ xxmaj tucket . xxmaj enter xxup montjoy 

▁ xxup montjoy . xxmaj you know me by my habit . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj well then , i know thee ; what shall i know of thee ? 
▁ xxup montjoy . xxmaj my master 's mind . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj unfold it . 
▁ xxup montjoy . xxmaj thus says my king . xxmaj say thou to xxmaj harry of xxmaj england : xxmaj though we 
▁ seem'd dead we did but sleep ; advantage is a better soldier than 
▁ rashness . xxmaj tell him we could have rebuk'd him at xxmaj harfleur , but 
▁ that we thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full 
▁ ripe . xxmaj now we speak upon our cue , and our voice is imperial : 
▁ xxmaj england shall repent his folly , see his weakness , and admire our 
▁ sufferance . xxmaj bid him therefore consider of his ransom , which must 
▁ proportion the losses we have borne , the subjects we have lost , 
▁ the disgrace we have digested ; which , in weight to re - answer , his 
▁ pettiness would bow under . xxmaj for our losses his exchequer is too 
▁ poor ; for th ' effusion of our blood , the muster of his kingdom 
▁ too faint a number ; and for our disgrace , his own person kneeling 
▁ at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfaction . xxmaj to this add 
▁ defiance ; and tell him , for conclusion , he hath betrayed his 
▁ followers , whose condemnation is pronounc'd . xxmaj so far my king and 
▁ master ; so much my office . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what is thy name ? i know thy quality . 
▁ xxup montjoy . xxmaj montjoy . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj thou dost thy office fairly . xxmaj turn thee back , 
▁ xxmaj and tell thy king i do not seek him now , 
▁ xxmaj but could be willing to march on to xxmaj calais 
▁ xxmaj without impeachment ; for , to say the sooth- 
▁ xxmaj though ' tis no wisdom to confess so much 
▁ xxmaj unto an enemy of craft and vantage- 
▁ xxmaj my people are with sickness much enfeebled ; 
▁ xxmaj my numbers lessen'd ; and those few i have 
▁ xxmaj almost no better than so many xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj who when they were in health , i tell thee , herald , 
▁ i thought upon one pair of xxmaj english legs 
▁ xxmaj did march three xxmaj frenchmen . xxmaj yet forgive me , xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj that i do brag thus ; this your air of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj hath blown that vice in me ; i must repent . 
▁ xxmaj go , therefore , tell thy master here i am ; 
▁ xxmaj my ransom is this frail and worthless trunk ; 
▁ xxmaj my army but a weak and sickly guard ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , xxmaj god before , tell him we will come on , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj france himself and such another neighbour 
▁ xxmaj stand in our way . xxmaj there 's for thy labour , xxmaj montjoy . 
▁ xxmaj go , bid thy master well advise himself . 
▁ xxmaj if we may pass , we will ; if we be hind'red , 
▁ xxmaj we shall your tawny ground with your red blood 
▁ xxmaj discolour ; and so , xxmaj montjoy , fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj the sum of all our answer is but this : 
▁ xxmaj we would not seek a battle as we are ; 
▁ xxmaj nor as we are , we say , we will not shun it . 
▁ xxmaj so tell your master . 
▁ xxup montjoy . i shall deliver so . xxmaj thanks to your xxmaj highness . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gloucester . i hope they will not come upon us now . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we are in xxmaj god 's hand , brother , not in theirs . 
▁ xxmaj march to the bridge , it now draws toward night ; 
▁ xxmaj beyond the river we 'll encamp ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj and on to - morrow bid them march away . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj french camp near xxmaj agincourt 

 xxmaj enter the xxup constable xxup of xxup france , the xxup lord xxup rambures , the xxup duke xxup of xxup orleans , 
 the xxup dauphin , with others 

▁ xxup constable . xxmaj tut ! i have the best armour of the world . 
▁ xxmaj would it were day ! 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj you have an excellent armour ; but let my horse have his 
▁ due . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj it is the best horse of xxmaj europe . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj will it never be morning ? 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj orleans and my xxmaj lord xxmaj high xxmaj constable , you talk of 
▁ horse and armour ? 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj you are as well provided of both as any prince in the 
▁ world . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj what a long night is this ! i will not change my horse with 
▁ any that treads but on four pasterns . xxmaj ca , ha ! he bounds from the 
▁ earth as if his entrails were hairs ; le cheval volant , the 
▁ xxmaj pegasus , chez les narines de feu ! xxmaj when i bestride him i soar , i 
▁ am a hawk . xxmaj he trots the air ; the earth sings when he touches it ; 
▁ the basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of 
▁ xxmaj hermes . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj he 's of the colour of the nutmeg . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj and of the heat of the ginger . xxmaj it is a beast for xxmaj perseus : 
▁ he is pure air and fire ; and the dull elements of earth and water 
▁ never appear in him , but only in patient stillness while his 
▁ rider mounts him ; he is indeed a horse , and all other jades you 
▁ may call beasts . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj indeed , my lord , it is a most absolute and excellent 
▁ horse . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj it is the prince of palfreys ; his neigh is like the 
▁ bidding of a monarch , and his countenance enforces homage . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj no more , cousin . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj nay , the man hath no wit that can not , from the rising of 
▁ the lark to the lodging of the lamb , vary deserved praise on my 
▁ palfrey . xxmaj it is a theme as fluent as the sea : turn the sands into 
▁ eloquent tongues , and my horse is argument for them all : ' tis a 
▁ subject for a sovereign to reason on , and for a sovereign 's 
▁ sovereign to ride on ; and for the world- familiar to us and 
▁ unknown- to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at 
▁ him . i once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus : ' wonder 
▁ of nature'- 
▁ xxup orleans . i have heard a sonnet begin so to one 's mistress . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj then did they imitate that which i compos'd to my courser ; 
▁ for my horse is my mistress . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj your mistress bears well . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj me well ; which is the prescript praise and perfection of a 
▁ good and particular mistress . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj nay , for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly 
▁ shook your back . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj so perhaps did yours . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj mine was not bridled . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxup o , then belike she was old and gentle ; and you rode like a 
▁ kern of xxmaj ireland , your xxmaj french hose off and in your strait 
▁ strossers . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj you have good judgment in horsemanship . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj be warn'd by me , then : they that ride so , and ride not 
▁ warily , fall into foul bogs . i had rather have my horse to my 
▁ mistress . 
▁ xxup constable . i had as lief have my mistress a jade . 
▁ xxup dauphin . i tell thee , xxmaj constable , my mistress wears his own hair . 
▁ xxup constable . i could make as true a boast as that , if i had a sow to 
▁ my mistress . 
▁ xxup dauphin . ' le chien est retourne a son propre vomissement , et la 
▁ truie lavee au bourbier . ' xxmaj thou mak'st use of anything . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj yet do i not use my horse for my mistress , or any such 
▁ proverb so little kin to the purpose . 
▁ xxup rambures . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj constable , the armour that i saw in your tent 
▁ to - night- are those stars or suns upon it ? 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj stars , my lord . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj some of them will fall to - morrow , i hope . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj and yet my sky shall not want . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj that may be , for you bear a many superfluously , and ' twere 
▁ more honour some were away . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj ev'n as your horse bears your praises , who would trot as 
▁ well were some of your brags dismounted . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj would i were able to load him with his desert ! xxmaj will it 
▁ never be day ? i will trot to - morrow a mile , and my way shall be 
▁ paved with xxmaj english faces . 
▁ xxup constable . i will not say so , for fear i should be fac'd out of my 
▁ way ; but i would it were morning , for i would fain be about the 
▁ ears of the xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup rambures . xxmaj who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners ? 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj you must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them . 
▁ xxup dauphin . ' tis midnight ; xxmaj i 'll go arm myself . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin longs for morning . 
▁ xxup rambures . xxmaj he longs to eat the xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup constable . i think he will eat all he kills . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj by the white hand of my lady , he 's a gallant prince . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj swear by her foot , that she may tread out the oath . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj he is simply the most active gentleman of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj doing is activity , and he will still be doing . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj he never did harm that i heard of . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj nor will do none to - morrow : he will keep that good name 
▁ still . 
▁ xxup orleans . i know him to be valiant . 
▁ xxup constable . i was told that by one that knows him better than you . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj what 's he ? 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj marry , he told me so himself ; and he said he car'd not 
▁ who knew it . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj he needs not ; it is no hidden virtue in him . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj by my faith , sir , but it is ; never anybody saw it but 
▁ his lackey . 
▁ ' tis a hooded valour , and when it appears it will bate . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj ill - wind never said well . 
▁ xxup constable . i will cap that proverb with ' there is flattery in 
▁ friendship . ' 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj and i will take up that with ' give the devil his due . ' 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj well plac'd ! xxmaj there stands your friend for the devil ; 
▁ have at the very eye of that proverb with ' a pox of the devil ! ' 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj you are the better at proverbs by how much ' a fool 's bolt 
▁ is soon shot . ' 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj you have shot over . 
▁ xxup orleans . ' tis not the first time you were overshot . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj high xxmaj constable , the xxmaj english lie within fifteen 
▁ hundred paces of your tents . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj who hath measur'd the ground ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj lord xxmaj grandpre . 
▁ xxup constable . a valiant and most expert gentleman . xxmaj would it were day ! 
▁ xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj harry of xxmaj england ! he longs not for the dawning as we 
▁ do . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj what a wretched and peevish fellow is this xxmaj king of 
▁ xxmaj england , to mope with his fat - brain'd followers so far out of his 
▁ knowledge ! 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj if the xxmaj english had any apprehension , they would run 
▁ away . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj that they lack ; for if their heads had any intellectual 
▁ armour , they could never wear such heavy head - pieces . 
▁ xxup rambures . xxmaj that island of xxmaj england breeds very valiant creatures ; 
▁ their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj foolish curs , that run winking into the mouth of a xxmaj russian 
▁ bear , and have their heads crush'd like rotten apples ! xxmaj you may as 
▁ well say that 's a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the 
▁ lip of a lion . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj just , just ! and the men do sympathise with the mastiffs 
▁ in robustious and rough coming on , leaving their wits with their 
▁ wives ; and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel ; 
▁ they will eat like wolves and fight like devils . 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj ay , but these xxmaj english are shrewdly out of beef . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj then shall we find to - morrow they have only stomachs to 
▁ eat , and none to fight . xxmaj now is it time to arm . xxmaj come , shall we 
▁ about it ? 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj it is now two o'clock ; but let me see- by ten 
▁ xxmaj we shall have each a hundred xxmaj englishmen . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup prologue . 

 xxmaj enter xxup chorus 

▁ xxup chorus . xxmaj now entertain conjecture of a time 
▁ xxmaj when creeping murmur and the poring dark 
▁ xxmaj fills the wide vessel of the universe . 
▁ xxmaj from camp to camp , through the foul womb of night , 
▁ xxmaj the hum of either army stilly sounds , 
▁ xxmaj that the fix'd sentinels almost receive 
▁ xxmaj the secret whispers of each other 's watch . 
▁ xxmaj fire answers fire , and through their paly flames 
▁ xxmaj each battle sees the other 's umber'd face ; 
▁ xxmaj steed threatens steed , in high and boastful neighs 
▁ xxmaj piercing the night 's dull ear ; and from the tents 
▁ xxmaj the armourers accomplishing the knights , 
▁ xxmaj with busy hammers closing rivets up , 
▁ xxmaj give dreadful note of preparation . 
▁ xxmaj the country cocks do crow , the clocks do ton , 
▁ xxmaj and the third hour of drowsy morning name . 
▁ xxmaj proud of their numbers and secure in soul , 
▁ xxmaj the confident and over - lusty xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj do the low - rated xxmaj english play at dice ; 
▁ xxmaj and chide the cripple tardy - gaited night 
▁ xxmaj who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp 
▁ xxmaj so tediously away . xxmaj the poor condemned xxmaj english , 
▁ xxmaj like sacrifices , by their watchful fires 
▁ xxmaj sit patiently and inly ruminate 
▁ xxmaj the morning 's danger ; and their gesture sad 
▁ xxmaj investing lank - lean cheeks and war - worn coats 
▁ xxmaj presenteth them unto the gazing moon 
▁ xxmaj so many horrid ghosts . xxup o , now , who will behold 
▁ xxmaj the royal captain of this ruin'd band 
▁ xxmaj walking from watch to watch , from tent to tent , 
▁ xxmaj let him cry ' praise and glory on his head ! ' 
▁ xxmaj for forth he goes and visits all his host ; 
▁ xxmaj bids them good morrow with a modest smile , 
▁ xxmaj and calls them brothers , friends , and countrymen . 
▁ xxmaj upon his royal face there is no note 
▁ xxmaj how dread an army hath enrounded him ; 
▁ xxmaj nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour 
▁ xxmaj unto the weary and all - watched night ; 
▁ xxmaj but freshly looks , and over - bears attaint 
▁ xxmaj with cheerful semblance and sweet majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj that every wretch , pining and pale before , 
▁ xxmaj beholding him , plucks comfort from his looks ; 
▁ a largess universal , like the sun , 
▁ xxmaj his liberal eye doth give to every one , 
▁ xxmaj thawing cold fear , that mean and gentle all 
▁ xxmaj behold , as may unworthiness define , 
▁ a little touch of xxmaj harry in the night . 
▁ xxmaj and so our scene must to the battle fly ; 
▁ xxmaj where- o for pity!- we shall much disgrace 
▁ xxmaj with four or five most vile and ragged foils , 
▁ xxmaj right ill - dispos'd in brawl ridiculous , 
▁ xxmaj the name of xxmaj agincourt . xxmaj yet sit and see , 
▁ xxmaj minding true things by what their mock'ries be . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj france . xxmaj the xxmaj english camp at xxmaj agincourt 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup bedford , and xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj gloucester , ' tis true that we are in great danger ; 
▁ xxmaj the greater therefore should our courage be . 
▁ xxmaj good morrow , brother xxmaj bedford . xxmaj god xxmaj almighty ! 
▁ xxmaj there is some soul of goodness in things evil , 
▁ xxmaj would men observingly distil it out ; 
▁ xxmaj for our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers , 
▁ xxmaj which is both healthful and good husbandry . 
▁ xxmaj besides , they are our outward consciences 
▁ xxmaj and preachers to us all , admonishing 
▁ xxmaj that we should dress us fairly for our end . 
▁ xxmaj thus may we gather honey from the weed , 
▁ xxmaj and make a moral of the devil himself . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup erpingham 

▁ xxmaj good morrow , old xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj erpingham : 
▁ a good soft pillow for that good white head 
▁ xxmaj were better than a churlish turf of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup erpingham . xxmaj not so , my liege ; this lodging likes me better , 
▁ xxmaj since i may say ' now lie i like a king . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . ' tis good for men to love their present pains 
▁ xxmaj upon example ; so the spirit is eased ; 
▁ xxmaj and when the mind is quick'ned , out of doubt 
▁ xxmaj the organs , though defunct and dead before , 
▁ xxmaj break up their drowsy grave and newly move 
▁ xxmaj with casted slough and fresh legerity . 
▁ xxmaj lend me thy cloak , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas . xxmaj brothers both , 
▁ xxmaj commend me to the princes in our c & 
▁ xxmaj do my good morrow to them , and anon 
▁ xxmaj desire them all to my pavilion . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj we shall , my liege . 
▁ xxup erpingham . xxmaj shall i attend your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj no , my good knight : 
▁ xxmaj go with my brothers to my lords of xxmaj england ; 
▁ i and my bosom must debate awhile , 
▁ xxmaj and then i would no other company . 
▁ xxup erpingham . xxmaj the xxmaj lord in heaven bless thee , noble xxmaj harry ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup king 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj god - a - mercy , old heart ! thou speak'st cheerfully . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pistol 

▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj qui va la ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . a friend . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj discuss unto me : art thou officer , 
▁ xxmaj or art thou base , common , and popular ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i am a gentleman of a company . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj trail'st thou the puissant pike ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj even so . xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj as good a gentleman as the xxmaj emperor . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj then you are a better than the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj the xxmaj king 's a bawcock and a heart of gold , 
▁ a lad of life , an imp of fame ; 
▁ xxmaj of parents good , of fist most valiant . 
▁ i kiss his dirty shoe , and from heart - string 
▁ i love the lovely bully . xxmaj what is thy name ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj harry le xxmaj roy . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj le xxmaj roy ! a xxmaj cornish name ; art thou of xxmaj cornish crew ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj no , i am a xxmaj welshman . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj know'st thou xxmaj fluellen ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj tell him xxmaj i 'll knock his leek about his pate 
▁ xxmaj upon xxmaj saint xxmaj davy 's day . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day , lest 
▁ he knock that about yours . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj art thou his friend ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj and his kinsman too . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj the figo for thee , then ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i thank you ; xxmaj god be with you ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj my name is xxmaj pistol call'd . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj it sorts well with your fierceness . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup fluellen and xxup gower 

▁ xxup gower . xxmaj captain xxmaj fluellen ! 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj so ! in the name of xxmaj jesu xxmaj christ , speak fewer . xxmaj it is the 
▁ greatest admiration in the universal world , when the true and 
▁ aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept : if you 
▁ would take the pains but to examine the wars of xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great , 
▁ you shall find , i warrant you , that there is no tiddle - taddle nor 
▁ pibble - pabble in xxmaj pompey 's c & i warrant you , you shall find the 
▁ ceremonies of the wars , and the cares of it , and the forms of it , 
▁ and the sobriety of it , and the modesty of it , to be otherwise . 
▁ xxup gower . xxmaj why , the enemy is loud ; you hear him all night . 
▁ xxup fluellen . xxmaj if the enemy is an ass , and a fool , and a prating 
▁ coxcomb , is it meet , think you , that we should also , look you , be 
▁ an ass , and a fool , and a prating coxcomb ? xxmaj in your own 
▁ conscience , now ? 
▁ xxup gower . i will speak lower . 
▁ xxup fluellen . i pray you and beseech you that you will . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gower and xxup fluellen 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj though it appear a little out of fashion , 
▁ xxmaj there is much care and valour in this xxmaj welshman . 

▁ xxmaj enter three soldiers : xxup john xxup bates , xxup alexander xxup court , 
▁ and xxup michael xxup williams 
▁
▁ xxup court . xxmaj brother xxmaj john xxmaj bates , is not that the morning which breaks 
▁ yonder ? 
▁ xxup bates . i think it be ; but we have no great cause to desire the 
▁ approach of day . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj we see yonder the beginning of the day , but i think we 
▁ shall never see the end of it . xxmaj who goes there ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . a friend . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj under what captain serve you ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj under xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj erpingham . 
▁ xxup williams . a good old commander and a most kind gentleman . i pray 
▁ you , what thinks he of our estate ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj even as men wreck'd upon a sand , that look to be wash'd 
▁ off the next tide . 
▁ xxup bates . xxmaj he hath not told his thought to the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj no ; nor it is not meet he should . xxmaj for though i speak it 
▁ to you , i think the xxmaj king is but a man as i am : the violet smells 
▁ to him as it doth to me ; the element shows to him as it doth to 
▁ me ; all his senses have but human conditions ; his ceremonies laid 
▁ by , in his nakedness he appears but a man ; and though his 
▁ affections are higher mounted than ours , yet , when they stoop , 
▁ they stoop with the like wing . xxmaj therefore , when he sees reason of 
▁ fears , as we do , his fears , out of doubt , be of the same relish 
▁ as ours are ; yet , in reason , no man should possess him with any 
▁ appearance of fear , lest he , by showing it , should dishearten his 
▁ army . 
▁ xxup bates . xxmaj he may show what outward courage he will ; but i believe , as 
▁ cold a night as ' tis , he could wish himself in xxmaj thames up to the 
▁ neck ; and so i would he were , and i by him , at all adventures , so 
▁ we were quit here . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj by my troth , i will speak my conscience of the xxmaj king : i 
▁ think he would not wish himself anywhere but where he is . 
▁ xxup bates . xxmaj then i would he were here alone ; so should he be sure to be 
▁ ransomed , and a many poor men 's lives saved . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here 
▁ alone , howsoever you speak this , to feel other men 's minds ; 
▁ methinks i could not die anywhere so contented as in the xxmaj king 's 
▁ company , his cause being just and his quarrel honourable . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj that 's more than we know . 
▁ xxup bates . xxmaj ay , or more than we should seek after ; for we know enough if 
▁ we know we are the xxmaj king 's subjects . xxmaj if his cause be wrong , our 
▁ obedience to the xxmaj king wipes the crime of it out of us . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj but if the cause be not good , the xxmaj king himself hath a 
▁ heavy reckoning to make when all those legs and arms and heads , 
▁ chopp'd off in a battle , shall join together at the latter day 
▁ and cry all ' we died at such a place'- some swearing , some crying 
▁ for a surgeon , some upon their wives left poor behind them , some 
▁ upon the debts they owe , some upon their children rawly left . i 
▁ am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle ; for how 
▁ can they charitably dispose of anything when blood is their 
▁ argument ? xxmaj now , if these men do not die well , it will be a black 
▁ matter for the xxmaj king that led them to it ; who to disobey were 
▁ against all proportion of subjection . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj so , if a son that is by his father sent about 
▁ merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea , the imputation of 
▁ his wickedness , by your rule , should be imposed upon his father 
▁ that sent him ; or if a servant , under his master 's command 
▁ transporting a sum of money , be assailed by robbers and die in 
▁ many irreconcil'd iniquities , you may call the business of the 
▁ master the author of the servant 's damnation . xxmaj but this is not so : 
▁ the xxmaj king is not bound to answer the particular endings of his 
▁ soldiers , the father of his son , nor the master of his servant ; 
▁ for they purpose not their death when they purpose their 
▁ services . xxmaj besides , there is no king , be his cause never so 
▁ spotless , if it come to the arbitrement of swords , can try it out 
▁ with all unspotted soldiers : some peradventure have on them the 
▁ guilt of premeditated and contrived murder ; some , of beguiling 
▁ virgins with the broken seals of perjury ; some , making the wars 
▁ their bulwark , that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace 
▁ with pillage and robbery . xxmaj now , if these men have defeated the law 
▁ and outrun native punishment , though they can outstrip men they 
▁ have no wings to fly from xxmaj god : war is xxmaj his beadle , war is xxmaj his 
▁ vengeance ; so that here men are punish'd for before - breach of the 
▁ xxmaj king 's laws in now the xxmaj king 's quarrel . xxmaj where they feared the 
▁ death they have borne life away ; and where they would be safe 
▁ they perish . xxmaj then if they die unprovided , no more is the xxmaj king 
▁ guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those 
▁ impieties for the which they are now visited . xxmaj every subject 's 
▁ duty is the xxmaj king 's ; but every subject 's soul is his own . 
▁ xxmaj therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man 
▁ in his bed- wash every mote out of his conscience ; and dying so , 
▁ death is to him advantage ; or not dying , the time was blessedly 
▁ lost wherein such preparation was gained ; and in him that escapes 
▁ it were not sin to think that , making xxmaj god so free an offer , xxmaj he 
▁ let him outlive that day to see xxmaj his greatness , and to teach 
▁ others how they should prepare . 
▁ xxup williams . ' tis certain , every man that dies ill , the ill upon his 
▁ own head- the xxmaj king is not to answer for it . 
▁ xxup bates . i do not desire he should answer for me , and yet i determine 
▁ to fight lustily for him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i myself heard the xxmaj king say he would not be ransom'd . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj ay , he said so , to make us fight cheerfully ; but when our 
▁ throats are cut he may be ransom'd , and we ne'er the wiser . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj if i live to see it , i will never trust his word after . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj you pay him then ! xxmaj that 's a perilous shot out of an 
▁ elder - gun , that a poor and a private displeasure can do against a 
▁ monarch ! xxmaj you may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with 
▁ fanning in his face with a peacock 's feather . xxmaj you 'll never trust 
▁ his word after ! xxmaj come , ' tis a foolish saying . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj your reproof is something too round ; i should be angry 
▁ with you , if the time were convenient . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj let it be a quarrel between us if you live . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i embrace it . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj how shall i know thee again ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj give me any gage of thine , and i will wear it in my 
▁ bonnet ; then if ever thou dar'st acknowledge it , i will make it 
▁ my quarrel . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj here 's my glove ; give me another of thine . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj there . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj this will i also wear in my cap ; if ever thou come to me 
▁ and say , after to - morrow , ' this is my glove , ' by this hand i will 
▁ take thee a box on the ear . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj if ever i live to see it , i will challenge it . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj thou dar'st as well be hang'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj well , i will do it , though i take thee in the xxmaj king 's 
▁ company . 
▁ xxup williams . xxmaj keep thy word . xxmaj fare thee well . 
▁ xxup bates . xxmaj be friends , you xxmaj english fools , be friends ; we have 
▁ xxmaj french quarrels enow , if you could tell how to reckon . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj indeed , the xxmaj french may lay twenty xxmaj french crowns to one 
▁ they will beat us , for they bear them on their shoulders ; but it 
▁ is no xxmaj english treason to cut xxmaj french crowns , and to - morrow the 
▁ xxmaj king himself will be a clipper . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt soldiers 
▁ xxmaj upon the xxmaj king ! xxmaj let us our lives , our souls , 
▁ xxmaj our debts , our careful wives , 
▁ xxmaj our children , and our sins , lay on the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxmaj we must bear all . o hard condition , 
▁ xxmaj twin - born with greatness , subject to the breath 
▁ xxmaj of every fool , whose sense no more can feel 
▁ xxmaj but his own wringing ! xxmaj what infinite heart 's ease 
▁ xxmaj must kings neglect that private men enjoy ! 
▁ xxmaj and what have kings that privates have not too , 
▁ xxmaj save ceremony- save general ceremony ? 
▁ xxmaj and what art thou , thou idol xxmaj ceremony ? 
▁ xxmaj what kind of god art thou , that suffer'st more 
▁ xxmaj of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers ? 
▁ xxmaj what are thy rents ? xxmaj what are thy comings - in ? 
▁ o xxmaj ceremony , show me but thy worth ! 
▁ xxmaj what is thy soul of adoration ? 
▁ xxmaj art thou aught else but place , degree , and form , 
▁ xxmaj creating awe and fear in other men ? 
▁ xxmaj wherein thou art less happy being fear'd 
▁ xxmaj than they in fearing . 
▁ xxmaj what drink'st thou oft , instead of homage sweet , 
▁ xxmaj but poison'd flattery ? xxup o , be sick , great greatness , 
▁ xxmaj and bid thy ceremony give thee cure ! 
▁ xxmaj thinks thou the fiery fever will go out 
▁ xxmaj with titles blown from adulation ? 
▁ xxmaj will it give place to flexure and low bending ? 
▁ xxmaj canst thou , when thou command'st the beggar 's knee , 
▁ xxmaj command the health of it ? xxmaj no , thou proud dream , 
▁ xxmaj that play'st so subtly with a king 's repose . 
▁ i am a king that find thee ; and i know 
▁ ' tis not the balm , the sceptre , and the ball , 
▁ xxmaj the sword , the mace , the crown imperial , 
▁ xxmaj the intertissued robe of gold and pearl , 
▁ xxmaj the farced tide running fore the king , 
▁ xxmaj the throne he sits on , nor the tide of pomp 
▁ xxmaj that beats upon the high shore of this world- 
▁ xxmaj no , not all these , thrice gorgeous ceremony , 
▁ xxmaj not all these , laid in bed majestical , 
▁ xxmaj can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave 
▁ xxmaj who , with a body fill'd and vacant mind , 
▁ xxmaj gets him to rest , cramm'd with distressful bread ; 
▁ xxmaj never sees horrid night , the child of hell ; 
▁ xxmaj but , like a lackey , from the rise to set 
▁ xxmaj sweats in the eye of xxmaj pheebus , and all night 
▁ xxmaj sleeps in xxmaj elysium ; next day , after dawn , 
▁ xxmaj doth rise and help xxmaj hyperion to his horse ; 
▁ xxmaj and follows so the ever - running year 
▁ xxmaj with profitable labour , to his grave . 
▁ xxmaj and but for ceremony , such a wretch , 
▁ xxmaj winding up days with toil and nights with sleep , 
▁ xxmaj had the fore - hand and vantage of a king . 
▁ xxmaj the slave , a member of the country 's peace , 
▁ xxmaj enjoys it ; but in gross brain little wots 
▁ xxmaj what watch the king keeps to maintain the peace 
▁ xxmaj whose hours the peasant best advantages . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup erpingham 

▁ xxup erpingham . xxmaj my lord , your nobles , jealous of your absence , 
▁ xxmaj seek through your camp to find you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj good old knight , 
▁ xxmaj collect them all together at my tent : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be before thee . 
▁ xxup erpingham . i shall do't , my lord . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king . o xxmaj god of battles , steel my soldiers ' hearts , 
▁ xxmaj possess them not with fear ! xxmaj take from them now 
▁ xxmaj the sense of reck'ning , if th ' opposed numbers 
▁ xxmaj pluck their hearts from them ! xxmaj not to - day , o xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxup o , not to - day , think not upon the fault 
▁ xxmaj my father made in compassing the crown ! 
▁ i xxmaj richard 's body have interred new , 
▁ xxmaj and on it have bestowed more contrite tears 
▁ xxmaj than from it issued forced drops of blood ; 
▁ xxmaj five hundred poor i have in yearly pay , 
▁ xxmaj who twice a day their wither'd hands hold up 
▁ xxmaj toward heaven , to pardon blood ; and i have built 
▁ xxmaj two chantries , where the sad and solemn priests 
▁ xxmaj sing still for xxmaj richard 's soul . xxmaj more will i do ; 
▁ xxmaj though all that i can do is nothing worth , 
▁ xxmaj since that my penitence comes after all , 
▁ xxmaj imploring pardon . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my liege ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my brother xxmaj gloucester 's voice ? xxmaj ay ; 
▁ i know thy errand , i will go with thee ; 
▁ xxmaj the day , my friends , and all things , stay for me . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj french camp 

 xxmaj enter the xxup dauphin , xxup orleans , xxup rambures , and others 

▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj the sun doth gild our armour ; up , my lords ! 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj montez a cheval ! xxmaj my horse ! xxmaj varlet , laquais ! xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup orleans . o brave spirit ! 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj via ! xxmaj les eaux et la terre- 
▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj rien puis ? xxmaj l'air et le feu . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj ciel ! cousin xxmaj orleans . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup constable 

▁ xxmaj now , my xxmaj lord xxmaj constable ! 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj hark how our steeds for present service neigh ! 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj mount them , and make incision in their hides , 
▁ xxmaj that their hot blood may spin in xxmaj english eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and dout them with superfluous courage , ha ! 
▁ xxup rambures . xxmaj what , will you have them weep our horses ' blood ? 
▁ xxmaj how shall we then behold their natural tears ? 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj english are embattl'd , you xxmaj french peers . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj to horse , you gallant xxmaj princes ! straight to horse ! 
▁ xxmaj do but behold yon poor and starved band , 
▁ xxmaj and your fair show shall suck away their souls , 
▁ xxmaj leaving them but the shales and husks of men . 
▁ xxmaj there is not work enough for all our hands ; 
▁ xxmaj scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins 
▁ xxmaj to give each naked curtle - axe a stain 
▁ xxmaj that our xxmaj french gallants shall to - day draw out , 
▁ xxmaj and sheathe for lack of sport . xxmaj let us but blow on them , 
▁ xxmaj the vapour of our valour will o'erturn them . 
▁ ' tis positive ' gainst all exceptions , lords , 
▁ xxmaj that our superfluous lackeys and our peasants- 
▁ xxmaj who in unnecessary action swarm 
▁ xxmaj about our squares of battle- were enow 
▁ xxmaj to purge this field of , such a hilding foe ; 
▁ xxmaj though we upon this mountain 's basis by 
▁ xxmaj took stand for idle speculation- 
▁ xxmaj but that our honours must not . xxmaj what 's to say ? 
▁ a very little little let us do , 
▁ xxmaj and all is done . xxmaj then let the trumpets sound 
▁ xxmaj the tucket sonance and the note to mount ; 
▁ xxmaj for our approach shall so much dare the field 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj england shall couch down in fear and yield . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup grandpre 

▁ xxup grandpre . xxmaj why do you stay so long , my lords of xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxmaj yond island carrions , desperate of their bones , 
▁ xxmaj ill - favouredly become the morning field ; 
▁ xxmaj their ragged curtains poorly are let loose , 
▁ xxmaj and our air shakes them passing scornfully ; 
▁ xxmaj big xxmaj mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host , 
▁ xxmaj and faintly through a rusty beaver peeps . 
▁ xxmaj the horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks 
▁ xxmaj with torch - staves in their hand ; and their poor jades 
▁ xxmaj lob down their heads , dropping the hides and hips , 
▁ xxmaj the gum down - roping from their pale - dead eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and in their pale dull mouths the gimmal'd bit 
▁ xxmaj lies foul with chaw'd grass , still and motionless ; 
▁ xxmaj and their executors , the knavish crows , 
▁ xxmaj fly o'er them , all impatient for their hour . 
▁ xxmaj description can not suit itself in words 
▁ xxmaj to demonstrate the life of such a battle 
▁ xxmaj in life so lifeless as it shows itself . 
▁ xxup constable . xxmaj they have said their prayers and they stay for death . 
▁ xxup dauphin . xxmaj shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits , 
▁ xxmaj and give their fasting horses provender , 
▁ xxmaj and after fight with them ? 
▁ xxup constable . i stay but for my guidon . xxmaj to the field ! 
▁ i will the banner from a trumpet take , 
▁ xxmaj and use it for my haste . xxmaj come , come , away ! 
▁ xxmaj the sun is high , and we outwear the day . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj english camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup gloucester , xxup bedford , xxup exeter , xxup erpingham , with all his host ; 
 xxup salisbury and xxup westmoreland 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj where is the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj the xxmaj king himself is rode to view their battle . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj of fighting men they have full three - score thousand . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj there 's five to one ; besides , they all are fresh . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj god 's arm strike with us ! ' tis a fearful odds . 
▁ xxmaj god bye you , xxmaj princes all ; xxmaj i 'll to my charge . 
▁ xxmaj if we no more meet till we meet in heaven , 
▁ xxmaj then joyfully , my noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj bedford , 
▁ xxmaj my dear xxmaj lord xxmaj gloucester , and my good xxmaj lord xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj and my kind kinsman- warriors all , adieu ! 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj salisbury ; and good luck go with thee ! 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj farewell , kind lord . xxmaj fight valiantly to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i do thee wrong to mind thee of it , 
▁ xxmaj for thou art fram'd of the firm truth of valour . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj he is as full of valour as of kindness ; 
▁ xxmaj princely in both . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king 

▁ xxup westmoreland . o that we now had here 
▁ xxmaj but one ten thousand of those men in xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj that do no work to - day ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what 's he that wishes so ? 
▁ xxmaj my cousin xxmaj westmoreland ? xxmaj no , my fair cousin ; 
▁ xxmaj if we are mark'd to die , we are enow 
▁ xxmaj to do our country loss ; and if to live , 
▁ xxmaj the fewer men , the greater share of honour . 
▁ xxmaj god 's will ! i pray thee , wish not one man more . 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj jove , i am not covetous for gold , 
▁ xxmaj nor care i who doth feed upon my cost ; 
▁ xxmaj it yearns me not if men my garments wear ; 
▁ xxmaj such outward things dwell not in my desires . 
▁ xxmaj but if it be a sin to covet honour , 
▁ i am the most offending soul alive . 
▁ xxmaj no , faith , my coz , wish not a man from xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj god 's peace ! i would not lose so great an honour 
▁ xxmaj as one man more methinks would share from me 
▁ xxmaj for the best hope i have . xxup o , do not wish one more ! 
▁ xxmaj rather proclaim it , xxmaj westmoreland , through my host , 
▁ xxmaj that he which hath no stomach to this fight , 
▁ xxmaj let him depart ; his passport shall be made , 
▁ xxmaj and crowns for convoy put into his purse ; 
▁ xxmaj we would not die in that man 's company 
▁ xxmaj that fears his fellowship to die with us . 
▁ xxmaj this day is call'd the feast of xxmaj crispian . 
▁ xxmaj he that outlives this day , and comes safe home , 
▁ xxmaj will stand a tip - toe when this day is nam'd , 
▁ xxmaj and rouse him at the name of xxmaj crispian . 
▁ xxmaj he that shall live this day , and see old age , 
▁ xxmaj will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' to - morrow is xxmaj saint xxmaj crispian . ' 
▁ xxmaj then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' these wounds i had on xxmaj crispian 's day . ' 
▁ xxmaj old men forget ; yet all shall be forgot , 
▁ xxmaj but he 'll remember , with advantages , 
▁ xxmaj what feats he did that day . xxmaj then shall our names , 
▁ xxmaj familiar in his mouth as household words- 
▁ xxmaj harry the xxmaj king , xxmaj bedford and xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj warwick and xxmaj talbot , xxmaj salisbury and xxmaj gloucester- 
▁ xxmaj be in their flowing cups freshly rememb'red . 
▁ xxmaj this story shall the good man teach his son ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj crispin xxmaj crispian shall ne'er go by , 
▁ xxmaj from this day to the ending of the world , 
▁ xxmaj but we in it shall be remembered- 
▁ xxmaj we few , we happy few , we band of brothers ; 
▁ xxmaj for he to - day that sheds his blood with me 
▁ xxmaj shall be my brother ; be he ne'er so vile , 
▁ xxmaj this day shall gentle his condition ; 
▁ xxmaj and gentlemen in xxmaj england now - a - bed 
▁ xxmaj shall think themselves accurs'd they were not here , 
▁ xxmaj and hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks 
▁ xxmaj that fought with us upon xxmaj saint xxmaj crispin 's day .