xxbos conjure up love in her in his true likeness , he must appear naked 
▁ and blind . xxmaj can you blame her , then , being a maid yet ros'd over 
▁ with the virgin crimson of modesty , if she deny the appearance of 
▁ a naked blind boy in her naked seeing self ? xxmaj it were , my lord , a 
▁ hard condition for a maid to consign to . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj yet they do wink and yield , as love is blind and 
▁ enforces . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj they are then excus'd , my lord , when they see not what 
▁ they do . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj then , good my lord , teach your cousin to consent 
▁ winking . 
▁ xxup burgundy . i will wink on her to consent , my lord , if you will teach 
▁ her to know my meaning ; for maids well summer'd and warm kept are 
▁ like flies at xxmaj bartholomew - tide , blind , though they have their 
▁ eyes ; and then they will endure handling , which before would not 
▁ abide looking on . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj this moral ties me over to time and a hot summer ; and 
▁ so i shall catch the fly , your cousin , in the latter end , and she 
▁ must be blind too . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj as love is , my lord , before it loves . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj it is so ; and you may , some of you , thank love for my 
▁ blindness , who can not see many a fair xxmaj french city for one fair 
▁ xxmaj french maid that stands in my way . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj yes , my lord , you see them perspectively , the cities 
▁ turned into a maid ; for they are all girdled with maiden walls 
▁ that war hath never ent'red . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj shall xxmaj kate be my wife ? 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj so please you . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i am content , so the maiden cities you talk of may wait 
▁ on her ; so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show 
▁ me the way to my will . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj we have consented to all terms of reason . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj is't so , my lords of xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj the king hath granted every article : 
▁ xxmaj his daughter first ; and then in sequel , all , 
▁ xxmaj according to their firm proposed natures . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj only he hath not yet subscribed this : 
▁ xxmaj where your xxmaj majesty demands that the xxmaj king of xxmaj france , having any 
▁ occasion to write for matter of grant , shall name your xxmaj highness 
▁ in this form and with this addition , in xxmaj french , xxmaj notre tres cher 
▁ fils xxmaj henri , xxmaj roi d'angleterre , xxmaj heritier de xxmaj france ; and thus in 
▁ xxmaj latin , xxmaj praeclarissimus filius noster xxmaj henricus , xxmaj rex xxmaj angliae et 
▁ xxmaj haeres xxmaj franciae . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj nor this i have not , brother , so denied 
▁ xxmaj but our request shall make me let it pass . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i pray you , then , in love and dear alliance , 
▁ xxmaj let that one article rank with the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj and thereupon give me your daughter . 
▁ xxup french xxup king . xxmaj take her , fair son , and from her blood raise up 
▁ xxmaj issue to me ; that the contending kingdoms 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj france and xxmaj england , whose very shores look pale 
▁ xxmaj with envy of each other 's happiness , 
▁ xxmaj may cease their hatred ; and this dear conjunction 
▁ xxmaj plant neighbourhood and xxmaj christian - like accord 
▁ xxmaj in their sweet bosoms , that never war advance 
▁ xxmaj his bleeding sword ' twixt xxmaj england and fair xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj amen ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj now , welcome , xxmaj kate ; and bear me witness all , 
▁ xxmaj that here i kiss her as my sovereign queen . [ floulish ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup isabel . xxmaj god , the best maker of all marriages , 
▁ xxmaj combine your hearts in one , your realms in one ! 
▁ xxmaj as man and wife , being two , are one in love , 
▁ xxmaj so be there ' twixt your kingdoms such a spousal 
▁ xxmaj that never may ill office or fell jealousy , 
▁ xxmaj which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage , 
▁ xxmaj thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms , 
▁ xxmaj to make divorce of their incorporate league ; 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj english may as xxmaj french , xxmaj french xxmaj englishmen , 
▁ xxmaj receive each other . xxmaj god speak this xxmaj amen ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj amen ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj prepare we for our marriage ; on which day , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj burgundy , we 'll take your oath , 
▁ xxmaj and all the peers ' , for surety of our leagues . 
▁ xxmaj then shall i swear to xxmaj kate , and you to me , 
▁ xxmaj and may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be ! 
▁ xxmaj sennet . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup epilogue 
▁ xxup epilogue . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup chorus 

▁ xxup chorus . xxmaj thus far , with rough and all - unable pen , 
▁ xxmaj our bending author hath pursu'd the story , 
▁ xxmaj in little room confining mighty men , 
▁ xxmaj mangling by starts the full course of their glory . 
▁ xxmaj small time , but , in that small , most greatly lived 
▁ xxmaj this star of xxmaj england . xxmaj fortune made his sword ; 
▁ xxmaj by which the world 's best garden he achieved , 
▁ xxmaj and of it left his son imperial lord . 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj sixth , in infant bands crown'd king 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj france and xxmaj england , did this king succeed ; 
▁ xxmaj whose state so many had the managing 
▁ xxmaj that they lost xxmaj france and made his xxmaj england bleed ; 
▁ xxmaj which oft our stage hath shown ; and , for their sake , 
▁ xxmaj in your fair minds let this acceptance take . xxmaj exit 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1592 

 xxup the xxup first xxup part xxup of xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 


 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , uncle to the xxmaj king , and xxmaj protector 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup bedford , uncle to the xxmaj king , and xxmaj regent of xxmaj france 
▁ xxup thomas xxup beaufort , xxup duke xxup of xxup exeter , great - uncle to the king 
▁ xxup henry xxup beaufort , great - uncle to the xxmaj king , xxup bishop xxup of xxup winchester , 
▁ and afterwards xxup cardinal 
▁ xxup john xxup beaufort , xxup earl xxup of xxup somerset , afterwards xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup richard xxup plantagenet , son of xxmaj richard late xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , 
▁ afterwards xxup duke xxup of xxup york 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup warwick 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup suffolk 
▁ xxup lord xxup talbot , afterwards xxup earl xxup of xxup shrewsbury 
▁ xxup john xxup talbot , his son 
▁ xxup edmund xxup mortimer , xxup earl xxup of xxup march 
▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup fastolfe 
▁ xxup sir xxup william xxup lucy 
▁ xxup sir xxup william xxup glansdale 
▁ xxup sir xxup thomas xxup gargrave 
▁ xxup mayor of xxup london 
▁ xxup woodville , xxmaj lieutenant of the xxmaj tower 
▁ xxup vernon , of the xxmaj white xxmaj rose or xxmaj york faction 
▁ xxup basset , of the xxmaj red xxmaj rose or xxmaj lancaster faction 
▁ a xxup lawyer 
▁ xxup gaolers , to xxmaj mortimer 
▁ xxup charles , xxmaj dauphin , and afterwards xxmaj king of xxmaj france 
▁ xxup reignier , xxup duke xxup of xxup anjou , and titular xxmaj king of xxmaj naples 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup burgundy 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup alencon 
▁ xxup bastard xxup of xxup orleans 
▁ xxup governor xxup of xxup paris 
▁ xxup master - gunner xxup of xxup orleans , and his xxup son 
▁ xxup general xxup of xxup the xxup french xxup forces in xxmaj bordeaux 
▁ a xxup french xxup sergeant 
▁ a xxup porter 
▁ xxup an xxup old xxup shepherd , father to xxmaj joan la xxmaj pucelle 
▁ xxup margaret , daughter to xxmaj reignier , afterwards married to 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry 
▁ xxup countess xxup of xxup auvergne 
▁ xxup joan xxup la xxup pucelle , xxmaj commonly called xxup joan xxup of xxup arc 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj warders of the xxmaj tower , xxmaj heralds , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj messengers , xxmaj english and xxmaj french xxmaj attendants . xxmaj fiends appearing 
▁ to xxmaj la xxmaj pucelle 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj england and xxmaj france 




 xxmaj the xxmaj first xxmaj part of xxmaj king xxmaj henry the xxmaj sixth 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj westminster xxmaj abbey 

 xxmaj dead xxmaj march . xxmaj enter the funeral of xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup fifth , 
 attended on by the xxup duke xxup of xxup bedford , xxmaj regent of xxmaj france , 
 the xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , xxmaj protector , the xxup duke xxup of xxup exeter , 
 the xxup earl xxup of xxup warwick , the xxup bishop xxup of xxup winchester 

▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj hung be the heavens with black , yield day to 
▁ night ! xxmaj comets , importing change of times and states , 
▁ xxmaj brandish your crystal tresses in the sky 
▁ xxmaj and with them scourge the bad revolting stars 
▁ xxmaj that have consented unto xxmaj henry 's death ! 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth , too famous to live long ! 
▁ xxmaj england ne'er lost a king of so much worth . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj england ne'er had a king until his time . 
▁ xxmaj virtue he had , deserving to command ; 
▁ xxmaj his brandish'd sword did blind men with his beams ; 
▁ xxmaj his arms spread wider than a dragon 's wings ; 
▁ xxmaj his sparkling eyes , replete with wrathful fire , 
▁ xxmaj more dazzled and drove back his enemies 
▁ xxmaj than mid - day sun fierce bent against their faces . 
▁ xxmaj what should i say ? xxmaj his deeds exceed all speech : 
▁ xxmaj he ne'er lift up his hand but conquered . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj we mourn in black ; why mourn we not in blood ? 
▁ xxmaj henry is dead and never shall revive . 
▁ xxmaj upon a wooden coffin we attend ; 
▁ xxmaj and death 's dishonourable victory 
▁ xxmaj we with our stately presence glorify , 
▁ xxmaj like captives bound to a triumphant car . 
▁ xxmaj what ! shall we curse the planets of mishap 
▁ xxmaj that plotted thus our glory 's overthrow ? 
▁ xxmaj or shall we think the subtle - witted xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj conjurers and sorcerers , that , afraid of him , 
▁ xxmaj by magic verses have contriv'd his end ? 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj he was a king bless'd of the xxmaj king of kings ; 
▁ xxmaj unto the xxmaj french the dreadful judgment - day 
▁ xxmaj so dreadful will not be as was his sight . 
▁ xxmaj the battles of the xxmaj lord of xxmaj hosts he fought ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj church 's prayers made him so prosperous . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the xxmaj church ! xxmaj where is it ? xxmaj had not churchmen 
▁ pray'd , 
▁ xxmaj his thread of life had not so soon decay'd . 
▁ xxmaj none do you like but an effeminate prince , 
▁ xxmaj whom like a school - boy you may overawe . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj gloucester , whate'er we like , thou art 
▁ xxmaj protector 
▁ xxmaj and lookest to command the xxmaj prince and realm . 
▁ xxmaj thy wife is proud ; she holdeth thee in awe 
▁ xxmaj more than xxmaj god or religious churchmen may . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj name not religion , for thou lov'st the flesh ; 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er throughout the year to church thou go'st , 
▁ xxmaj except it be to pray against thy foes . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj cease , cease these jars and rest your minds in peace ; 
▁ xxmaj let 's to the altar . xxmaj heralds , wait on us . 
▁ xxmaj instead of gold , we 'll offer up our arms , 
▁ xxmaj since arms avail not , now that xxmaj henry 's dead . 
▁ xxmaj posterity , await for wretched years , 
▁ xxmaj when at their mothers ' moist'ned eyes babes shall suck , 
▁ xxmaj our isle be made a nourish of salt tears , 
▁ xxmaj and none but women left to wail the dead . 
▁ xxup henry the xxmaj fifth , thy ghost i invocate : 
▁ xxmaj prosper this realm , keep it from civil broils , 
▁ xxmaj combat with adverse planets in the heavens . 
▁ a far more glorious star thy soul will make 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar or bright 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my honourable lords , health to you all ! 
▁ xxmaj sad tidings bring i to you out of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj of loss , of slaughter , and discomfiture : 
▁ xxmaj guienne , xxmaj champagne , xxmaj rheims , xxmaj orleans , 
▁ xxmaj paris , xxmaj guysors , xxmaj poictiers , are all quite lost . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj what say'st thou , man , before dead xxmaj henry 's corse ? 
▁ xxmaj speak softly , or the loss of those great towns 
▁ xxmaj will make him burst his lead and rise from death . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj is xxmaj paris lost ? xxmaj is xxmaj rouen yielded up ? 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj henry were recall'd to life again , 
▁ xxmaj these news would cause him once more yield the ghost . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj how were they lost ? xxmaj what treachery was us'd ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj no treachery , but want of men and money . 
▁ xxmaj amongst the soldiers this is muttered 
▁ xxmaj that here you maintain several factions ; 
▁ xxmaj and whilst a field should be dispatch'd and fought , 
▁ xxmaj you are disputing of your generals : 
▁ xxmaj one would have ling'ring wars , with little cost ; 
▁ xxmaj another would fly swift , but wanteth wings ; 
▁ a third thinks , without expense at all , 
▁ xxmaj by guileful fair words peace may be obtain'd . 
▁ xxmaj awake , awake , xxmaj english nobility ! 
▁ xxmaj let not sloth dim your honours , new - begot . 
▁ xxmaj cropp'd are the flower - de - luces in your arms ; 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj england 's coat one half is cut away . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj were our tears wanting to this funeral , 
▁ xxmaj these tidings would call forth their flowing tides . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj me they concern ; xxmaj regent i am of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj give me my steeled coat ; xxmaj i 'll fight for xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj away with these disgraceful wailing robes ! 
▁ xxmaj wounds will i lend the xxmaj french instead of eyes , 
▁ xxmaj to weep their intermissive miseries . 

▁ xxmaj enter a second xxup messenger 

▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj lords , view these letters full of bad 
▁ mischance . 
▁ xxmaj france is revolted from the xxmaj english quite , 
▁ xxmaj except some petty towns of no import . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin xxmaj charles is crowned king in xxmaj rheims ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj bastard of xxmaj orleans with him is join'd ; 
▁ xxmaj reignier , xxmaj duke of xxmaj anjou , doth take his part ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj alencon flieth to his side . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin crowned king ! all fly to him ! 
▁ xxup o , whither shall we fly from this reproach ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj we will not fly but to our enemies ' throats . 
▁ xxmaj bedford , if thou be slack xxmaj i 'll fight it out . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj gloucester , why doubt'st thou of my forwardness ? 
▁ xxmaj an army have i muster'd in my thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj wherewith already xxmaj france is overrun . 

▁ xxmaj enter a third xxup messenger 

▁ xxup third xxup messenger . xxmaj my gracious lords , to add to your 
▁ laments , 
▁ xxmaj wherewith you now bedew xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's hearse , 
▁ i must inform you of a dismal fight 
▁ xxmaj betwixt the stout xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot and the xxmaj french . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj what ! xxmaj wherein xxmaj talbot overcame ? xxmaj is't so ? 
▁ xxup third xxup messenger . xxup o , no ; wherein xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot was 
▁ o'erthrown . 
▁ xxmaj the circumstance xxmaj i 'll tell you more at large . 
▁ xxmaj the tenth of xxmaj august last this dreadful lord , 
▁ xxmaj retiring from the siege of xxmaj orleans , 
▁ xxmaj having full scarce six thousand in his troop , 
▁ xxmaj by three and twenty thousand of the xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj was round encompassed and set upon . 
▁ xxmaj no leisure had he to enrank his men ; 
▁ xxmaj he wanted pikes to set before his archers ; 
▁ xxmaj instead whereof sharp stakes pluck'd out of hedges 
▁ xxmaj they pitched in the ground confusedly 
▁ xxmaj to keep the horsemen off from breaking in . 
▁ xxmaj more than three hours the fight continued ; 
▁ xxmaj where valiant xxmaj talbot , above human thought , 
▁ xxmaj enacted wonders with his sword and lance : 
▁ xxmaj hundreds he sent to hell , and none durst stand him ; 
▁ xxmaj here , there , and everywhere , enrag'd he slew 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french exclaim'd the devil was in arms ; 
▁ xxmaj all the whole army stood agaz'd on him . 
▁ xxmaj his soldiers , spying his undaunted spirit , 
▁ ' a xxmaj talbot ! a xxmaj talbot ! ' cried out amain , 
▁ xxmaj and rush'd into the bowels of the battle . 
▁ xxmaj here had the conquest fully been seal'd up 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj fastolfe had not play'd the coward . 
▁ xxmaj he , being in the vaward plac'd behind 
▁ xxmaj with purpose to relieve and follow them- 
▁ xxmaj cowardly fled , not having struck one stroke ; 
▁ xxmaj hence grew the general wreck and massacre . 
▁ xxmaj enclosed were they with their enemies . 
▁ a base xxmaj walloon , to win the xxmaj dauphin 's grace , 
▁ xxmaj thrust xxmaj talbot with a spear into the back ; 
▁ xxmaj whom all xxmaj france , with their chief assembled strength , 
▁ xxmaj durst not presume to look once in the face . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj is xxmaj talbot slain ? xxmaj then i will slay myself , 
▁ xxmaj for living idly here in pomp and ease , 
▁ xxmaj whilst such a worthy leader , wanting aid , 
▁ xxmaj unto his dastard foemen is betray'd . 
▁ xxup third xxup messenger . o no , he lives , but is took prisoner , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj lord xxmaj scales with him , and xxmaj lord xxmaj hungerford ; 
▁ xxmaj most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj his ransom there is none but i shall pay . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hale the xxmaj dauphin headlong from his throne ; 
▁ xxmaj his crown shall be the ransom of my friend ; 
▁ xxmaj four of their lords xxmaj i 'll change for one of ours . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my masters ; to my task will xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj bonfires in xxmaj france forthwith i am to make 
▁ xxmaj to keep our great xxmaj saint xxmaj george 's feast withal . 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand soldiers with me i will take , 
▁ xxmaj whose bloody deeds shall make an xxmaj europe quake . 
▁ xxup third xxup messenger . xxmaj so you had need ; for xxmaj orleans is besieg'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj english army is grown weak and faint ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj salisbury craveth supply 
▁ xxmaj and hardly keeps his men from mutiny , 
▁ xxmaj since they , so few , watch such a multitude . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj remember , lords , your oaths to xxmaj henry sworn , 
▁ xxmaj either to quell the xxmaj dauphin utterly , 
▁ xxmaj or bring him in obedience to your yoke . 
▁ xxup bedford . i do remember it , and here take my leave 
▁ xxmaj to go about my preparation . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj tower with all the haste i can 
▁ xxmaj to view th ' artillery and munition ; 
▁ xxmaj and then i will proclaim young xxmaj henry king . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj to xxmaj eltham will xxup i , where the young xxmaj king is , 
▁ xxmaj being ordain'd his special governor ; 
▁ xxmaj and for his safety there xxmaj i 'll best devise . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup winchester . [ aside ] xxmaj each hath his place and function to 
▁ attend : 
▁ i am left out ; for me nothing remains . 
▁ xxmaj but long i will not be xxmaj jack out of office . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king from xxmaj eltham i intend to steal , 
▁ xxmaj and sit at chiefest stern of public weal . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 2 . 

▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj before xxmaj orleans 

▁ xxmaj sound a flourish . xxmaj enter xxup charles xxup the xxup dauphin , xxup alencon , 
▁ and xxup reignier , marching with drum and soldiers 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj mars his true moving , even as in the heavens 
▁ xxmaj so in the earth , to this day is not known . 
▁ xxmaj late did he shine upon the xxmaj english side ; 
▁ xxmaj now we are victors , upon us he smiles . 
▁ xxmaj what towns of any moment but we have ? 
▁ xxmaj at pleasure here we lie near xxmaj orleans ; 
▁ xxmaj otherwhiles the famish'd xxmaj english , like pale ghosts , 
▁ xxmaj faintly besiege us one hour in a month . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj they want their porridge and their fat bull 
▁ beeves . 
▁ xxmaj either they must be dieted like mules 
▁ xxmaj and have their provender tied to their mouths , 
▁ xxmaj or piteous they will look , like drowned mice . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj let 's raise the siege . xxmaj why live we idly here ? 
▁ xxmaj talbot is taken , whom we wo nt to fear ; 
▁ xxmaj remaineth none but mad - brain'd xxmaj salisbury , 
▁ xxmaj and he may well in fretting spend his gall 
▁ xxmaj nor men nor money hath he to make war . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj sound , sound alarum ; we will rush on them . 
▁ xxmaj now for the honour of the forlorn xxmaj french ! 
▁ xxmaj him i forgive my death that killeth me , 
▁ xxmaj when he sees me go back one foot or flee . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj here alarum . xxmaj they are beaten hack by the xxmaj english , with 
▁ great loss . xxmaj re - enter xxup charles , xxup alencon , and xxup reignier 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj who ever saw the like ? xxmaj what men have xxup i ! 
▁ xxmaj dogs ! cowards ! dastards ! i would ne'er have fled 
▁ xxmaj but that they left me midst my enemies . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj salisbury is a desperate homicide ; 
▁ xxmaj he fighteth as one weary of his life . 
▁ xxmaj the other lords , like lions wanting food , 
▁ xxmaj do rush upon us as their hungry prey . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj froissart , a countryman of ours , records 
▁ xxmaj england all xxmaj olivers and xxmaj rowlands bred 
▁ xxmaj during the time xxmaj edward the xxmaj third did reign . 
▁ xxmaj more truly now may this be verified ; 
▁ xxmaj for none but xxmaj samsons and xxmaj goliases 
▁ xxmaj it sendeth forth to skirmish . xxmaj one to ten ! 
▁ xxmaj lean raw - bon'd rascals ! xxmaj who would e'er suppose 
▁ xxmaj they had such courage and audacity ? 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj let 's leave this town ; for they are hare - brain'd 
▁ slaves , 
▁ xxmaj and hunger will enforce them to be more eager . 
▁ xxmaj of old i know them ; rather with their teeth 
▁ xxmaj the walls they 'll tear down than forsake the siege . 
▁ xxup reignier . i think by some odd gimmers or device 
▁ xxmaj their arms are set , like clocks , still to strike on ; 
▁ xxmaj else ne'er could they hold out so as they do . 
▁ xxmaj by my consent , we 'll even let them alone . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj be it so . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup bastard xxup of xxup orleans 

▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj where 's the xxmaj prince xxmaj dauphin ? i have news for him . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj bastard of xxmaj orleans , thrice welcome to us . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj methinks your looks are sad , your cheer appall'd . 
▁ xxmaj hath the late overthrow wrought this offence ? 
▁ xxmaj be not dismay'd , for succour is at hand . 
▁ a holy maid hither with me i bring , 
▁ xxmaj which , by a vision sent to her from heaven , 
▁ xxmaj ordained is to raise this tedious siege 
▁ xxmaj and drive the xxmaj english forth the bounds of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj the spirit of deep prophecy she hath , 
▁ xxmaj exceeding the nine sibyls of old xxmaj rome : 
▁ xxmaj what 's past and what 's to come she can descry . 
▁ xxmaj speak , shall i call her in ? xxmaj believe my words , 
▁ xxmaj for they are certain and unfallible . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj go , call her in . [ exit xxup bastard ] 
▁ xxmaj but first , to try her skill , 
▁ xxmaj reignier , stand thou as xxmaj dauphin in my place ; 
▁ xxmaj question her proudly ; let thy looks be stern ; 
▁ xxmaj by this means shall we sound what skill she hath . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the xxup bastard xxup of xxup orleans with 
▁ xxup joan xxup la xxup pucelle 

▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj fair maid , is ' t thou wilt do these wondrous feats ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj reignier , is ' t thou that thinkest to beguile me ? 
▁ xxmaj where is the xxmaj dauphin ? xxmaj come , come from behind ; 
▁ i know thee well , though never seen before . 
▁ xxmaj be not amaz'd , there 's nothing hid from me . 
▁ xxmaj in private will i talk with thee apart . 
▁ xxmaj stand back , you lords , and give us leave awhile . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj she takes upon her bravely at first dash . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj dauphin , i am by birth a shepherd 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj my wit untrain'd in any kind of art . 
▁ xxmaj heaven and our xxmaj lady gracious hath it pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj to shine on my contemptible estate . 
▁ xxmaj lo , whilst i waited on my tender lambs 
▁ xxmaj and to sun 's parching heat display'd my cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj god 's xxmaj mother deigned to appear to me , 
▁ xxmaj and in a vision full of majesty 
▁ xxmaj will'd me to leave my base vocation 
▁ xxmaj and free my country from calamity 
▁ xxmaj her aid she promis'd and assur'd success . 
▁ xxmaj in complete glory she reveal'd herself ; 
▁ xxmaj and whereas i was black and swart before , 
▁ xxmaj with those clear rays which she infus'd on me 
▁ xxmaj that beauty am i bless'd with which you may see . 
▁ xxmaj ask me what question thou canst possible , 
▁ xxmaj and i will answer unpremeditated . 
▁ xxmaj my courage try by combat if thou dar'st , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt find that i exceed my sex . 
▁ xxmaj resolve on this : thou shalt be fortunate 
▁ xxmaj if thou receive me for thy warlike mate . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj thou hast astonish'd me with thy high terms . 
▁ xxmaj only this proof xxmaj i 'll of thy valour make 
▁ xxmaj in single combat thou shalt buckle with me ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou vanquishest , thy words are true ; 
▁ xxmaj otherwise i renounce all confidence . 
▁ xxup pucelle . i am prepar'd ; here is my keen - edg'd sword , 
▁ xxmaj deck'd with five flower - de - luces on each side , 
▁ xxmaj the which at xxmaj touraine , in xxmaj saint xxmaj katherine 's churchyard , 
▁ xxmaj out of a great deal of old iron i chose forth . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj then come , o ' xxmaj god 's name ; i fear no woman . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj and while i live xxmaj i 'll ne'er fly from a man . 
▁ [ here they fight and xxup joan xxup la xxup pucelle overcomes ] 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj stay , stay thy hands ; thou art an xxmaj amazon , 
▁ xxmaj and fightest with the sword of xxmaj deborah . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj christ 's xxmaj mother helps me , else i were too weak . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj whoe'er helps thee , ' tis thou that must help me . 
▁ xxmaj impatiently i burn with thy desire ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart and hands thou hast at once subdu'd . 
▁ xxmaj excellent xxmaj pucelle , if thy name be so , 
▁ xxmaj let me thy servant and not sovereign be . 
▁ ' tis the xxmaj french xxmaj dauphin sueth to thee thus . 
▁ xxup pucelle . i must not yield to any rites of love , 
▁ xxmaj for my profession 's sacred from above . 
▁ xxmaj when i have chased all thy foes from hence , 
▁ xxmaj then will i think upon a recompense . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj my lord , methinks , is very long in talk . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock ; 
▁ xxmaj else ne'er could he so long protract his speech . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj shall we disturb him , since he keeps no mean ? 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj he may mean more than we poor men do know ; 
▁ xxmaj these women are shrewd tempters with their tongues . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj my lord , where are you ? xxmaj what devise you on ? 
▁ xxmaj shall we give o'er xxmaj orleans , or no ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj why , no , i say ; distrustful recreants ! 
▁ xxmaj fight till the last gasp ; i will be your guard . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj what she says xxmaj i 'll confirm ; we 'll fight it out . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj assign'd am i to be the xxmaj english scourge . 
▁ xxmaj this night the siege assuredly xxmaj i 'll raise . 
▁ xxmaj expect xxmaj saint xxmaj martin 's summer , halcyon days , 
▁ xxmaj since i have entered into these wars . 
▁ xxmaj glory is like a circle in the water , 
▁ xxmaj which never ceaseth to enlarge itself 
▁ xxmaj till by broad spreading it disperse to nought . 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj henry 's death the xxmaj english circle ends ; 
▁ xxmaj dispersed are the glories it included . 
▁ xxmaj now am i like that proud insulting ship 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj caesar and his fortune bare at once . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj was xxmaj mahomet inspired with a dove ? 
▁ xxmaj thou with an eagle art inspired then . 
▁ xxmaj helen , the mother of great xxmaj constantine , 
▁ xxmaj nor yet xxmaj saint xxmaj philip 's daughters were like thee . 
▁ xxmaj bright star of xxmaj venus , fall'n down on the earth , 
▁ xxmaj how may i reverently worship thee enough ? 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj leave off delays , and let us raise the siege . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj woman , do what thou canst to save our honours ; 
▁ xxmaj drive them from xxmaj orleans , and be immortaliz'd . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj presently we 'll try . xxmaj come , let 's away about it . 
▁ xxmaj no prophet will i trust if she prove false . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 3 . 

▁ xxmaj london . xxmaj before the xxmaj tower gates 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , with his serving - men 
▁ in blue coats 

▁ xxup gloucester . i am come to survey the xxmaj tower this day ; 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj henry 's death , i fear , there is conveyance . 
▁ xxmaj where be these warders that they wait not here ? 
▁ xxmaj open the gates ; ' tis xxmaj gloucester that calls . 
▁ xxup first xxup warder . [ within ] xxmaj who 's there that knocks so 
▁ imperiously ? 
▁ xxup first xxup serving - man . xxmaj it is the noble xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxup second xxup warder . [ within ] xxmaj whoe'er he be , you may not be 
▁ let in . 
▁ xxup first xxup serving - man . xxmaj villains , answer you so the xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj protector ? 
▁ xxup first xxup warder . [ within ] xxmaj the xxmaj lord protect him ! so we 
▁ answer him . 
▁ xxmaj we do no otherwise than we are will'd . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj who willed you , or whose will stands but 
▁ mine ? 
▁ xxmaj there 's none xxmaj protector of the realm but xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj break up the gates , xxmaj i 'll be your warrantize . 
▁ xxmaj shall i be flouted thus by dunghill grooms ? 
▁ [ gloucester 's men rush at the xxmaj tower gates , and 
▁ xxup woodville the xxmaj lieutenant speaks within ] 
▁ xxup woodville . [ within ] xxmaj what noise is this ? xxmaj what traitors 
▁ have we here ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj lieutenant , is it you whose voice i hear ? 
▁ xxmaj open the gates ; here 's xxmaj gloucester that would enter . 
▁ xxup woodville . [ within ] xxmaj have patience , noble xxmaj duke , i may 
▁ not open ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal of xxmaj winchester forbids . 
▁ xxmaj from him i have express commandment 
▁ xxmaj that thou nor none of thine shall be let in . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj faint - hearted xxmaj woodville , prizest him fore me ? 
▁ xxmaj arrogant xxmaj winchester , that haughty prelate 
▁ xxmaj whom xxmaj henry , our late sovereign , ne'er could brook ! 
▁ xxmaj thou art no friend to xxmaj god or to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj open the gates , or xxmaj i 'll shut thee out shortly . 
▁ xxup serving - men . xxmaj open the gates unto the xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , 
▁ xxmaj or we 'll burst them open , if that you come not quickly . 

▁ xxmaj enter to the xxup protector at the xxmaj tower gates xxup winchester 
▁ and his men in tawny coats 

▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj how now , ambitious xxmaj humphry ! xxmaj what means 
▁ this ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj peel'd priest , dost thou command me to be 
▁ shut out ? 
▁ xxup winchester . i do , thou most usurping proditor , 
▁ xxmaj and not xxmaj protector of the xxmaj king or realm . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj stand back , thou manifest conspirator , 
▁ xxmaj thou that contrived'st to murder our dead lord ; 
▁ xxmaj thou that giv'st whores indulgences to sin . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll canvass thee in thy broad cardinal 's hat , 
▁ xxmaj if thou proceed in this thy insolence . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj nay , stand thou back ; i will not budge a foot . 
▁ xxmaj this be xxmaj damascus ; be thou cursed xxmaj cain , 
▁ xxmaj to slay thy brother xxmaj abel , if thou wilt . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i will not slay thee , but xxmaj i 'll drive thee back . 
▁ xxmaj thy scarlet robes as a child 's bearing - cloth 
▁ xxmaj i 'll use to carry thee out of this place . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj do what thou dar'st ; i beard thee to thy face . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what ! am i dar'd and bearded to my face ? 
▁ xxmaj draw , men , for all this privileged place 
▁ xxmaj blue - coats to tawny - coats . xxmaj priest , beware your beard ; 
▁ i mean to tug it , and to cuff you soundly ; 
▁ xxmaj under my feet i stamp thy cardinal 's hat ; 
▁ xxmaj in spite of xxmaj pope or dignities of church , 
▁ xxmaj here by the cheeks xxmaj i 'll drag thee up and down . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj gloucester , thou wilt answer this before the 
▁ xxmaj pope . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj winchester goose ! i cry ' a rope , a rope ! ' 
▁ xxmaj now beat them hence ; why do you let them stay ? 
▁ xxmaj thee xxmaj i 'll chase hence , thou wolf in sheep 's array . 
▁ xxmaj out , tawny - coats ! xxmaj out , scarlet hypocrite ! 

▁ xxmaj here xxup gloucester 's men beat out the xxup cardinal 's 
▁ men ; and enter in the hurly burly the xxup mayor xxup of 
▁ xxup london and his xxup officers 

▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj fie , lords ! that you , being supreme magistrates , 
▁ xxmaj thus contumeliously should break the peace ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj peace , xxmaj mayor ! thou know'st little of my wrongs : 
▁ xxmaj here 's xxmaj beaufort , that regards nor xxmaj god nor xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj hath here distrain'd the xxmaj tower to his use . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj here 's xxmaj gloucester , a foe to citizens ; 
▁ xxmaj one that still motions war and never peace , 
▁ xxmaj o'ercharging your free purses with large fines ; 
▁ xxmaj that seeks to overthrow religion , 
▁ xxmaj because he is xxmaj protector of the realm , 
▁ xxmaj and would have armour here out of the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj to crown himself xxmaj king and suppress the xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i xxmaj will not answer thee with words , but blows . 
▁ [ here they skirmish again ] 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj nought rests for me in this tumultuous strife 
▁ xxmaj but to make open proclamation . 
▁ xxmaj come , officer , as loud as e'er thou canst , 
▁ xxmaj cry . 
▁ xxup officer . [ cries ] xxmaj all manner of men assembled here in arms 
▁ this day against xxmaj god 's peace and the xxmaj king 's , we charge 
▁ and command you , in his xxmaj highness ' name , to repair to 
▁ your several dwelling - places ; and not to wear , handle , or 
▁ use , any sword , weapon , or dagger , henceforward , upon 
▁ pain of death . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj cardinal , xxmaj i 'll be no breaker of the law ; 
▁ xxmaj but we shall meet and break our minds at large . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj gloucester , we 'll meet to thy cost , be sure ; 
▁ xxmaj thy heart - blood i will have for this day 's work . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj i 'll call for clubs if you will not away . 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj cardinal 's more haughty than the devil . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj mayor , farewell ; thou dost but what thou 
▁ mayst . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj abominable xxmaj gloucester , guard thy head , 
▁ xxmaj for i intend to have it ere long . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt , severally , xxup gloucester and xxup winchester 
▁ with their servants 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj see the coast clear'd , and then we will depart . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj god , these nobles should such stomachs bear ! 
▁ i myself fight not once in forty year . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 4 . 

▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj before xxmaj orleans 

▁ xxmaj enter , on the walls , the xxup master - gunner 
▁ xxup of xxup orleans and his xxup boy 

▁ xxup master - gunner . xxmaj sirrah , thou know'st how xxmaj orleans is 
▁ besieg'd , 
▁ xxmaj and how the xxmaj english have the suburbs won . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj father , i know ; and oft have shot at them , 
▁ xxmaj howe'er unfortunate i miss'd my aim . 
▁ xxup master - gunner . xxmaj but now thou shalt not . xxmaj be thou rul'd 
▁ by me . 
▁ xxmaj chief master - gunner am i of this town ; 
▁ xxmaj something i must do to procure me grace . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince 's espials have informed me 
▁ xxmaj how the xxmaj english , in the suburbs close intrench'd , 
▁ xxmaj wo nt , through a secret grate of iron bars 
▁ xxmaj in yonder tower , to overpeer the city , 
▁ xxmaj and thence discover how with most advantage 
▁ xxmaj they may vex us with shot or with assault . 
▁ xxmaj to intercept this inconvenience , 
▁ a piece of ordnance ' gainst it i have plac'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and even these three days have i watch'd 
▁ xxmaj if i could see them . xxmaj now do thou watch , 
▁ xxmaj for i can stay no longer . 
▁ xxmaj if thou spy'st any , run and bring me word ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt find me at the xxmaj governor 's . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj father , i warrant you ; take you no care ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll never trouble you , if i may spy them . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup salisbury and xxup talbot on the turrets , with 
▁ xxup sir xxup william xxup glansdale , xxup sir xxup thomas xxup gargrave , 
▁ and others 

▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj talbot , my life , my joy , again return'd ! 
▁ xxmaj how wert thou handled being prisoner ? 
▁ xxmaj or by what means got'st thou to be releas'd ? 
▁ xxmaj discourse , i prithee , on this turret 's top . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj bedford had a prisoner 
▁ xxmaj call'd the brave xxmaj lord xxmaj ponton de xxmaj santrailles ; 
▁ xxmaj for him was i exchang'd and ransomed . 
▁ xxmaj but with a baser man of arms by far 
▁ xxmaj once , in contempt , they would have barter'd me ; 
▁ xxmaj which i disdaining scorn'd , and craved death 
▁ xxmaj rather than i would be so vile esteem'd . 
▁ xxmaj in fine , redeem'd i was as i desir'd . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxup o ! the treacherous xxmaj fastolfe wounds my heart 
▁ xxmaj whom with my bare fists i would execute , 
▁ xxmaj if i now had him brought into my power . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj yet tell'st thou not how thou wert entertain'd . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj with scoffs , and scorns , and contumelious taunts , 
▁ xxmaj in open market - place produc'd they me 
▁ xxmaj to be a public spectacle to all ; 
▁ xxmaj here , said they , is the terror of the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj the scarecrow that affrights our children so . 
▁ xxmaj then broke i from the officers that led me , 
▁ xxmaj and with my nails digg'd stones out of the ground 
▁ xxmaj to hurl at the beholders of my shame ; 
▁ xxmaj my grisly countenance made others fly ; 
▁ xxmaj none durst come near for fear of sudden death . 
▁ xxmaj in iron walls they deem'd me not secure ; 
▁ xxmaj so great fear of my name ' mongst them was spread 
▁ xxmaj that they suppos'd i could rend bars of steel 
▁ xxmaj and spurn in pieces posts of adamant ; 
▁ xxmaj wherefore a guard of chosen shot i had 
▁ xxmaj that walk'd about me every minute - while ; 
▁ xxmaj and if i did but stir out of my bed , 
▁ xxmaj ready they were to shoot me to the heart . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup boy with a linstock 

▁ xxup salisbury . i grieve to hear what torments you endur'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but we will be reveng'd sufficiently . 
▁ xxmaj now it is supper - time in xxmaj orleans : 
▁ xxmaj here , through this grate , i count each one 
▁ xxmaj and view the xxmaj frenchmen how they fortify . 
▁ xxmaj let us look in ; the sight will much delight thee . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj gargrave and xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj glansdale , 
▁ xxmaj let me have your express opinions 
▁ xxmaj where is best place to make our batt'ry next . 
▁ xxup gargrave . i think at the xxmaj north xxmaj gate ; for there stand lords . 
▁ xxup glansdale . xxmaj and i here , at the bulwark of the bridge . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj for aught i see , this city must be famish'd , 
▁ xxmaj or with light skirmishes enfeebled . 
▁ [ here they shoot and xxup salisbury and xxup gargrave 
▁ fall down ] 
▁ xxup salisbury . o xxmaj lord , have mercy on us , wretched sinners ! 
▁ xxup gargrave . o xxmaj lord , have mercy on me , woeful man ! 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj what chance is this that suddenly hath cross'd us ? 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj salisbury ; at least , if thou canst speak . 
▁ xxmaj how far'st thou , mirror of all martial men ? 
▁ xxmaj one of thy eyes and thy cheek 's side struck off ! 
▁ xxmaj accursed tower ! accursed fatal hand 
▁ xxmaj that hath contriv'd this woeful tragedy ! 
▁ xxmaj in thirteen battles xxmaj salisbury o'ercame ; 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth he first train'd to the wars ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst any trump did sound or drum struck up , 
▁ xxmaj his sword did ne'er leave striking in the field . 
▁ xxmaj yet liv'st thou , xxmaj salisbury ? xxmaj though thy speech doth fail , 
▁ xxmaj one eye thou hast to look to heaven for grace ; 
▁ xxmaj the sun with one eye vieweth all the world . 
▁ xxmaj heaven , be thou gracious to none alive 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj salisbury wants mercy at thy hands ! 
▁ xxmaj bear hence his body ; i will help to bury it . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj gargrave , hast thou any life ? 
▁ xxmaj speak unto xxmaj talbot ; nay , look up to him . 
▁ xxmaj salisbury , cheer thy spirit with this comfort , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt not die whiles 
▁ xxmaj he beckons with his hand and smiles on me , 
▁ xxmaj as who should say ' when i am dead and gone , 
▁ xxmaj remember to avenge me on the xxmaj french . ' 
▁ xxmaj plantagenet , i will ; and like thee , xxmaj nero , 
▁ xxmaj play on the lute , beholding the towns burn . 
▁ xxmaj wretched shall xxmaj france be only in my name . 
▁ [ here an alarum , and it thunders and lightens ] 
▁ xxmaj what stir is this ? xxmaj what tumult 's in the heavens ? 
▁ xxmaj whence cometh this alarum and the noise ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 
▁
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord , my lord , the xxmaj french have gather'd 
▁ head 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin , with one xxmaj joan la xxmaj pucelle join'd , 
▁ a holy prophetess new risen up , 
▁ xxmaj is come with a great power to raise the siege . 
▁ [ here xxup salisbury lifteth himself up and groans ] 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj hear , hear how dying xxmaj salisbury doth groan . 
▁ xxmaj it irks his heart he can not be reveng'd . 
▁ xxmaj frenchmen , xxmaj i 'll be a xxmaj salisbury to you . 
▁ xxmaj pucelle or puzzel , dolphin or dogfish , 
▁ xxmaj your hearts xxmaj i 'll stamp out with my horse 's heels 
▁ xxmaj and make a quagmire of your mingled brains . 
▁ xxmaj convey me xxmaj salisbury into his tent , 
▁ xxmaj and then we 'll try what these dastard xxmaj frenchmen dare . 
▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 5 . 

▁ xxmaj before xxmaj orleans 

▁ xxmaj here an alarum again , and xxup talbot pursueth the 
▁ xxup dauphin and driveth him . xxmaj then enter xxup joan xxup la xxup pucelle 
▁ driving xxmaj englishmen before her . xxmaj then enter xxup talbot 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj where is my strength , my valour , and my force ? 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj english troops retire , i can not stay them ; 
▁ a woman clad in armour chaseth them . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup la xxup pucelle 

▁ xxmaj here , here she comes . xxmaj i 'll have a bout with thee . 
▁ xxmaj devil or devil 's dam , xxmaj i 'll conjure thee ; 
▁ xxmaj blood will i draw on thee - thou art a witch 
▁ xxmaj and straightway give thy soul to him thou serv'st . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj come , come , ' tis only i that must disgrace thee . 
▁ [ here they fight ] 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj heavens , can you suffer hell so to prevail ? 
▁ xxmaj my breast xxmaj i 'll burst with straining of my courage . 
▁ xxmaj and from my shoulders crack my arms asunder , 
▁ xxmaj but i will chastise this high minded strumpet . 
▁ [ they fight again ] 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj talbot , farewell ; thy hour is not yet come . 
▁ i must go victual xxmaj orleans forthwith . 
▁ [ a short alarum ; then enter the town with soldiers ] 
▁ xxmaj o'ertake me if thou canst ; i scorn thy strength . 
▁ xxmaj go , go , cheer up thy hungry starved men ; 
▁ xxmaj help xxmaj salisbury to make his testament . 
▁ xxmaj this day is ours , as many more shall be . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj my thoughts are whirled like a potter 's wheel ; 
▁ i know not where i am nor what i do . 
▁ a witch by fear , not force , like xxmaj hannibal , 
▁ xxmaj drives back our troops and conquers as she lists . 
▁ xxmaj so bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench 
▁ xxmaj are from their hives and houses driven away . 
▁ xxmaj they call'd us , for our fierceness , xxmaj english dogs ; 
▁ xxmaj now like to whelps we crying run away . 
▁ [ a short alarum ] 
▁ xxmaj hark , countrymen ! xxmaj either renew the fight 
▁ xxmaj or tear the lions out of xxmaj england 's coat ; 
▁ xxmaj renounce your soil , give sheep in lions ' stead : 
▁ xxmaj sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf , 
▁ xxmaj or horse or oxen from the leopard , 
▁ xxmaj as you fly from your oft subdued slaves . 
▁ [ alarum . xxmaj here another skirmish ] 
▁ xxmaj it will not be - retire into your trenches . 
▁ xxmaj you all consented unto xxmaj salisbury 's death , 
▁ xxmaj for none would strike a stroke in his revenge . 
▁ xxmaj pucelle is ent'red into xxmaj orleans 
▁ xxmaj in spite of us or aught that we could do . 
▁ xxup o , would i were to die with xxmaj salisbury ! 
▁ xxmaj the shame hereof will make me hide my head . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup talbot . xxmaj alarum ; retreat 



▁ xxup scene 6 . 

▁ xxup orleans 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter on the walls , xxup la xxup pucelle , xxup charles , 
▁ xxup reignier , xxup alencon , and soldiers 

▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj advance our waving colours on the walls ; 
▁ xxmaj rescu'd is xxmaj orleans from the xxmaj english . 
▁ xxmaj thus xxmaj joan la xxmaj pucelle hath perform'd her word . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj divinest creature , xxmaj astraea 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj how shall i honour thee for this success ? 
▁ xxmaj thy promises are like xxmaj adonis ' gardens , 
▁ xxmaj that one day bloom'd and fruitful were the next . 
▁ xxmaj france , triumph in thy glorious prophetess . 
▁ xxmaj recover'd is the town of xxmaj orleans . 
▁ xxmaj more blessed hap did ne'er befall our state . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the 
▁ town ? 
▁ xxmaj dauphin , command the citizens make bonfires 
▁ xxmaj and feast and banquet in the open streets 
▁ xxmaj to celebrate the joy that xxmaj god hath given us . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj all xxmaj france will be replete with mirth and joy 
▁ xxmaj when they shall hear how we have play'd the men . 
▁ xxup charles . ' tis xxmaj joan , not we , by whom the day is won ; 
▁ xxmaj for which i will divide my crown with her ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the priests and friars in my realm 
▁ xxmaj shall in procession sing her endless praise . 
▁ a statelier pyramis to her xxmaj i 'll rear 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj rhodope 's of xxmaj memphis ever was . 
▁ xxmaj in memory of her , when she is dead , 
▁ xxmaj her ashes , in an urn more precious 
▁ xxmaj than the rich jewel'd coffer of xxmaj darius , 
▁ xxmaj transported shall be at high festivals 
▁ xxmaj before the kings and queens of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj no longer on xxmaj saint xxmaj denis will we cry , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj joan la xxmaj pucelle shall be xxmaj france 's saint . 
▁ xxmaj come in , and let us banquet royally 
▁ xxmaj after this golden day of victory . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj before xxmaj orleans 

 xxmaj enter a xxup french xxup sergeant and two xxup sentinels 

▁ xxup sergeant . xxmaj sirs , take your places and be vigilant . 
▁ xxmaj if any noise or soldier you perceive 
▁ xxmaj near to the walls , by some apparent sign 
▁ xxmaj let us have knowledge at the court of guard . 
▁ xxup first xxup sentinel . xxmaj sergeant , you shall . [ exit xxup sergeant ] 
▁ xxmaj thus are poor servitors , 
▁ xxmaj when others sleep upon their quiet beds , 
▁ xxmaj constrain'd to watch in darkness , rain , and cold . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup talbot , xxup bedford , xxup burgundy , and forces , 
▁ with scaling - ladders ; their drums beating a dead 
▁ march 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj lord xxmaj regent , and redoubted xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj by whose approach the regions of xxmaj artois , 
▁ xxmaj wallon , and xxmaj picardy , are friends to us , 
▁ xxmaj this happy night the xxmaj frenchmen are secure , 
▁ xxmaj having all day carous'd and banqueted ; 
▁ xxmaj embrace we then this opportunity , 
▁ xxmaj as fitting best to quittance their deceit , 
▁ xxmaj contriv'd by art and baleful sorcery . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj coward of xxmaj france , how much he wrongs his fame , 
▁ xxmaj despairing of his own arm 's fortitude , 
▁ xxmaj to join with witches and the help of hell ! 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj traitors have never other company . 
▁ xxmaj but what 's that xxmaj pucelle whom they term so pure ? 
▁ xxup talbot . a maid , they say . 
▁ xxup bedford . a maid ! and be so martial ! 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj pray xxmaj god she prove not masculine ere long , 
▁ xxmaj if underneath the standard of the xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj she carry armour as she hath begun . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj well , let them practise and converse with spirits : 
▁ xxmaj god is our fortress , in whose conquering name 
▁ xxmaj let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj ascend , brave xxmaj talbot ; we will follow thee . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj not all together ; better far , i guess , 
▁ xxmaj that we do make our entrance several ways ; 
▁ xxmaj that if it chance the one of us do fail 
▁ xxmaj the other yet may rise against their force . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj agreed ; xxmaj i 'll to yond corner . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj and i to this .