xxbos xxup talbot . xxmaj and here will xxmaj talbot mount or make his grave . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj salisbury , for thee , and for the right 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj english xxmaj henry , shall this night appear 
▁ xxmaj how much in duty i am bound to both . 
▁ [ the xxmaj english scale the walls and cry ' saint xxmaj george ! 
▁ a xxmaj talbot ! ' ] 
▁ xxup sentinel . xxmaj arm ! arm ! xxmaj the enemy doth make assault . 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french leap o'er the walls in their shirts . 
▁ xxmaj enter , several ways , xxup bastard , xxup alencon , xxup reignier , 
▁ half ready and half unready 

▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj how now , my lords ? xxmaj what , all unready so ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj unready ! xxmaj ay , and glad we ' scap'd so well . 
▁ xxup reignier . ' twas time , i trow , to wake and leave our beds , 
▁ xxmaj hearing alarums at our chamber doors . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj of all exploits since first i follow'd arms 
▁ xxmaj ne'er heard i of a warlike enterprise 
▁ xxmaj more venturous or desperate than this . 
▁ xxup bastard . i think this xxmaj talbot be a fiend of hell . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj if not of hell , the heavens , sure , favour him 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj here cometh xxmaj charles ; i marvel how he sped . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles and xxup la xxup pucelle 

▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj tut ! holy xxmaj joan was his defensive guard . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj is this thy cunning , thou deceitful dame ? 
▁ xxmaj didst thou at first , to flatter us withal , 
▁ xxmaj make us partakers of a little gain 
▁ xxmaj that now our loss might be ten times so much ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj wherefore is xxmaj charles impatient with his friend ? 
▁ xxmaj at all times will you have my power alike ? 
▁ xxmaj sleeping or waking , must i still prevail 
▁ xxmaj or will you blame and lay the fault on me ? 
▁ xxmaj improvident soldiers ! xxmaj had your watch been good 
▁ xxmaj this sudden mischief never could have fall'n . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj duke of xxmaj alencon , this was your default 
▁ xxmaj that , being captain of the watch to - night , 
▁ xxmaj did look no better to that weighty charge . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj had all your quarters been as safely kept 
▁ xxmaj as that whereof i had the government , 
▁ xxmaj we had not been thus shamefully surpris'd . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj mine was secure . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj and so was mine , my lord . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj and , for myself , most part of all this night , 
▁ xxmaj within her quarter and mine own precinct 
▁ i was employ'd in passing to and fro 
▁ xxmaj about relieving of the sentinels . 
▁ xxmaj then how or which way should they first break in ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj question , my lords , no further of the case , 
▁ xxmaj how or which way ; ' tis sure they found some place 
▁ xxmaj but weakly guarded , where the breach was made . 
▁ xxmaj and now there rests no other shift but this 
▁ xxmaj to gather our soldiers , scatter'd and dispers'd , 
▁ xxmaj and lay new platforms to endamage them . 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter an xxup english xxup soldier , crying 
▁ ' a xxmaj talbot ! a xxmaj talbot ! ' xxmaj they fly , leaving their 
▁ clothes behind 

▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj i 'll be so bold to take what they have left . 
▁ xxmaj the cry of xxmaj talbot serves me for a sword ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have loaden me with many spoils , 
▁ xxmaj using no other weapon but his name . xxmaj exit 




▁ xxup scene 2 . 

▁ xxup orleans . xxmaj within the town 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup talbot , xxup bedford , xxup burgundy , a xxup captain , 
▁ and others 

▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj the day begins to break , and night is fled 
▁ xxmaj whose pitchy mantle over - veil'd the earth . 
▁ xxmaj here sound retreat and cease our hot pursuit . 
▁ [ retreat sounded ] 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj bring forth the body of old xxmaj salisbury 
▁ xxmaj and here advance it in the market - place , 
▁ xxmaj the middle centre of this cursed town . 
▁ xxmaj now have i paid my vow unto his soul ; 
▁ xxmaj for every drop of blood was drawn from him 
▁ xxmaj there hath at least five xxmaj frenchmen died to - night . 
▁ xxmaj and that hereafter ages may behold 
▁ xxmaj what ruin happened in revenge of him , 
▁ xxmaj within their chiefest temple xxmaj i 'll erect 
▁ a tomb , wherein his corpse shall be interr'd ; 
▁ xxmaj upon the which , that every one may read , 
▁ xxmaj shall be engrav'd the sack of xxmaj orleans , 
▁ xxmaj the treacherous manner of his mournful death , 
▁ xxmaj and what a terror he had been to xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj but , lords , in all our bloody massacre , 
▁ i muse we met not with the xxmaj dauphin 's grace , 
▁ xxmaj his new - come champion , virtuous xxmaj joan of xxmaj arc , 
▁ xxmaj nor any of his false confederates . 
▁ xxup bedford . ' tis thought , xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot , when the fight began , 
▁ xxmaj rous'd on the sudden from their drowsy beds , 
▁ xxmaj they did amongst the troops of armed men 
▁ xxmaj leap o'er the walls for refuge in the field . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj myself , as far as i could well discern 
▁ xxmaj for smoke and dusky vapours of the night , 
▁ xxmaj am sure i scar'd the xxmaj dauphin and his trull , 
▁ xxmaj when arm in arm they both came swiftly running , 
▁ xxmaj like to a pair of loving turtle - doves 
▁ xxmaj that could not live asunder day or night . 
▁ xxmaj after that things are set in order here , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll follow them with all the power we have . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj all hail , my lords ! xxmaj which of this princely train 
▁ xxmaj call ye the warlike xxmaj talbot , for his acts 
▁ xxmaj so much applauded through the realm of xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj here is the xxmaj talbot ; who would speak with him ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the virtuous lady , xxmaj countess of xxmaj auvergne , 
▁ xxmaj with modesty admiring thy renown , 
▁ xxmaj by me entreats , great lord , thou wouldst vouchsafe 
▁ xxmaj to visit her poor castle where she lies , 
▁ xxmaj that she may boast she hath beheld the man 
▁ xxmaj whose glory fills the world with loud report . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj is it even so ? xxmaj nay , then i see our wars 
▁ xxmaj will turn into a peaceful comic sport , 
▁ xxmaj when ladies crave to be encount'red with . 
▁ xxmaj you may not , my lord , despise her gentle suit . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj ne'er trust me then ; for when a world of men 
▁ xxmaj could not prevail with all their oratory , 
▁ xxmaj yet hath a woman 's kindness overrul'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore tell her i return great thanks 
▁ xxmaj and in submission will attend on her . 
▁ xxmaj will not your honours bear me company ? 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj no , truly ; ' tis more than manners will ; 
▁ xxmaj and i have heard it said unbidden guests 
▁ xxmaj are often welcomest when they are gone . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj well then , alone , since there 's no remedy , 
▁ i mean to prove this lady 's courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj come hither , xxmaj captain . [ whispers ] xxmaj you perceive my mind ? 
▁ xxup captain . i do , my lord , and mean accordingly . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 3 . 

▁ xxup auvergne . xxmaj the xxmaj castle 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup countess and her xxup porter 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj porter , remember what i gave in charge ; 
▁ xxmaj and when you have done so , bring the keys to me . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj madam , i will . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj the plot is laid ; if all things fall out right , 
▁ i shall as famous be by this exploit . 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj scythian xxmaj tomyris by xxmaj cyrus ' death . 
▁ xxmaj great is the rumour of this dreadful knight , 
▁ xxmaj and his achievements of no less account . 
▁ xxmaj fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears 
▁ xxmaj to give their censure of these rare reports . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup messenger and xxup talbot . 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , according as your ladyship desir'd , 
▁ xxmaj by message crav'd , so is xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot come . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj and he is welcome . xxmaj what ! is this the man ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj madam , it is . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj is this the scourge of xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxmaj is this xxmaj talbot , so much fear'd abroad 
▁ xxmaj that with his name the mothers still their babes ? 
▁ i see report is fabulous and false . 
▁ i thought i should have seen some xxmaj hercules , 
▁ a second xxmaj hector , for his grim aspect 
▁ xxmaj and large proportion of his strong - knit limbs . 
▁ xxmaj alas , this is a child , a silly dwarf ! 
▁ xxmaj it can not be this weak and writhled shrimp 
▁ xxmaj should strike such terror to his enemies . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj madam , i have been bold to trouble you ; 
▁ xxmaj but since your ladyship is not at leisure , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll sort some other time to visit you . [ going ] 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj what means he now ? xxmaj go ask him whither he 
▁ goes . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj stay , my xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot ; for my lady craves 
▁ xxmaj to know the cause of your abrupt departure . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj marry , for that she 's in a wrong belief , 
▁ i go to certify her xxmaj talbot 's here . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup porter xxmaj with keys 

▁ xxup countess . xxmaj if thou be he , then art thou prisoner . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj prisoner ! xxmaj to whom ? 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj to me , blood - thirsty lord 
▁ xxmaj and for that cause i train'd thee to my house . 
▁ xxmaj long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me , 
▁ xxmaj for in my gallery thy picture hangs ; 
▁ xxmaj but now the substance shall endure the like 
▁ xxmaj and i will chain these legs and arms of thine 
▁ xxmaj that hast by tyranny these many years 
▁ xxmaj wasted our country , slain our citizens , 
▁ xxmaj and sent our sons and husbands captivate . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj laughest thou , wretch ? xxmaj thy mirth shall turn to 
▁ moan . 
▁ xxup talbot . i laugh to see your ladyship so fond 
▁ xxmaj to think that you have aught but xxmaj talbot 's shadow 
▁ xxmaj whereon to practise your severity . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj why , art not thou the man ? 
▁ xxup talbot . i am indeed . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj then have i substance too . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj no , no , i am but shadow of myself . 
▁ xxmaj you are deceiv'd , my substance is not here ; 
▁ xxmaj for what you see is but the smallest part 
▁ xxmaj and least proportion of humanity . 
▁ i tell you , madam , were the whole frame here , 
▁ xxmaj it is of such a spacious lofty pitch 
▁ xxmaj your roof were not sufficient to contain ' t. 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj this is a riddling merchant for the nonce ; 
▁ xxmaj he will be here , and yet he is not here . 
▁ xxmaj how can these contrarieties agree ? 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj that will i show you presently . 

▁ xxmaj winds his horn ; drums strike up ; 
▁ a peal of ordnance . xxmaj enter soldiers 

▁ xxmaj how say you , madam ? xxmaj are you now persuaded 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj talbot is but shadow of himself ? 
▁ xxmaj these are his substance , sinews , arms , and strength , 
▁ xxmaj with which he yoketh your rebellious necks , 
▁ xxmaj razeth your cities , and subverts your towns , 
▁ xxmaj and in a moment makes them desolate . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj victorious xxmaj talbot ! pardon my abuse . 
▁ i find thou art no less than fame hath bruited , 
▁ xxmaj and more than may be gathered by thy shape . 
▁ xxmaj let my presumption not provoke thy wrath , 
▁ xxmaj for i am sorry that with reverence 
▁ i did not entertain thee as thou art . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj be not dismay'd , fair lady ; nor misconster 
▁ xxmaj the mind of xxmaj talbot as you did mistake 
▁ xxmaj the outward composition of his body . 
▁ xxmaj what you have done hath not offended me . 
▁ xxmaj nor other satisfaction do i crave 
▁ xxmaj but only , with your patience , that we may 
▁ xxmaj taste of your wine and see what cates you have , 
▁ xxmaj for soldiers ' stomachs always serve them well . 
▁ xxup countess . xxmaj with all my heart , and think me honoured 
▁ xxmaj to feast so great a warrior in my house . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 4 . 

▁ xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj temple garden 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup earls xxup of xxup somerset , xxup suffolk , and xxup warwick ; 
▁ xxup richard xxup plantagenet , xxup vernon , and another xxup lawyer 

▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj great lords and gentlemen , what means this 
▁ silence ? 
▁ xxmaj dare no man answer in a case of truth ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj within the xxmaj temple xxmaj hall we were too loud ; 
▁ xxmaj the garden here is more convenient . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj then say at once if i maintain'd the truth ; 
▁ xxmaj or else was wrangling xxmaj somerset in th ' error ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj faith , i have been a truant in the law 
▁ xxmaj and never yet could frame my will to it ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore frame the law unto my will . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj judge you , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwick , then , between us . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj between two hawks , which flies the higher pitch ; 
▁ xxmaj between two dogs , which hath the deeper mouth ; 
▁ xxmaj between two blades , which bears the better temper ; 
▁ xxmaj between two horses , which doth bear him best ; 
▁ xxmaj between two girls , which hath the merriest eye 
▁ i have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgment ; 
▁ xxmaj but in these nice sharp quillets of the law , 
▁ xxmaj good faith , i am no wiser than a daw . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj tut , tut , here is a mannerly forbearance : 
▁ xxmaj the truth appears so naked on my side 
▁ xxmaj that any purblind eye may find it out . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj and on my side it is so well apparell'd , 
▁ xxmaj so clear , so shining , and so evident , 
▁ xxmaj that it will glimmer through a blind man 's eye . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj since you are tongue - tied and so loath to speak , 
▁ xxmaj in dumb significants proclaim your thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj let him that is a true - born gentleman 
▁ xxmaj and stands upon the honour of his birth , 
▁ xxmaj if he suppose that i have pleaded truth , 
▁ xxmaj from off this brier pluck a white rose with me . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj let him that is no coward nor no flatterer , 
▁ xxmaj but dare maintain the party of the truth , 
▁ xxmaj pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me . 
▁ xxup warwick . i love no colours ; and , without all colour 
▁ xxmaj of base insinuating flattery , 
▁ i pluck this white rose with xxmaj plantagenet . 
▁ xxup suffolk . i pluck this red rose with young xxmaj somerset , 
▁ xxmaj and say withal i think he held the right . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj stay , lords and gentlemen , and pluck no more 
▁ xxmaj till you conclude that he upon whose side 
▁ xxmaj the fewest roses are cropp'd from the tree 
▁ xxmaj shall yield the other in the right opinion . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj vernon , it is well objected ; 
▁ xxmaj if i have fewest , i subscribe in silence . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj and xxup i. 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj then , for the truth and plainness of the case , 
▁ i pluck this pale and maiden blossom here , 
▁ xxmaj giving my verdict on the white rose side . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj prick not your finger as you pluck it off , 
▁ xxmaj lest , bleeding , you do paint the white rose red , 
▁ xxmaj and fall on my side so , against your will . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj if xxup i , my lord , for my opinion bleed , 
▁ xxmaj opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt 
▁ xxmaj and keep me on the side where still i am . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj well , well , come on ; who else ? 
▁ xxup lawyer . [ to xxmaj somerset ] xxmaj unless my study and my books be 
▁ false , 
▁ xxmaj the argument you held was wrong in you ; 
▁ xxmaj in sign whereof i pluck a white rose too . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj now , xxmaj somerset , where is your argument ? 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj here in my scabbard , meditating that 
▁ xxmaj shall dye your white rose in a bloody red . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our 
▁ roses ; 
▁ xxmaj for pale they look with fear , as witnessing 
▁ xxmaj the truth on our side . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj no , xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ ' tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks 
▁ xxmaj blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses , 
▁ xxmaj and yet thy tongue will not confess thy error . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj hath not thy rose a canker , xxmaj somerset ? 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj hath not thy rose a thorn , xxmaj plantagenet ? 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj ay , sharp and piercing , to maintain his truth ; 
▁ xxmaj whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses , 
▁ xxmaj that shall maintain what i have said is true , 
▁ xxmaj where false xxmaj plantagenet dare not be seen . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj now , by this maiden blossom in my hand , 
▁ i scorn thee and thy fashion , peevish boy . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj turn not thy scorns this way , xxmaj plantagenet . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj proud xxmaj pole , i will , and scorn both him and 
▁ thee . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj i 'll turn my part thereof into thy throat . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj away , away , good xxmaj william de la xxmaj pole ! 
▁ xxmaj we grace the yeoman by conversing with him . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj now , by xxmaj god 's will , thou wrong'st him , xxmaj somerset ; 
▁ xxmaj his grandfather was xxmaj lionel xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence , 
▁ xxmaj third son to the third xxmaj edward , xxmaj king of xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root ? 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj he bears him on the place 's privilege , 
▁ xxmaj or durst not for his craven heart say thus . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj by xxmaj him that made me , xxmaj i 'll maintain my words 
▁ xxmaj on any plot of ground in xxmaj christendom . 
▁ xxmaj was not thy father , xxmaj richard xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , 
▁ xxmaj for treason executed in our late king 's days ? 
▁ xxmaj and by his treason stand'st not thou attainted , 
▁ xxmaj corrupted , and exempt from ancient gentry ? 
▁ xxmaj his trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood ; 
▁ xxmaj and till thou be restor'd thou art a yeoman . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj my father was attached , not attainted ; 
▁ xxmaj condemn'd to die for treason , but no traitor ; 
▁ xxmaj and that xxmaj i 'll prove on better men than xxmaj somerset , 
▁ xxmaj were growing time once ripened to my will . 
▁ xxmaj for your partaker xxmaj pole , and you yourself , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll note you in my book of memory 
▁ xxmaj to scourge you for this apprehension . 
▁ xxmaj look to it well , and say you are well warn'd . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj ay , thou shalt find us ready for thee still ; 
▁ xxmaj and know us by these colours for thy foes 
▁ xxmaj for these my friends in spite of thee shall wear . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj and , by my soul , this pale and angry rose , 
▁ xxmaj as cognizance of my blood - drinking hate , 
▁ xxmaj will i for ever , and my faction , wear , 
▁ xxmaj until it wither with me to my grave , 
▁ xxmaj or flourish to the height of my degree . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj go forward , and be chok'd with thy ambition ! 
▁ xxmaj and so farewell until i meet thee next . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj have with thee , xxmaj pole . xxmaj farewell , ambitious 
▁ xxmaj richard . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj how i am brav'd , and must perforce endure 
▁ it ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj this blot that they object against your house 
▁ xxmaj shall be wip'd out in the next xxmaj parliament , 
▁ xxmaj call'd for the truce of xxmaj winchester and xxmaj gloucester ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou be not then created xxmaj york , 
▁ i will not live to be accounted xxmaj warwick . 
▁ xxmaj meantime , in signal of my love to thee , 
▁ xxmaj against proud xxmaj somerset and xxmaj william xxmaj pole , 
▁ xxmaj will i upon thy party wear this rose ; 
▁ xxmaj and here i prophesy : this brawl to - day , 
▁ xxmaj grown to this faction in the xxmaj temple xxmaj garden , 
▁ xxmaj shall send between the xxmaj red xxmaj rose and the xxmaj white 
▁ a thousand souls to death and deadly night . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj vernon , i am bound to you 
▁ xxmaj that you on my behalf would pluck a flower . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj in your behalf still will i wear the same . 
▁ xxup lawyer . xxmaj and so will xxup i. 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj thanks , gentle sir . 
▁ xxmaj come , let us four to dinner . i dare say 
▁ xxmaj this quarrel will drink blood another day . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 5 . 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj tower of xxmaj london 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mortimer , brought in a chair , and xxup gaolers 

▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj kind keepers of my weak decaying age , 
▁ xxmaj let dying xxmaj mortimer here rest himself . 
▁ xxmaj even like a man new haled from the rack , 
▁ xxmaj so fare my limbs with long imprisonment ; 
▁ xxmaj and these grey locks , the pursuivants of death , 
▁ xxmaj nestor - like aged in an age of care , 
▁ xxmaj argue the end of xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj these eyes , like lamps whose wasting oil is spent , 
▁ xxmaj wax dim , as drawing to their exigent ; 
▁ xxmaj weak shoulders , overborne with burdening grief , 
▁ xxmaj and pithless arms , like to a withered vine 
▁ xxmaj that droops his sapless branches to the ground . 
▁ xxmaj yet are these feet , whose strengthless stay is numb , 
▁ xxmaj unable to support this lump of clay , 
▁ xxmaj swift - winged with desire to get a grave , 
▁ xxmaj as witting i no other comfort have . 
▁ xxmaj but tell me , keeper , will my nephew come ? 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj richard xxmaj plantagenet , my lord , will come . 
▁ xxmaj we sent unto the xxmaj temple , unto his chamber ; 
▁ xxmaj and answer was return'd that he will come . 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj enough ; my soul shall then be satisfied . 
▁ xxmaj poor gentleman ! his wrong doth equal mine . 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj henry xxmaj monmouth first began to reign , 
▁ xxmaj before whose glory i was great in arms , 
▁ xxmaj this loathsome sequestration have i had ; 
▁ xxmaj and even since then hath xxmaj richard been obscur'd , 
▁ xxmaj depriv'd of honour and inheritance . 
▁ xxmaj but now the arbitrator of despairs , 
▁ xxmaj just xxmaj death , kind umpire of men 's miseries , 
▁ xxmaj with sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence . 
▁ i would his troubles likewise were expir'd , 
▁ xxmaj that so he might recover what was lost . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup richard xxup plantagenet 

▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj my lord , your loving nephew now is come . 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj richard xxmaj plantagenet , my friend , is he come ? 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj ay , noble uncle , thus ignobly us'd , 
▁ xxmaj your nephew , late despised xxmaj richard , comes . 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj direct mine arms i may embrace his neck 
▁ xxmaj and in his bosom spend my latter gasp . 
▁ xxup o , tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj that i may kindly give one fainting kiss . 
▁ xxmaj and now declare , sweet stem from xxmaj york 's great stock , 
▁ xxmaj why didst thou say of late thou wert despis'd ? 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj first , lean thine aged back against mine arm ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in that ease , xxmaj i 'll tell thee my disease . 
▁ xxmaj this day , in argument upon a case , 
▁ xxmaj some words there grew ' twixt xxmaj somerset and me ; 
▁ xxmaj among which terms he us'd his lavish tongue 
▁ xxmaj and did upbraid me with my father 's death ; 
▁ xxmaj which obloquy set bars before my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj else with the like i had requited him . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , good uncle , for my father 's sake , 
▁ xxmaj in honour of a true xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj and for alliance sake , declare the cause 
▁ xxmaj my father , xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , lost his head . 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj that cause , fair nephew , that imprison'd me 
▁ xxmaj and hath detain'd me all my flow'ring youth 
▁ xxmaj within a loathsome dungeon , there to pine , 
▁ xxmaj was cursed instrument of his decease . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj discover more at large what cause that was , 
▁ xxmaj for i am ignorant and can not guess . 
▁ xxup mortimer . i will , if that my fading breath permit 
▁ xxmaj and death approach not ere my tale be done . 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj fourth , grandfather to this king , 
▁ xxmaj depos'd his nephew xxmaj richard , xxmaj edward 's son , 
▁ xxmaj the first - begotten and the lawful heir 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj edward king , the third of that descent ; 
▁ xxmaj during whose reign the xxmaj percies of the north , 
▁ xxmaj finding his usurpation most unjust , 
▁ xxmaj endeavour'd my advancement to the throne . 
▁ xxmaj the reason mov'd these warlike lords to this 
▁ xxmaj was , for that - young xxmaj richard thus remov'd , 
▁ xxmaj leaving no heir begotten of his body- 
▁ i was the next by birth and parentage ; 
▁ xxmaj for by my mother i derived am 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj lionel xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence , third son 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj king xxmaj edward the xxmaj third ; whereas he 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt doth bring his pedigree , 
▁ xxmaj being but fourth of that heroic line . 
▁ xxmaj but mark : as in this haughty great attempt 
▁ xxmaj they laboured to plant the rightful heir , 
▁ i lost my liberty , and they their lives . 
▁ xxmaj long after this , when xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth , 
▁ xxmaj succeeding his father xxmaj bolingbroke , did reign , 
▁ xxmaj thy father , xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , then deriv'd 
▁ xxmaj from famous xxmaj edmund xxmaj langley , xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj marrying my sister , that thy mother was , 
▁ xxmaj again , in pity of my hard distress , 
▁ xxmaj levied an army , weening to redeem 
▁ xxmaj and have install'd me in the diadem ; 
▁ xxmaj but , as the rest , so fell that noble earl , 
▁ xxmaj and was beheaded . xxmaj thus the xxmaj mortimers , 
▁ xxmaj in whom the title rested , were suppress'd . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj of xxmaj which , my lord , your honour is the last . 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj true ; and thou seest that i no issue have , 
▁ xxmaj and that my fainting words do warrant death . 
▁ xxmaj thou art my heir ; the rest i wish thee gather ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet be wary in thy studious care . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj thy grave admonishments prevail with me . 
▁ xxmaj but yet methinks my father 's execution 
▁ xxmaj was nothing less than bloody tyranny . 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj with silence , nephew , be thou politic ; 
▁ xxmaj strong fixed is the house of xxmaj lancaster 
▁ xxmaj and like a mountain not to be remov'd . 
▁ xxmaj but now thy uncle is removing hence , 
▁ xxmaj as princes do their courts when they are cloy'd 
▁ xxmaj with long continuance in a settled place . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . o uncle , would some part of my young years 
▁ xxmaj might but redeem the passage of your age ! 
▁ xxup mortimer . xxmaj thou dost then wrong me , as that slaughterer 
▁ doth 
▁ xxmaj which giveth many wounds when one will kill . 
▁ xxmaj mourn not , except thou sorrow for my good ; 
▁ xxmaj only give order for my funeral . 
▁ xxmaj and so , farewell ; and fair be all thy hopes , 
▁ xxmaj and prosperous be thy life in peace and war ! [ dies ] 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj and peace , no war , befall thy parting soul ! 
▁ xxmaj in prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage , 
▁ xxmaj and like a hermit overpass'd thy days . 
▁ xxmaj well , i will lock his counsel in my breast ; 
▁ xxmaj and what i do imagine , let that rest . 
▁ xxmaj keepers , convey him hence ; and i myself 
▁ xxmaj will see his burial better than his life . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gaolers , hearing out the body of xxup mortimer 
▁ xxmaj here dies the dusky torch of xxmaj mortimer , 
▁ xxmaj chok'd with ambition of the meaner sort ; 
▁ xxmaj and for those wrongs , those bitter injuries , 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj somerset hath offer'd to my house , 
▁ i doubt not but with honour to redress ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore haste i to the xxmaj parliament , 
▁ xxmaj either to be restored to my blood , 
▁ xxmaj or make my ill th ' advantage of my good . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj parliament xxmaj house 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup exeter , xxup gloucester , xxup warwick , xxup somerset , and xxup suffolk ; 
 the xxup bishop xxup of xxup winchester , xxup richard xxup plantagenet , and others . 
 xxup gloucester offers to put up a bill ; xxup winchester snatches it , and tears it 

▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj com'st thou with deep premeditated lines , 
▁ xxmaj with written pamphlets studiously devis'd ? 
▁ xxmaj humphrey of xxmaj gloucester , if thou canst accuse 
▁ xxmaj or aught intend'st to lay unto my charge , 
▁ xxmaj do it without invention , suddenly ; 
▁ i with sudden and extemporal speech 
▁ xxmaj purpose to answer what thou canst object . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj presumptuous priest , this place commands my 
▁ patience , 
▁ xxmaj or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonour'd me . 
▁ xxmaj think not , although in writing i preferr'd 
▁ xxmaj the manner of thy vile outrageous crimes , 
▁ xxmaj that therefore i have forg'd , or am not able 
▁ xxmaj verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen . 
▁ xxmaj no , prelate ; such is thy audacious wickedness , 
▁ xxmaj thy lewd , pestiferous , and dissentious pranks , 
▁ xxmaj as very infants prattle of thy pride . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a most pernicious usurer ; 
▁ xxmaj froward by nature , enemy to peace ; 
▁ xxmaj lascivious , wanton , more than well beseems 
▁ a man of thy profession and degree ; 
▁ xxmaj and for thy treachery , what 's more manifest 
▁ xxmaj in that thou laid'st a trap to take my life , 
▁ xxmaj as well at xxmaj london xxmaj bridge as at the xxmaj tower ? 
▁ xxmaj beside , i fear me , if thy thoughts were sifted , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king , thy sovereign , is not quite exempt 
▁ xxmaj from envious malice of thy swelling heart . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj gloucester , i do defy thee . xxmaj lords , vouchsafe 
▁ xxmaj to give me hearing what i shall reply . 
▁ xxmaj if i were covetous , ambitious , or perverse , 
▁ xxmaj as he will have me , how am i so poor ? 
▁ xxmaj or how haps it i seek not to advance 
▁ xxmaj or raise myself , but keep my wonted calling ? 
▁ xxmaj and for dissension , who preferreth peace 
▁ xxmaj more than i do , except i be provok'd ? 
▁ xxmaj no , my good lords , it is not that offends ; 
▁ xxmaj it is not that that incens'd hath incens'd the xxmaj duke : 
▁ xxmaj it is because no one should sway but he ; 
▁ xxmaj no one but he should be about the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj and that engenders thunder in his breast 
▁ xxmaj and makes him roar these accusations forth . 
▁ xxmaj but he shall know i am as good 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj as good ! 
▁ xxmaj thou bastard of my grandfather ! 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj ay , lordly sir ; for what are you , i pray , 
▁ xxmaj but one imperious in another 's throne ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj am i not xxmaj protector , saucy priest ? 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj and am not i a prelate of the church ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj yes , as an outlaw in a castle keeps , 
▁ xxmaj and useth it to patronage his theft . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj unreverent xxmaj gloucester ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj thou art reverend 
▁ xxmaj touching thy spiritual function , not thy life . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj rome shall remedy this . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj roam thither then . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj my lord , it were your duty to forbear . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ay , see the bishop be not overborne . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj methinks my lord should be religious , 
▁ xxmaj and know the office that belongs to such . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj methinks his lordship should be humbler ; 
▁ xxmaj it fitteth not a prelate so to plead . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj yes , when his holy state is touch'd so near . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj state holy or unhallow'd , what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj is not his xxmaj grace xxmaj protector to the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup plantagenet . [ aside ] xxmaj plantagenet , i see , must hold his 
▁ tongue , 
▁ xxmaj lest it be said ' speak , sirrah , when you should ; 
▁ xxmaj must your bold verdict enter talk with lords ? ' 
▁ xxmaj else would i have a fling at xxmaj winchester . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj uncles of xxmaj gloucester and of xxmaj winchester , 
▁ xxmaj the special watchmen of our xxmaj english weal , 
▁ i would prevail , if prayers might prevail 
▁ xxmaj to join your hearts in love and amity . 
▁ xxup o , what a scandal is it to our crown 
▁ xxmaj that two such noble peers as ye should jar ! 
▁ xxmaj believe me , lords , my tender years can tell 
▁ xxmaj civil dissension is a viperous worm 
▁ xxmaj that gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth . 
▁ [ a noise within : ' down with the tawny coats ! ' ] 
▁ xxmaj what tumult 's this ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj an uproar , i dare warrant , 
▁ xxmaj begun through malice of the xxmaj bishop 's men . 
▁ [ a noise again : ' stones ! xxmaj stones ! ' ] 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup mayor xxup of xxup london , attended 

▁ xxup mayor . xxup o , my good lords , and virtuous xxmaj henry , 
▁ xxmaj pity the city of xxmaj london , pity us ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj bishop and the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 's men , 
▁ xxmaj forbidden late to carry any weapon , 
▁ xxmaj have fill'd their pockets full of pebble stones 
▁ xxmaj and , banding themselves in contrary parts , 
▁ xxmaj do pelt so fast at one another 's pate 
▁ xxmaj that many have their giddy brains knock'd out . 
▁ xxmaj our windows are broke down in every street , 
▁ xxmaj and we for fear compell'd to shut our shops . 

▁ xxmaj enter in skirmish , the retainers of xxup gloucester and 
▁ xxup winchester , with bloody pates 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj we charge you , on allegiance to ourself , 
▁ xxmaj to hold your slaught'ring hands and keep the peace . 
▁ xxmaj pray , uncle xxmaj gloucester , mitigate this strife . 
▁ xxup first xxup serving - man . xxmaj nay , if we be forbidden stones , we 'll 
▁ fall to it with our teeth . 
▁ xxup second xxup serving - man . xxmaj do what ye dare , we are as resolute . 
▁ [ skirmish again ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj you of my household , leave this peevish broil , 
▁ xxmaj and set this unaccustom'd fight aside . 
▁ xxup third xxup serving - man . xxmaj my lord , we know your xxmaj grace to be a 
▁ man 
▁ xxmaj just and upright , and for your royal birth 
▁ xxmaj inferior to none but to his xxmaj majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj and ere that we will suffer such a prince , 
▁ xxmaj so kind a father of the commonweal , 
▁ xxmaj to be disgraced by an inkhorn mate , 
▁ xxmaj we and our wives and children all will fight 
▁ xxmaj and have our bodies slaught'red by thy foes . 
▁ xxup first xxup serving - man . xxmaj ay , and the very parings of our nails 
▁ xxmaj shall pitch a field when we are dead . [ begin again ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj stay , stay , i say ! 
▁ xxmaj and if you love me , as you say you do , 
▁ xxmaj let me persuade you to forbear awhile . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxup o , how this discord doth afflict my soul ! 
▁ xxmaj can you , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , behold 
▁ xxmaj my sighs and tears and will not once relent ? 
▁ xxmaj who should be pitiful , if you be not ? 
▁ xxmaj or who should study to prefer a peace , 
▁ xxmaj if holy churchmen take delight in broils ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj yield , my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector ; yield , xxmaj winchester ; 
▁ xxmaj except you mean with obstinate repulse 
▁ xxmaj to slay your sovereign and destroy the realm . 
▁ xxmaj you see what mischief , and what murder too , 
▁ xxmaj hath been enacted through your enmity ; 
▁ xxmaj then be at peace , except ye thirst for blood . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj he shall submit , or i will never yield . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj compassion on the xxmaj king commands me stoop , 
▁ xxmaj or i would see his heart out ere the priest 
▁ xxmaj should ever get that privilege of me . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj behold , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj hath banish'd moody discontented fury , 
▁ xxmaj as by his smoothed brows it doth appear ; 
▁ xxmaj why look you still so stem and tragical ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj here , xxmaj winchester , i offer thee my hand . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj fie , uncle xxmaj beaufort ! i have heard you preach 
▁ xxmaj that malice was a great and grievous sin ; 
▁ xxmaj and will not you maintain the thing you teach , 
▁ xxmaj but prove a chief offender in the same ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj sweet xxmaj king ! xxmaj the xxmaj bishop hath a kindly gird . 
▁ xxmaj for shame , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , relent ; 
▁ xxmaj what , shall a child instruct you what to do ? 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj well , xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester , i will yield to thee ; 
▁ xxmaj love for thy love and hand for hand i give . 
▁ xxup gloucester [ aside ] xxmaj ay , but , i fear me , with a hollow 
▁ heart . 
▁ xxmaj see here , my friends and loving countrymen : 
▁ xxmaj this token serveth for a flag of truce 
▁ xxmaj betwixt ourselves and all our followers . 
▁ xxmaj so help me xxmaj god , as i dissemble not ! 
▁ xxup winchester [ aside ] xxmaj so help me xxmaj god , as i intend it not ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o loving uncle , kind xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj how joyful am i made by this contract ! 
▁ xxmaj away , my masters ! trouble us no more ; 
▁ xxmaj but join in friendship , as your lords have done . 
▁ xxup first xxup serving - man . xxmaj content : xxmaj i 'll to the surgeon 's . 
▁ xxup second xxup serving - man . xxmaj and so will xxup i. 
▁ xxup third xxup serving - man . xxmaj and i will see what physic the tavern 
▁ affords . xxmaj exeunt servants , xxup mayor , & c. 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj accept this scroll , most gracious sovereign ; 
▁ xxmaj which in the right of xxmaj richard xxmaj plantagenet 
▁ xxmaj we do exhibit to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well urg'd , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwick ; for , sweet 
▁ prince , 
▁ xxmaj an if your xxmaj grace mark every circumstance , 
▁ xxmaj you have great reason to do xxmaj richard right ; 
▁ xxmaj especially for those occasions 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj eltham xxmaj place i told your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj and those occasions , uncle , were of force ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , my loving lords , our pleasure is 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj richard be restored to his blood . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj let xxmaj richard be restored to his blood ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall his father 's wrongs be recompens'd . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj as will the rest , so willeth xxmaj winchester . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj if xxmaj richard will be true , not that alone 
▁ xxmaj but all the whole inheritance i give 
▁ xxmaj that doth belong unto the house of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj from whence you spring by lineal descent . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj thy humble servant vows obedience 
▁ xxmaj and humble service till the point of death . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj stoop then and set your knee against my foot ; 
▁ xxmaj and in reguerdon of that duty done 
▁ i girt thee with the valiant sword of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj rise , xxmaj richard , like a true xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj and rise created princely xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup plantagenet . xxmaj and so thrive xxmaj richard as thy foes may fall ! 
▁ xxmaj and as my duty springs , so perish they 
▁ xxmaj that grudge one thought against your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj welcome , high xxmaj prince , the mighty xxmaj duke of xxmaj york ! 
▁ xxup somerset . [ aside ] xxmaj perish , base xxmaj prince , ignoble xxmaj duke of 
▁ xxmaj york ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now will it best avail your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj to cross the seas and to be crown'd in xxmaj france : 
▁ xxmaj the presence of a king engenders love 
▁ xxmaj amongst his subjects and his loyal friends , 
▁ xxmaj as it disanimates his enemies . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj when xxmaj gloucester says the word , xxmaj king xxmaj henry 
▁ goes ; 
▁ xxmaj for friendly counsel cuts off many foes . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj your ships already are in readiness . 
▁ xxmaj sennet . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup exeter 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj ay , we may march in xxmaj england or in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj not seeing what is likely to ensue . 
▁ xxmaj this late dissension grown betwixt the peers 
▁ xxmaj burns under feigned ashes of forg'd love 
▁ xxmaj and will at last break out into a flame ; 
▁ xxmaj as fest'red members rot but by degree 
▁ xxmaj till bones and flesh and sinews fall away , 
▁ xxmaj so will this base and envious discord breed . 
▁ xxmaj and now i fear that fatal prophecy . 
▁ xxmaj which in the time of xxmaj henry nam'd the xxmaj fifth 
▁ xxmaj was in the mouth of every sucking babe : 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj henry born at xxmaj monmouth should win all , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj henry born at xxmaj windsor should lose all . 
▁ xxmaj which is so plain that xxmaj exeter doth wish 
▁ xxmaj his days may finish ere that hapless time . xxmaj exit 




▁ xxup scene 2 . 

▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj before xxmaj rouen 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup la xxup pucelle disguis'd , with four soldiers dressed 
▁ like countrymen , with sacks upon their backs 

▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj these are the city gates , the gates of xxmaj rouen , 
▁ xxmaj through which our policy must make a breach . 
▁ xxmaj take heed , be wary how you place your words ; 
▁ xxmaj talk like the vulgar sort of market - men 
▁ xxmaj that come to gather money for their corn . 
▁ xxmaj if we have entrance , as i hope we shall , 
▁ xxmaj and that we find the slothful watch but weak , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll by a sign give notice to our friends , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj charles the xxmaj dauphin may encounter them . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city , 
▁ xxmaj and we be lords and rulers over xxmaj rouen ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore we 'll knock . [ knocks ] 
▁ xxup watch . [ within ] xxmaj qui est la ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj paysans , pauvres gens de xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj poor market - folks that come to sell their corn . 
▁ xxup watch . xxmaj enter , go in ; the market - bell is rung . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj now , xxmaj rouen , xxmaj i 'll shake thy bulwarks to the 
▁ ground . 

▁ [ la xxup pucelle , & c. , enter the town ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles , xxup bastard , xxup alencon , xxup reignier , and forces 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj saint xxmaj denis bless this happy stratagem ! 
▁ xxmaj and once again we 'll sleep secure in xxmaj rouen . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj here ent'red xxmaj pucelle and her practisants ; 
▁ xxmaj now she is there , how will she specify 
▁ xxmaj here is the best and safest passage in ? 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj by thrusting out a torch from yonder tower ; 
▁ xxmaj which once discern'd shows that her meaning is 
▁ xxmaj no way to that , for weakness , which she ent'red . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup la xxup pucelle , on the top , thrusting out 
▁ a torch burning 
▁
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj behold , this is the happy wedding torch 
▁ xxmaj that joineth xxmaj rouen unto her countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj but burning fatal to the xxmaj talbotites . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj see , noble xxmaj charles , the beacon of our friend ; 
▁ xxmaj the burning torch in yonder turret stands . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj now shine it like a comet of revenge , 
▁ a prophet to the fall of all our foes ! 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj defer no time , delays have dangerous ends ; 
▁ xxmaj enter , and cry ' the xxmaj dauphin ! ' presently , 
▁ xxmaj and then do execution on the watch . xxmaj alarum . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj an alarum . xxmaj enter xxup talbot in an excursion 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj france , thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj talbot but survive thy treachery . 
▁ xxup pucelle , that witch , that damned sorceress , 
▁ xxmaj hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares , 
▁ xxmaj that hardly we escap'd the pride of xxmaj france . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj an alarum ; excursions . xxup bedford brought in sick in 
▁ a chair . xxmaj enter xxup talbot and xxup burgundy without ; 
▁ within , xxup la xxup pucelle , xxup charles , xxup bastard , xxup alencon , 
▁ and xxup reignier , on the walls 

▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj good morrow , gallants ! xxmaj want ye corn for bread ? 
▁ i think the xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy will fast 
▁ xxmaj before he 'll buy again at such a rate . 
▁ ' twas full of darnel - do you like the taste ? 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj scoff on , vile fiend and shameless courtezan . 
▁ i trust ere long to choke thee with thine own , 
▁ xxmaj and make thee curse the harvest of that corn . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj your xxmaj grace may starve , perhaps , before that time . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxup o , let no words , but deeds , revenge this treason ! 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj what you do , good grey beard ? xxmaj break a 
▁ lance , 
▁ xxmaj and run a tilt at death within a chair ? 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj foul fiend of xxmaj france and hag of all despite , 
▁ xxmaj encompass'd with thy lustful paramours , 
▁ xxmaj becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age 
▁ xxmaj and twit with cowardice a man half dead ? 
▁ xxmaj damsel , xxmaj i 'll have a bout with you again , 
▁ xxmaj or else let xxmaj talbot perish with this shame . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj are ye so hot , sir ? xxmaj yet , xxmaj pucelle , hold thy peace ; 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj talbot do but thunder , rain will follow . 
▁ [ the xxmaj english party whisper together in council ] 
▁ xxmaj god speed the parliament ! xxmaj who shall be the xxmaj speaker ? 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj dare ye come forth and meet us in the field ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj belike your lordship takes us then for fools , 
▁ xxmaj to try if that our own be ours or no . 
▁ xxup talbot . i speak not to that railing xxmaj hecate , 
▁ xxmaj but unto thee , xxmaj alencon , and the rest . 
▁ xxmaj will ye , like soldiers , come and fight it out ? 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj signior , no . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj signior , hang ! xxmaj base muleteers of xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxmaj like peasant foot - boys do they keep the walls , 
▁ xxmaj and dare not take up arms like gentlemen . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj away , captains ! xxmaj let 's get us from the walls ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj talbot means no goodness by his looks . 
▁ xxmaj god b'uy , my lord ; we came but to tell you 
▁ xxmaj that we are here . xxmaj exeunt from the walls 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj and there will we be too , ere it be long , 
▁ xxmaj or else reproach be xxmaj talbot 's greatest fame ! 
▁ xxmaj vow , xxmaj burgundy , by honour of thy house , 
▁ xxmaj prick'd on by public wrongs sustain'd in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj either to get the town again or die ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , as sure as xxmaj english xxmaj henry lives 
▁ xxmaj and as his father here was conqueror , 
▁ xxmaj as sure as in this late betrayed town 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj coeur - de - lion 's heart was buried 
▁ xxmaj so sure i swear to get the town or die . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj my vows are equal partners with thy vows . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj but ere we go , regard this dying prince , 
▁ xxmaj the valiant xxmaj duke of xxmaj bedford . xxmaj come , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj we will bestow you in some better place , 
▁ xxmaj fitter for sickness and for crazy age . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot , do not so dishonour me ; 
▁ xxmaj here will i sit before the walls of xxmaj rouen , 
▁ xxmaj and will be partner of your weal or woe . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj courageous xxmaj bedford , let us now persuade you . 
▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj not to be gone from hence ; for once i read 
▁ xxmaj that stout xxmaj pendragon in his litter sick 
▁ xxmaj came to the field , and vanquished his foes . 
▁ xxmaj methinks i should revive the soldiers ' hearts , 
▁ xxmaj because i ever found them as myself . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj undaunted spirit in a dying breast ! 
▁ xxmaj then be it so . xxmaj heavens keep old xxmaj bedford safe ! 
▁ xxmaj and now no more ado , brave xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj but gather we our forces out of hand 
▁ xxmaj and set upon our boasting enemy . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt against the town all but xxup bedford and attendants 

▁ xxmaj an alarum ; excursions . xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john xxup fastolfe , 
▁ and a xxup captain 

▁ xxup captain . xxmaj whither away , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj fastolfe , in such haste ? 
▁ xxup fastolfe . xxmaj whither away ? xxmaj to save myself by flight : 
▁ xxmaj we are like to have the overthrow again . 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj what ! xxmaj will you and leave xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot ? 
▁ xxup fastolfe . xxmaj ay , 
▁ xxmaj all the xxmaj talbots in the world , to save my life . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj cowardly knight ! ill fortune follow thee ! 
▁ xxmaj exit into the town 

▁ xxmaj retreat ; excursions . xxup la xxup pucelle , xxup alencon , 
▁ and xxup charles fly 

▁ xxup bedford . xxmaj now , quiet soul , depart when heaven please , 
▁ xxmaj for i have seen our enemies ' overthrow . 
▁ xxmaj what is the trust or strength of foolish man ? 
▁ xxmaj they that of late were daring with their scoffs 
▁ xxmaj are glad and fain by flight to save themselves . 
▁ [ bedford dies and is carried in by two in his chair ] 

▁ xxmaj an alarum . xxmaj re - enter xxup talbot , xxup burgundy , and the rest 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj lost and recovered in a day again ! 
▁ xxmaj this is a double honour , xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxmaj yet heavens have glory for this victory ! 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj warlike and martial xxmaj talbot , xxmaj burgundy 
▁ xxmaj enshrines thee in his heart , and there erects 
▁ xxmaj thy noble deeds as valour 's monuments . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj thanks , gentle xxmaj duke . xxmaj but where is xxmaj pucelle now ? 
▁ i think her old familiar is asleep . 
▁ xxmaj now where 's the xxmaj bastard 's braves , and xxmaj charles his gleeks ? 
▁ xxmaj what , all amort ? xxmaj rouen hangs her head for grief 
▁ xxmaj that such a valiant company are fled . 
▁ xxmaj now will we take some order in the town , 
▁ xxmaj placing therein some expert officers ; 
▁ xxmaj and then depart to xxmaj paris to the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj for there young xxmaj henry with his nobles lie . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj what xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot pleaseth xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj but yet , before we go , let 's not forget 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj duke of xxmaj bedford , late deceas'd , 
▁ xxmaj but see his exequies fulfill'd in xxmaj rouen . 
▁ a braver soldier never couched lance , 
▁ a gentler heart did never sway in court ; 
▁ xxmaj but kings and mightiest potentates must die , 
▁ xxmaj for that 's the end of human misery . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 3 . 

▁ xxmaj the plains near xxmaj rouen 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles , the xxup bastard , xxup alencon , xxup la xxup pucelle , 
▁ and forces 

▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj dismay not , xxmaj princes , at this accident , 
▁ xxmaj nor grieve that xxmaj rouen is so recovered . 
▁ xxmaj care is no cure , but rather corrosive , 
▁ xxmaj for things that are not to be remedied . 
▁ xxmaj let frantic xxmaj talbot triumph for a while 
▁ xxmaj and like a peacock sweep along his tail ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll pull his plumes and take away his train , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj dauphin and the rest will be but rul'd . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj we have guided by thee hitherto , 
▁ xxmaj and of thy cunning had no diffidence ; 
▁ xxmaj one sudden foil shall never breed distrust 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj search out thy wit for secret policies , 
▁ xxmaj and we will make thee famous through the world . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj we 'll set thy statue in some holy place , 
▁ xxmaj and have thee reverenc'd like a blessed saint . 
▁ xxmaj employ thee , then , sweet virgin , for our good .