xxbos xxup pucelle . xxmaj then thus it must be ; this doth xxmaj joan devise : 
▁ xxmaj by fair persuasions , mix'd with sug'red words , 
▁ xxmaj we will entice the xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy 
▁ xxmaj to leave the xxmaj talbot and to follow us . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj ay , marry , sweeting , if we could do that , 
▁ xxmaj france were no place for xxmaj henry 's warriors ; 
▁ xxmaj nor should that nation boast it so with us , 
▁ xxmaj but be extirped from our provinces . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj for ever should they be expuls'd from xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and not have tide of an earldom here . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj your honours shall perceive how i will work 
▁ xxmaj to bring this matter to the wished end . 
▁ [ drum sounds afar off ] 
▁ xxmaj hark ! by the sound of drum you may perceive 
▁ xxmaj their powers are marching unto xxmaj paris - ward . 

▁ xxmaj here sound an xxmaj english march . xxmaj enter , and pass over 
▁ at a distance , xxup talbot and his forces 
▁
▁ xxmaj there goes the xxmaj talbot , with his colours spread , 
▁ xxmaj and all the troops of xxmaj english after him . 

▁ xxmaj french march . xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup burgundy and 
▁ his forces 

▁ xxmaj now in the rearward comes the xxmaj duke and his . 
▁ xxmaj fortune in favour makes him lag behind . 
▁ xxmaj summon a parley ; we will talk with him . 
▁ [ trumpets sound a parley ] 
▁ xxup charles . a parley with the xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy ! 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj who craves a parley with the xxmaj burgundy ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj the princely xxmaj charles of xxmaj france , thy countryman . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj what say'st thou , xxmaj charles ? for i am marching 
▁ hence . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj speak , xxmaj pucelle , and enchant him with thy words . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj brave xxmaj burgundy , undoubted hope of xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxmaj stay , let thy humble handmaid speak to thee . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj speak on ; but be not over - tedious . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj look on thy country , look on fertile xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and see the cities and the towns defac'd 
▁ xxmaj by wasting ruin of the cruel foe ; 
▁ xxmaj as looks the mother on her lowly babe 
▁ xxmaj when death doth close his tender dying eyes , 
▁ xxmaj see , see the pining malady of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj behold the wounds , the most unnatural wounds , 
▁ xxmaj which thou thyself hast given her woeful breast . 
▁ xxup o , turn thy edged sword another way ; 
▁ xxmaj strike those that hurt , and hurt not those that help ! 
▁ xxmaj one drop of blood drawn from thy country 's bosom 
▁ xxmaj should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore . 
▁ xxmaj return thee therefore with a flood of tears , 
▁ xxmaj and wash away thy country 's stained spots . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj either she hath bewitch'd me with her words , 
▁ xxmaj or nature makes me suddenly relent . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj besides , all xxmaj french and xxmaj france exclaims on thee , 
▁ xxmaj doubting thy birth and lawful progeny . 
▁ xxmaj who join'st thou with but with a lordly nation 
▁ xxmaj that will not trust thee but for profit 's sake ? 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj talbot hath set footing once in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and fashion'd thee that instrument of ill , 
▁ xxmaj who then but xxmaj english xxmaj henry will be lord , 
▁ xxmaj and thou be thrust out like a fugitive ? 
▁ xxmaj call we to mind - and mark but this for proof : 
▁ xxmaj was not the xxmaj duke of xxmaj orleans thy foe ? 
▁ xxmaj and was he not in xxmaj england prisoner ? 
▁ xxmaj but when they heard he was thine enemy 
▁ xxmaj they set him free without his ransom paid , 
▁ xxmaj in spite of xxmaj burgundy and all his friends . 
▁ xxmaj see then , thou fight'st against thy countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj and join'st with them will be thy slaughtermen . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , return ; return , thou wandering lord ; 
▁ xxmaj charles and the rest will take thee in their arms . 
▁ xxup burgundy . i am vanquished ; these haughty words of hers 
▁ xxmaj have batt'red me like roaring cannon - shot 
▁ xxmaj and made me almost yield upon my knees . 
▁ xxmaj forgive me , country , and sweet countrymen 
▁ xxmaj and , lords , accept this hearty kind embrace . 
▁ xxmaj my forces and my power of men are yours ; 
▁ xxmaj so , farewell , xxmaj talbot ; xxmaj i 'll no longer trust thee . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj done like a xxmaj frenchman- [ aside ] turn and turn 
▁ again . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj welcome , brave xxmaj duke ! xxmaj thy friendship makes us 
▁ fresh . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj and doth beget new courage in our breasts . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj pucelle hath bravely play'd her part in this , 
▁ xxmaj and doth deserve a coronet of gold . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj now let us on , my lords , and join our powers , 
▁ xxmaj and seek how we may prejudice the foe . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 4 . 

▁ xxmaj paris . xxmaj the palace 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup gloucester , xxup winchester , xxup york , 
▁ xxup suffolk , xxup somerset , xxup warwick , xxup exeter , 
▁ xxup vernon , xxup basset , and others . xxmaj to them , with 
▁ his soldiers , xxup talbot 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj my gracious xxmaj prince , and honourable peers , 
▁ xxmaj hearing of your arrival in this realm , 
▁ i have awhile given truce unto my wars 
▁ xxmaj to do my duty to my sovereign ; 
▁ xxmaj in sign whereof , this arm that hath reclaim'd 
▁ xxmaj to your obedience fifty fortresses , 
▁ xxmaj twelve cities , and seven walled towns of strength , 
▁ xxmaj beside five hundred prisoners of esteem , 
▁ xxmaj lets fall his sword before your xxmaj highness ' feet , 
▁ xxmaj and with submissive loyalty of heart 
▁ xxmaj ascribes the glory of his conquest got 
▁ xxmaj first to my xxmaj god and next unto your xxmaj grace . [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj is this the xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot , uncle xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj that hath so long been resident in xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj yes , if it please your xxmaj majesty , my liege . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj welcome , brave captain and victorious lord ! 
▁ xxmaj when i was young , as yet i am not old , 
▁ i do remember how my father said 
▁ a stouter champion never handled sword . 
▁ xxmaj long since we were resolved of your truth , 
▁ xxmaj your faithful service , and your toil in war ; 
▁ xxmaj yet never have you tasted our reward , 
▁ xxmaj or been reguerdon'd with so much as thanks , 
▁ xxmaj because till now we never saw your face . 
▁ xxmaj therefore stand up ; and for these good deserts 
▁ xxmaj we here create you xxmaj earl of xxmaj shrewsbury ; 
▁ xxmaj and in our coronation take your place . 
▁ xxmaj sennet . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup vernon and xxup basset 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj now , sir , to you , that were so hot at sea , 
▁ xxmaj disgracing of these colours that i wear 
▁ xxmaj in honour of my noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj dar'st thou maintain the former words thou spak'st ? 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj yes , sir ; as well as you dare patronage 
▁ xxmaj the envious barking of your saucy tongue 
▁ xxmaj against my lord the xxmaj duke of xxmaj somerset . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj sirrah , thy lord i honour as he is . 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj why , what is he ? xxmaj as good a man as xxmaj york ! 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj hark ye : not so . xxmaj in witness , take ye that . 
▁ [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj villain , thou knowest the law of arms is such 
▁ xxmaj that whoso draws a sword ' tis present death , 
▁ xxmaj or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood . 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll unto his xxmaj majesty and crave 
▁ i may have liberty to venge this wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj when thou shalt see xxmaj i 'll meet thee to thy cost . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj well , miscreant , xxmaj i 'll be there as soon as you ; 
▁ xxmaj and , after , meet you sooner than you would . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj park . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup gloucester , xxup winchester , xxup york , xxup suffolk , xxup somerset , xxup warwick , 
 xxup talbot , xxup exeter , the xxup governor xxup of xxup paris , and others 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj lord xxmaj bishop , set the crown upon his head . 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj god save xxmaj king xxmaj henry , of that name the xxmaj sixth ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now , xxmaj governor of xxmaj paris , take your oath 
▁ [ governor kneels ] 
▁ xxmaj that you elect no other king but him , 
▁ xxmaj esteem none friends but such as are his friends , 
▁ xxmaj and none your foes but such as shall pretend 
▁ xxmaj malicious practices against his state . 
▁ xxmaj this shall ye do , so help you righteous xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup governor and his train 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john xxup fastolfe 

▁ xxup fastolfe . xxmaj my gracious sovereign , as i rode from xxmaj calais , 
▁ xxmaj to haste unto your coronation , 
▁ a letter was deliver'd to my hands , 
▁ xxmaj writ to your xxmaj grace from th ' xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj shame to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy and thee ! 
▁ i vow'd , base knight , when i did meet thee next 
▁ xxmaj to tear the xxmaj garter from thy craven 's leg , [ plucking it off ] 
▁ xxmaj which i have done , because unworthily 
▁ xxmaj thou wast installed in that high degree . 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , princely xxmaj henry , and the rest : 
▁ xxmaj this dastard , at the battle of xxmaj patay , 
▁ xxmaj when but in all i was six thousand strong , 
▁ xxmaj and that the xxmaj french were almost ten to one , 
▁ xxmaj before we met or that a stroke was given , 
▁ xxmaj like to a trusty squire did run away ; 
▁ xxmaj in which assault we lost twelve hundred men ; 
▁ xxmaj myself and divers gentlemen beside 
▁ xxmaj were there surpris'd and taken prisoners . 
▁ xxmaj then judge , great lords , if i have done amiss , 
▁ xxmaj or whether that such cowards ought to wear 
▁ xxmaj this ornament of knighthood - yea or no . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj to say the truth , this fact was infamous 
▁ xxmaj and ill beseeming any common man , 
▁ xxmaj much more a knight , a captain , and a leader . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj when first this order was ordain'd , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj knights of the xxmaj garter were of noble birth , 
▁ xxmaj valiant and virtuous , full of haughty courage , 
▁ xxmaj such as were grown to credit by the wars ; 
▁ xxmaj not fearing death nor shrinking for distress , 
▁ xxmaj but always resolute in most extremes . 
▁ xxmaj he then that is not furnish'd in this sort 
▁ xxmaj doth but usurp the sacred name of knight , 
▁ xxmaj profaning this most honourable order , 
▁ xxmaj and should , if i were worthy to be judge , 
▁ xxmaj be quite degraded , like a hedge - born swain 
▁ xxmaj that doth presume to boast of gentle blood . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj stain to thy countrymen , thou hear'st thy 
▁ doom . 
▁ xxmaj be packing , therefore , thou that wast a knight ; 
▁ xxmaj henceforth we banish thee on pain of death . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup fastolfe 
▁ xxmaj and now , my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , view the letter 
▁ xxmaj sent from our uncle xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ viewing the superscription ] xxmaj what means his 
▁ xxmaj grace , that he hath chang'd his style ? 
▁ xxmaj no more but plain and bluntly ' to the xxmaj king ! ' 
▁ xxmaj hath he forgot he is his sovereign ? 
▁ xxmaj or doth this churlish superscription 
▁ xxmaj pretend some alteration in good - will ? 
▁ xxmaj what 's here ? [ reads ] ' i have , upon especial cause , 
▁ xxmaj mov'd with compassion of my country 's wreck , 
▁ xxmaj together with the pitiful complaints 
▁ xxmaj of such as your oppression feeds upon , 
▁ xxmaj forsaken your pernicious faction , 
▁ xxmaj and join'd with xxmaj charles , the rightful xxmaj king of xxmaj france . ' 
▁ o monstrous treachery ! xxmaj can this be so 
▁ xxmaj that in alliance , amity , and oaths , 
▁ xxmaj there should be found such false dissembling guile ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what ! xxmaj doth my uncle xxmaj burgundy revolt ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he doth , my lord , and is become your foe . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj is that the worst this letter doth contain ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj it is the worst , and all , my lord , he writes . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why then xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot there shall talk with 
▁ him 
▁ xxmaj and give him chastisement for this abuse . 
▁ xxmaj how say you , my lord , are you not content ? 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj content , my liege ! xxmaj yes ; but that i am prevented , 
▁ i should have begg'd i might have been employ'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj then gather strength and march unto him 
▁ straight ; 
▁ xxmaj let him perceive how ill we brook his treason . 
▁ xxmaj and what offence it is to flout his friends . 
▁ xxup talbot . i go , my lord , in heart desiring still 
▁ xxmaj you may behold confusion of your foes . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup vernon and xxup basset 

▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj grant me the combat , gracious sovereign . 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj and me , my lord , grant me the combat too . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj this is my servant : hear him , noble xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj and this is mine : sweet xxmaj henry , favour him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj be patient , lords , and give them leave to speak . 
▁ xxmaj say , gentlemen , what makes you thus exclaim , 
▁ xxmaj and wherefore crave you combat , or with whom ? 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj with him , my lord ; for he hath done me wrong . 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj and i with him ; for he hath done me wrong . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what is that wrong whereof you both 
▁ complain ? xxmaj first let me know , and then xxmaj i 'll answer you . 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj crossing the sea from xxmaj england into xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj this fellow here , with envious carping tongue , 
▁ xxmaj upbraided me about the rose i wear , 
▁ xxmaj saying the sanguine colour of the leaves 
▁ xxmaj did represent my master 's blushing cheeks 
▁ xxmaj when stubbornly he did repugn the truth 
▁ xxmaj about a certain question in the law 
▁ xxmaj argu'd betwixt the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york and him ; 
▁ xxmaj with other vile and ignominious terms 
▁ xxmaj in confutation of which rude reproach 
▁ xxmaj and in defence of my lord 's worthiness , 
▁ i crave the benefit of law of arms . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj and that is my petition , noble lord ; 
▁ xxmaj for though he seem with forged quaint conceit 
▁ xxmaj to set a gloss upon his bold intent , 
▁ xxmaj yet know , my lord , i was provok'd by him , 
▁ xxmaj and he first took exceptions at this badge , 
▁ xxmaj pronouncing that the paleness of this flower 
▁ xxmaj bewray'd the faintness of my master 's heart . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj will not this malice , xxmaj somerset , be left ? 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj your private grudge , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , will out , 
▁ xxmaj though ne'er so cunningly you smother it . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj good xxmaj lord , what madness rules in brainsick 
▁ men , xxmaj when for so slight and frivolous a cause 
▁ xxmaj such factious emulations shall arise ! 
▁ xxmaj good cousins both , of xxmaj york and xxmaj somerset , 
▁ xxmaj quiet yourselves , i pray , and be at peace . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj let this dissension first be tried by fight , 
▁ xxmaj and then your xxmaj highness shall command a peace . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj the quarrel toucheth none but us alone ; 
▁ xxmaj betwixt ourselves let us decide it then . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj there is my pledge ; accept it , xxmaj somerset . 
▁ xxup vernon . xxmaj nay , let it rest where it began at first . 
▁ xxup basset . xxmaj confirm it so , mine honourable lord . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj confirm it so ? xxmaj confounded be your strife ; 
▁ xxmaj and perish ye , with your audacious prate ! 
▁ xxmaj presumptuous vassals , are you not asham'd 
▁ xxmaj with this immodest clamorous outrage 
▁ xxmaj to trouble and disturb the xxmaj king and us ? 
▁ xxmaj and you , my lords- methinks you do not well 
▁ xxmaj to bear with their perverse objections , 
▁ xxmaj much less to take occasion from their mouths 
▁ xxmaj to raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves . 
▁ xxmaj let me persuade you take a better course . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj it grieves his xxmaj highness . xxmaj good my lords , be friends . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj come hither , you that would be combatants : 
▁ xxmaj henceforth i charge you , as you love our favour , 
▁ xxmaj quite to forget this quarrel and the cause . 
▁ xxmaj and you , my lords , remember where we are : 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj france , amongst a fickle wavering nation ; 
▁ xxmaj if they perceive dissension in our looks 
▁ xxmaj and that within ourselves we disagree , 
▁ xxmaj how will their grudging stomachs be provok'd 
▁ xxmaj to wilful disobedience , and rebel ! 
▁ xxmaj beside , what infamy will there arise 
▁ xxmaj when foreign princes shall be certified 
▁ xxmaj that for a toy , a thing of no regard , 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's peers and chief nobility 
▁ xxmaj destroy'd themselves and lost the realm of xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxup o , think upon the conquest of my father , 
▁ xxmaj my tender years ; and let us not forgo 
▁ xxmaj that for a trifle that was bought with blood ! 
▁ xxmaj let me be umpire in this doubtful strife . 
▁ i see no reason , if i wear this rose , 
▁ [ putting on a red rose ] 
▁ xxmaj that any one should therefore be suspicious 
▁ i more incline to xxmaj somerset than xxmaj york : 
▁ xxmaj both are my kinsmen , and i love them both . 
▁ xxmaj as well they may upbraid me with my crown , 
▁ xxmaj because , forsooth , the xxmaj king of xxmaj scots is crown'd . 
▁ xxmaj but your discretions better can persuade 
▁ xxmaj than i am able to instruct or teach ; 
▁ xxmaj and , therefore , as we hither came in peace , 
▁ xxmaj so let us still continue peace and love . 
▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj york , we institute your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj to be our xxmaj regent in these parts of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj and , good my xxmaj lord of xxmaj somerset , unite 
▁ xxmaj your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot ; 
▁ xxmaj and like true subjects , sons of your progenitors , 
▁ xxmaj go cheerfully together and digest 
▁ xxmaj your angry choler on your enemies . 
▁ xxmaj ourself , my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , and the rest , 
▁ xxmaj after some respite will return to xxmaj calais ; 
▁ xxmaj from thence to xxmaj england , where i hope ere long 
▁ xxmaj to be presented by your victories 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj charles , xxmaj alencon , and that traitorous rout . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup york , xxup warwick , 
▁ xxup exeter , xxup vernon 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , i promise you , the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj prettily , methought , did play the orator . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and so he did ; but yet i like it not , 
▁ xxmaj in that he wears the badge of xxmaj somerset . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj tush , that was but his fancy ; blame him not ; 
▁ i dare presume , sweet prince , he thought no harm . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj an if i wist he did - but let it rest ; 
▁ xxmaj other affairs must now be managed . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup exeter 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj well didst thou , xxmaj richard , to suppress thy voice ; 
▁ xxmaj for had the passions of thy heart burst out , 
▁ i fear we should have seen decipher'd there 
▁ xxmaj more rancorous spite , more furious raging broils , 
▁ xxmaj than yet can be imagin'd or suppos'd . 
▁ xxmaj but howsoe'er , no simple man that sees 
▁ xxmaj this jarring discord of nobility , 
▁ xxmaj this shouldering of each other in the court , 
▁ xxmaj this factious bandying of their favourites , 
▁ xxmaj but that it doth presage some ill event . 
▁ ' tis much when sceptres are in children 's hands ; 
▁ xxmaj but more when envy breeds unkind division : 
▁ xxmaj there comes the ruin , there begins confusion . xxmaj exit 




▁ xxup scene 2 . 

▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj before xxmaj bordeaux 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup talbot , with trump and drum 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj go to the gates of xxmaj bordeaux , trumpeter ; 
▁ xxmaj summon their general unto the wall . 

▁ xxmaj trumpet sounds a parley . xxmaj enter , aloft , the 
▁ xxup general xxup of xxup the xxup french , and others 

▁ xxmaj english xxmaj john xxmaj talbot , xxmaj captains , calls you forth , 
▁ xxmaj servant in arms to xxmaj harry xxmaj king of xxmaj england ; 
▁ xxmaj and thus he would open your city gates , 
▁ xxmaj be humble to us , call my sovereignvours 
▁ xxmaj and do him homage as obedient subjects , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll withdraw me and my bloody power ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you frown upon this proffer'd peace , 
▁ xxmaj you tempt the fury of my three attendants , 
▁ xxmaj lean famine , quartering steel , and climbing fire ; 
▁ xxmaj who in a moment even with the earth 
▁ xxmaj shall lay your stately and air braving towers , 
▁ xxmaj if you forsake the offer of their love . 
▁ xxup general xxup of xxup the xxup french . xxmaj thou ominous and fearful owl of 
▁ death , 
▁ xxmaj our nation 's terror and their bloody scourge ! 
▁ xxmaj the period of thy tyranny approacheth . 
▁ xxmaj on us thou canst not enter but by death ; 
▁ xxmaj for , i protest , we are well fortified , 
▁ xxmaj and strong enough to issue out and fight . 
▁ xxmaj if thou retire , the xxmaj dauphin , well appointed , 
▁ xxmaj stands with the snares of war to tangle thee . 
▁ xxmaj on either hand thee there are squadrons pitch'd 
▁ xxmaj to wall thee from the liberty of flight , 
▁ xxmaj and no way canst thou turn thee for redress 
▁ xxmaj but death doth front thee with apparent spoil 
▁ xxmaj and pale destruction meets thee in the face . 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand xxmaj french have ta'en the sacrament 
▁ xxmaj to rive their dangerous artillery 
▁ xxmaj upon no xxmaj christian soul but xxmaj english xxmaj talbot . 
▁ xxmaj lo , there thou stand'st , a breathing valiant man , 
▁ xxmaj of an invincible unconquer'd spirit ! 
▁ xxmaj this is the latest glory of thy praise 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , thy enemy , due thee withal ; 
▁ xxmaj for ere the glass that now begins to run 
▁ xxmaj finish the process of his sandy hour , 
▁ xxmaj these eyes that see thee now well coloured 
▁ xxmaj shall see thee withered , bloody , pale , and dead . 
▁ [ drum afar off ] 
▁ xxmaj hark ! hark ! xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin 's drum , a warning bell , 
▁ xxmaj sings heavy music to thy timorous soul ; 
▁ xxmaj and mine shall ring thy dire departure out . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj he fables not ; i hear the enemy . 
▁ xxmaj out , some light horsemen , and peruse their wings . 
▁ xxup o , negligent and heedless discipline ! 
▁ xxmaj how are we park'd and bounded in a pale 
▁ a little herd of xxmaj england 's timorous deer , 
▁ xxmaj maz'd with a yelping kennel of xxmaj french curs ! 
▁ xxmaj if we be xxmaj english deer , be then in blood ; 
▁ xxmaj not rascal - like to fall down with a pinch , 
▁ xxmaj but rather , moody - mad and desperate stags , 
▁ xxmaj turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel 
▁ xxmaj and make the cowards stand aloof at bay . 
▁ xxmaj sell every man his life as dear as mine , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall find dear deer of us , my friends . 
▁ xxmaj god and xxmaj saint xxmaj george , xxmaj talbot and xxmaj england 's right , 
▁ xxmaj prosper our colours in this dangerous fight ! xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 3 . 

▁ xxmaj plains in xxmaj gascony 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york , with trumpet and many soldiers . a 
▁ xxup messenger meets him 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj are not the speedy scouts return'd again 
▁ xxmaj that dogg'd the mighty army of the xxmaj dauphin ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj they are return'd , my lord , and give it out 
▁ xxmaj that he is march'd to xxmaj bordeaux with his power 
▁ xxmaj to fight with xxmaj talbot ; as he march'd along , 
▁ xxmaj by your espials were discovered 
▁ xxmaj two mightier troops than that the xxmaj dauphin led , 
▁ xxmaj which join'd with him and made their march for 
▁ xxmaj bordeaux . 
▁ xxup york . a plague upon that villain xxmaj somerset 
▁ xxmaj that thus delays my promised supply 
▁ xxmaj of horsemen that were levied for this siege ! 
▁ xxmaj renowned xxmaj talbot doth expect my aid , 
▁ xxmaj and i am louted by a traitor villain 
▁ xxmaj and can not help the noble chevalier . 
▁ xxmaj god comfort him in this necessity ! 
▁ xxmaj if he miscarry , farewell wars in xxmaj france . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup william xxup lucy 

▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj thou princely leader of our xxmaj english strength , 
▁ xxmaj never so needful on the earth of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj spur to the rescue of the noble xxmaj talbot , 
▁ xxmaj who now is girdled with a waist of iron 
▁ xxmaj and hemm'd about with grim destruction . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj bordeaux , warlike xxmaj duke ! to xxmaj bordeaux , xxmaj york ! 
▁ xxmaj else , farewell xxmaj talbot , xxmaj france , and xxmaj england 's honour . 
▁ xxup york . o xxmaj god , that xxmaj somerset , who in proud heart 
▁ xxmaj doth stop my cornets , were in xxmaj talbot 's place ! 
▁ xxmaj so should we save a valiant gentleman 
▁ xxmaj by forfeiting a traitor and a coward . 
▁ xxmaj mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep 
▁ xxmaj that thus we die while remiss traitors sleep . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxup o , send some succour to the distress'd lord ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj he dies ; we lose ; i break my warlike word . 
▁ xxmaj we mourn : xxmaj france smiles . xxmaj we lose : they daily get- 
▁ xxmaj all long of this vile traitor xxmaj somerset . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj then xxmaj god take mercy on brave xxmaj talbot 's soul , 
▁ xxmaj and on his son , young xxmaj john , who two hours since 
▁ i met in travel toward his warlike father . 
▁ xxmaj this seven years did not xxmaj talbot see his son ; 
▁ xxmaj and now they meet where both their lives are done . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj alas , what joy shall noble xxmaj talbot have 
▁ xxmaj to bid his young son welcome to his grave ? 
▁ xxmaj away ! vexation almost stops my breath , 
▁ xxmaj that sund'red friends greet in the hour of death . 
▁ xxmaj lucy , farewell ; no more my fortune can 
▁ xxmaj but curse the cause i can not aid the man . 
▁ xxmaj maine , xxmaj blois , xxmaj poictiers , and xxmaj tours , are won away 
▁ xxmaj long all of xxmaj somerset and his delay . xxmaj exit with forces 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj thus , while the vulture of sedition 
▁ xxmaj feeds in the bosom of such great commanders , 
▁ xxmaj sleeping neglection doth betray to loss 
▁ xxmaj the conquest of our scarce cold conqueror , 
▁ xxmaj that ever - living man of memory , 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth . xxmaj whiles they each other cross , 
▁ xxmaj lives , honours , lands , and all , hurry to loss . xxmaj exit 




▁ xxup scene 4 . 

▁ xxmaj other plains of xxmaj gascony 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup somerset , xxmaj with his forces ; an xxup officer of 
▁ xxup talbot 's with him 

▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj it is too late ; i can not send them now . 
▁ xxmaj this expedition was by xxmaj york and xxmaj talbot 
▁ xxmaj too rashly plotted ; all our general force 
▁ xxmaj might with a sally of the very town 
▁ xxmaj be buckled with . xxmaj the over daring xxmaj talbot 
▁ xxmaj hath sullied all his gloss of former honour 
▁ xxmaj by this unheedful , desperate , wild adventure . 
▁ xxmaj york set him on to fight and die in shame . 
▁ xxmaj that , xxmaj talbot dead , great xxmaj york might bear the name . 
▁ xxup officer . xxmaj here is xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj lucy , who with me 
▁ xxmaj set from our o'er - match'd forces forth for aid . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup william xxup lucy 

▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj william ! xxmaj whither were you sent ? 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj whither , my lord ! xxmaj from bought and sold xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj talbot , 
▁ xxmaj who , ring'd about with bold adversity , 
▁ xxmaj cries out for noble xxmaj york and xxmaj somerset 
▁ xxmaj to beat assailing death from his weak legions ; 
▁ xxmaj and whiles the honourable captain there 
▁ xxmaj drops bloody sweat from his war - wearied limbs 
▁ xxmaj and , in advantage ling'ring , looks for rescue , 
▁ xxmaj you , his false hopes , the trust of xxmaj england 's honour , 
▁ xxmaj keep off aloof with worthless emulation . 
▁ xxmaj let not your private discord keep away 
▁ xxmaj the levied succours that should lend him aid , 
▁ xxmaj while he , renowned noble gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj yield up his life unto a world of odds . 
▁ xxmaj orleans the xxmaj bastard , xxmaj charles , xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj alencon , xxmaj reignier , compass him about , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj talbot perisheth by your default . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj york set him on ; xxmaj york should have sent him aid . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj and xxmaj york as fast upon your xxmaj grace exclaims , 
▁ xxmaj swearing that you withhold his levied host , 
▁ xxmaj collected for this expedition . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj york lies ; he might have sent and had the horse . 
▁ i owe him little duty and less love , 
▁ xxmaj and take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj the fraud of xxmaj england , not the force of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj hath now entrapp'd the noble minded xxmaj talbot . 
▁ xxmaj never to xxmaj england shall he bear his life , 
▁ xxmaj but dies betray'd to fortune by your strife . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj come , go ; i will dispatch the horsemen straight ; 
▁ xxmaj within six hours they will be at his aid . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj too late comes rescue ; he is ta'en or slain , 
▁ xxmaj for fly he could not if he would have fled ; 
▁ xxmaj and fly would xxmaj talbot never , though he might . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj if he be dead , brave xxmaj talbot , then , adieu ! 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj his fame lives in the world , his shame in you . xxmaj exeunt 


▁ xxup scene 5 . 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj english camp near xxmaj bordeaux 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup talbot and xxup john his son 

▁ xxup talbot . o young xxmaj john xxmaj talbot ! i did send for thee 
▁ xxmaj to tutor thee in stratagems of war , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj talbot 's name might be in thee reviv'd 
▁ xxmaj when sapless age and weak unable limbs 
▁ xxmaj should bring thy father to his drooping chair . 
▁ xxmaj but , o malignant and ill - boding stars ! 
▁ xxmaj now thou art come unto a feast of death , 
▁ a terrible and unavoided danger ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , dear boy , mount on my swiftest horse , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll direct thee how thou shalt escape 
▁ xxmaj by sudden flight . xxmaj come , dally not , be gone . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj is my name xxmaj talbot , and am i your son ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall i fly ? xxup o , if you love my mother , 
▁ xxmaj dishonour not her honourable name , 
▁ xxmaj to make a bastard and a slave of me ! 
▁ xxmaj the world will say he is not xxmaj talbot 's blood 
▁ xxmaj that basely fled when noble xxmaj talbot stood . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj fly to revenge my death , if i be slain . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj he that flies so will ne'er return again . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj if we both stay , we both are sure to die . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj then let me stay ; and , father , do you fly . 
▁ xxmaj your loss is great , so your regard should be ; 
▁ xxmaj my worth unknown , no loss is known in me ; 
▁ xxmaj upon my death the xxmaj french can little boast ; 
▁ xxmaj in yours they will , in you all hopes are lost . 
▁ xxmaj flight can not stain the honour you have won ; 
▁ xxmaj but mine it will , that no exploit have done ; 
▁ xxmaj you fled for vantage , every one will swear ; 
▁ xxmaj but if i bow , they 'll say it was for fear . 
▁ xxmaj there is no hope that ever i will stay 
▁ xxmaj if the first hour i shrink and run away . 
▁ xxmaj here , on my knee , i beg mortality , 
▁ xxmaj rather than life preserv'd with infamy . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj shall all thy mother 's hopes lie in one tomb ? 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj ay , rather than xxmaj i 'll shame my mother 's womb . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj upon my blessing i command thee go . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj to fight i will , but not to fly the foe . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj part of thy father may be sav'd in thee . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj no part of him but will be shame in me . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj thou never hadst renown , nor canst not lose it . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj yes , your renowned name ; shall flight abuse it ? 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj thy father 's charge shall clear thee from that stain . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj you can not witness for me , being slain . 
▁ xxmaj if death be so apparent , then both fly . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj and leave my followers here to fight and die ? 
▁ xxmaj my age was never tainted with such shame . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj and shall my youth be guilty of such blame ? 
▁ xxmaj no more can i be severed from your side 
▁ xxmaj than can xxwrep 3 yourself in twain divide . 
▁ xxmaj stay , go , do what you will , the like do xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj for live i will not if my father die . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj then here i take my leave of thee , fair son , 
▁ xxmaj born to eclipse thy life this afternoon . 
▁ xxmaj come , side by side together live and die ; 
▁ xxmaj and soul with soul from xxmaj france to heaven fly . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 6 . 

▁ a field of battle 

▁ xxmaj alarum : excursions wherein xxup john xxup talbot is hemm'd 
▁ about , and xxup talbot rescues him 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj saint xxmaj george and victory ! xxmaj fight , soldiers , fight . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj regent hath with xxmaj talbot broke his word 
▁ xxmaj and left us to the rage of xxmaj france his sword . 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj john xxmaj talbot ? xxmaj pause and take thy breath ; 
▁ i gave thee life and rescu'd thee from death . 
▁ xxup john . xxup o , twice my father , twice am i thy son ! 
▁ xxmaj the life thou gav'st me first was lost and done 
▁ xxmaj till with thy warlike sword , despite of fate , 
▁ xxmaj to my determin'd time thou gav'st new date . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj when from the xxmaj dauphin 's crest thy sword struck 
▁ fire , 
▁ xxmaj it warm'd thy father 's heart with proud desire 
▁ xxmaj of bold - fac'd victory . xxmaj then leaden age , 
▁ xxmaj quicken'd with youthful spleen and warlike rage , 
▁ xxmaj beat down xxmaj alencon , xxmaj orleans , xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj and from the pride of xxmaj gallia rescued thee . 
▁ xxmaj the ireful bastard xxmaj orleans , that drew blood 
▁ xxmaj from thee , my boy , and had the maidenhood 
▁ xxmaj of thy first fight , i soon encountered 
▁ xxmaj and , interchanging blows , i quickly shed 
▁ xxmaj some of his bastard blood ; and in disgrace 
▁ xxmaj bespoke him thus : ' contaminated , base , 
▁ xxmaj and misbegotten blood i spill of thine , 
▁ xxmaj mean and right poor , for that pure blood of mine 
▁ xxmaj which thou didst force from xxmaj talbot , my brave boy . ' 
▁ xxmaj here purposing the xxmaj bastard to destroy , 
▁ xxmaj came in strong rescue . xxmaj speak , thy father 's care ; 
▁ xxmaj art thou not weary , xxmaj john ? xxmaj how dost thou fare ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou yet leave the battle , boy , and fly , 
▁ xxmaj now thou art seal'd the son of chivalry ? 
▁ xxmaj fly , to revenge my death when i am dead : 
▁ xxmaj the help of one stands me in little stead . 
▁ xxup o , too much folly is it , well i wot , 
▁ xxmaj to hazard all our lives in one small boat ! 
▁ xxmaj if i to - day die not with xxmaj frenchmen 's rage , 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow i shall die with mickle age . 
▁ xxmaj by me they nothing gain an if i stay : 
▁ ' tis but the short'ning of my life one day . 
▁ xxmaj in thee thy mother dies , our household 's name , 
▁ xxmaj my death 's revenge , thy youth , and xxmaj england 's fame . 
▁ xxmaj all these and more we hazard by thy stay ; 
▁ xxmaj all these are sav'd if thou wilt fly away . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj the sword of xxmaj orleans hath not made me smart ; 
▁ xxmaj these words of yours draw life - blood from my heart . 
▁ xxmaj on that advantage , bought with such a shame , 
▁ xxmaj to save a paltry life and slay bright fame , 
▁ xxmaj before young xxmaj talbot from old xxmaj talbot fly , 
▁ xxmaj the coward horse that bears me fall and die ! 
▁ xxmaj and like me to the peasant boys of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj to be shame 's scorn and subject of mischance ! 
▁ xxmaj surely , by all the glory you have won , 
▁ xxmaj an if i fly , i am not xxmaj talbot 's son ; 
▁ xxmaj then talk no more of flight , it is no boot ; 
▁ xxmaj if son to xxmaj talbot , die at xxmaj talbot 's foot . 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj then follow thou thy desp'rate sire of xxmaj crete , 
▁ xxmaj thou xxmaj icarus ; thy life to me is sweet . 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt fight , fight by thy father 's side ; 
▁ xxmaj and , commendable prov'd , let 's die in pride . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 7 . 

▁ xxmaj another part of the field 

▁ xxmaj alarum ; excursions . xxmaj enter old xxup talbot led by a xxup servant 

▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj where is my other life ? xxmaj mine own is gone . 
▁ xxup o , where 's young xxmaj talbot ? xxmaj where is valiant xxmaj john ? 
▁ xxmaj triumphant death , smear'd with captivity , 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj talbot 's valour makes me smile at thee . 
▁ xxmaj when he perceiv'd me shrink and on my knee , 
▁ xxmaj his bloody sword he brandish'd over me , 
▁ xxmaj and like a hungry lion did commence 
▁ xxmaj rough deeds of rage and stern impatience ; 
▁ xxmaj but when my angry guardant stood alone , 
▁ xxmaj tend'ring my ruin and assail'd of none , 
▁ xxmaj dizzy - ey'd fury and great rage of heart 
▁ xxmaj suddenly made him from my side to start 
▁ xxmaj into the clust'ring battle of the xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj and in that sea of blood my boy did drench 
▁ xxmaj his overmounting spirit ; and there died , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj icarus , my blossom , in his pride . 

▁ xxmaj enter soldiers , bearing the body of xxup john xxup talbot 

▁ xxup servant . o my dear lord , lo where your son is borne ! 
▁ xxup talbot . xxmaj thou antic xxmaj death , which laugh'st us here to scorn , 
▁ xxmaj anon , from thy insulting tyranny , 
▁ xxmaj coupled in bonds of perpetuity , 
▁ xxmaj two xxmaj talbots , winged through the lither sky , 
▁ xxmaj in thy despite shall scape mortality . 
▁ o thou whose wounds become hard - favoured xxmaj death , 
▁ xxmaj speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath ! 
▁ xxmaj brave xxmaj death by speaking , whether he will or no ; 
▁ xxmaj imagine him a xxmaj frenchman and thy foe . 
▁ xxmaj poor boy ! he smiles , methinks , as who should say , 
▁ xxmaj had xxmaj death been xxmaj french , then xxmaj death had died to - day . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , and lay him in his father 's arms . 
▁ xxmaj my spirit can no longer bear these harms . 
▁ xxmaj soldiers , adieu ! i have what i would have , 
▁ xxmaj now my old arms are young xxmaj john xxmaj talbot 's grave . [ dies ] 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles , xxup alencon , xxup burgundy , xxup bastard , 
▁ xxup la xxup pucelle , and forces 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj had xxmaj york and xxmaj somerset brought rescue in , 
▁ xxmaj we should have found a bloody day of this . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj how the young whelp of xxmaj talbot 's , raging wood , 
▁ xxmaj did flesh his puny sword in xxmaj frenchmen 's blood ! 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj once i encount'red him , and thus i said : 
▁ ' thou maiden youth , be vanquish'd by a maid . ' 
▁ xxmaj but with a proud majestical high scorn 
▁ xxmaj he answer'd thus : ' young xxmaj talbot was not born 
▁ xxmaj to be the pillage of a giglot wench . ' 
▁ xxmaj so , rushing in the bowels of the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj he left me proudly , as unworthy fight . 
▁ xxup burgundy . xxmaj doubtless he would have made a noble knight . 
▁ xxmaj see where he lies inhearsed in the arms 
▁ xxmaj of the most bloody nurser of his harms ! 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj hew them to pieces , hack their bones asunder , 
▁ xxmaj whose life was xxmaj england 's glory , xxmaj gallia 's wonder . 
▁ xxup charles . xxup o , no ; forbear ! xxmaj for that which we have fled 
▁ xxmaj during the life , let us not wrong it dead . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup william xxmaj lucy , attended ; a xxup french 
▁ xxup herald preceding 

▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj herald , conduct me to the xxmaj dauphin 's tent , 
▁ xxmaj to know who hath obtain'd the glory of the day . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj on what submissive message art thou sent ? 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj submission , xxmaj dauphin ! ' tis a mere xxmaj french word : 
▁ xxmaj we xxmaj english warriors wot not what it means . 
▁ i come to know what prisoners thou hast ta'en , 
▁ xxmaj and to survey the bodies of the dead . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj for prisoners ask'st thou ? xxmaj hell our prison is . 
▁ xxmaj but tell me whom thou seek'st . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj but where 's the great xxmaj alcides of the field , 
▁ xxmaj valiant xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot , xxmaj earl of xxmaj shrewsbury , 
▁ xxmaj created for his rare success in arms 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj earl of xxmaj washford , xxmaj waterford , and xxmaj valence , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj talbot of xxmaj goodrig and xxmaj urchinfield , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj strange of xxmaj blackmere , xxmaj lord xxmaj verdun of xxmaj alton , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj cromwell of xxmaj wingfield , xxmaj lord xxmaj furnival of xxmaj sheffield , 
▁ xxmaj the thrice victorious xxmaj lord of xxmaj falconbridge , 
▁ xxmaj knight of the noble order of xxmaj saint xxmaj george , 
▁ xxmaj worthy xxmaj saint xxmaj michael , and the xxmaj golden xxmaj fleece , 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj marshal to xxmaj henry the xxmaj sixth 
▁ xxmaj of all his wars within the realm of xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj here 's a silly - stately style indeed ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj turk , that two and fifty kingdoms hath , 
▁ xxmaj writes not so tedious a style as this . 
▁ xxmaj him that thou magnifi'st with all these tides , 
▁ xxmaj stinking and fly - blown lies here at our feet . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj is xxmaj talbot slain - the xxmaj frenchmen 's only scourge , 
▁ xxmaj your kingdom 's terror and black xxmaj nemesis ? 
▁ xxup o , were mine eye - bans into bullets turn'd , 
▁ xxmaj that i in rage might shoot them at your faces ! 
▁ o that i could but can these dead to life ! 
▁ xxmaj it were enough to fright the realm of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj were but his picture left amongst you here , 
▁ xxmaj it would amaze the proudest of you all . 
▁ xxmaj give me their bodies , that i may bear them hence 
▁ xxmaj and give them burial as beseems their worth . 
▁ xxup pucelle . i think this upstart is old xxmaj talbot 's ghost , 
▁ xxmaj he speaks with such a proud commanding spirit . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , let him have them ; to keep them here , 
▁ xxmaj they would but stink , and putrefy the air . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj go , take their bodies hence . 
▁ xxup lucy . xxmaj i 'll bear them hence ; but from their ashes shall be 
▁ rear'd 
▁ a phoenix that shall make all xxmaj france afeard . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj so we be rid of them , do with them what thou 
▁ wilt . 
▁ xxmaj and now to xxmaj paris in this conquering vein ! 
▁ xxmaj all will be ours , now bloody xxmaj talbot 's slain . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj sennet . xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup gloucester , and xxup exeter 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj have you perus'd the letters from the xxmaj pope , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj emperor , and the xxmaj earl of xxmaj armagnac ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . i have , my lord ; and their intent is this : 
▁ xxmaj they humbly sue unto your xxmaj excellence 
▁ xxmaj to have a godly peace concluded of 
▁ xxmaj between the realms of xxmaj england and of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how doth your xxmaj grace affect their motion ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well , my good lord , and as the only means 
▁ xxmaj to stop effusion of our xxmaj christian blood 
▁ xxmaj and stablish quietness on every side . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ay , marry , uncle ; for i always thought 
▁ xxmaj it was both impious and unnatural 
▁ xxmaj that such immanity and bloody strife 
▁ xxmaj should reign among professors of one faith . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj beside , my lord , the sooner to effect 
▁ xxmaj and surer bind this knot of amity , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj armagnac , near knit to xxmaj charles , 
▁ a man of great authority in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj proffers his only daughter to your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj in marriage , with a large and sumptuous dowry . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj marriage , uncle ! xxmaj alas , my years are young 
▁ xxmaj and fitter is my study and my books 
▁ xxmaj than wanton dalliance with a paramour . 
▁ xxmaj yet call th ' ambassadors , and , as you please , 
▁ xxmaj so let them have their answers every one . 
▁ i shall be well content with any choice 
▁ xxmaj tends to xxmaj god 's glory and my country 's weal . 

▁ xxmaj enter in xxmaj cardinal 's habit 
▁ xxup beaufort , the xxup papal xxup legate , and two xxup ambassadors 

▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj what ! xxmaj is my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester install'd 
▁ xxmaj and call'd unto a cardinal 's degree ? 
▁ xxmaj then i perceive that will be verified 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth did sometime prophesy : 
▁ ' if once he come to be a cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll make his cap co - equal with the crown . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my xxmaj lords xxmaj ambassadors , your several suits 
▁ xxmaj have been consider'd and debated on . 
▁ xxmaj your purpose is both good and reasonable , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore are we certainly resolv'd 
▁ xxmaj to draw conditions of a friendly peace , 
▁ xxmaj which by my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester we mean 
▁ xxmaj shall be transported presently to xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and for the proffer of my lord your master , 
▁ i have inform'd his xxmaj highness so at large , 
▁ xxmaj as , liking of the lady 's virtuous gifts , 
▁ xxmaj her beauty , and the value of her dower , 
▁ xxmaj he doth intend she shall be xxmaj england 's xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . [ to xxup ambassador ] xxmaj in argument and proof of 
▁ which contract , 
▁ xxmaj bear her this jewel , pledge of my affection . 
▁ xxmaj and so , my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , see them guarded 
▁ xxmaj and safely brought to xxmaj dover ; where inshipp'd , 
▁ xxmaj commit them to the fortune of the sea . 
▁
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup winchester and the xxup legate 
▁ xxup winchester . xxmaj stay , my xxmaj lord xxmaj legate ; you shall first receive 
▁ xxmaj the sum of money which i promised 
▁ xxmaj should be delivered to his xxmaj holiness 
▁ xxmaj for clothing me in these grave ornaments . 
▁ xxup legate . i will attend upon your lordship 's leisure . 
▁ xxup winchester . [ aside ] xxmaj now xxmaj winchester will not submit , i 
▁ trow , 
▁ xxmaj or be inferior to the proudest peer . 
▁ xxmaj humphrey of xxmaj gloucester , thou shalt well perceive 
▁ xxmaj that neither in birth or for authority 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj bishop will be overborne by thee . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll either make thee stoop and bend thy knee , 
▁ xxmaj or sack this country with a mutiny . xxmaj exeunt 


▁ xxup scene 2 . 

▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj plains in xxmaj anjou 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles , xxup burgundy , xxup alencon , xxup bastard , 
▁ xxup reignier , xxup la xxup pucelle , and forces 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj these news , my lords , may cheer our drooping 
▁ spirits : 
▁ ' tis said the stout xxmaj parisians do revolt 
▁ xxmaj and turn again unto the warlike xxmaj french . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj then march to xxmaj paris , royal xxmaj charles of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and keep not back your powers in dalliance . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj peace be amongst them , if they turn to us ; 
▁ xxmaj else ruin combat with their palaces ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup scout 

▁ xxup scout . xxmaj success unto our valiant general , 
▁ xxmaj and happiness to his accomplices ! 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj what tidings send our scouts ? i prithee speak . 
▁ xxup scout . xxmaj the xxmaj english army , that divided was 
▁ xxmaj into two parties , is now conjoin'd in one , 
▁ xxmaj and means to give you battle presently . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj somewhat too sudden , sirs , the warning is ; 
▁ xxmaj but we will presently provide for them . 
▁ xxup burgundy . i trust the ghost of xxmaj talbot is not there . 
▁ xxmaj now he is gone , my lord , you need not fear . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj of all base passions fear is most accurs'd . 
▁ xxmaj command the conquest , xxmaj charles , it shall be thine , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj henry fret and all the world repine . 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj then on , my lords ; and xxmaj france be fortunate ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 3 . 

▁ xxmaj before xxmaj angiers 

▁ xxmaj alarum , excursions . xxmaj enter xxup la xxup pucelle 

▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj the xxmaj regent conquers and the xxmaj frenchmen fly . 
▁ xxmaj now help , ye charming spells and periapts ; 
▁ xxmaj and ye choice spirits that admonish me 
▁ xxmaj and give me signs of future accidents ; [ thunder ] 
▁ xxmaj you speedy helpers that are substitutes 
▁ xxmaj under the lordly monarch of the north , 
▁ xxmaj appear and aid me in this enterprise ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup fiends 

▁ xxmaj this speedy and quick appearance argues proof 
▁ xxmaj of your accustom'd diligence to me . 
▁ xxmaj now , ye familiar spirits that are cull'd 
▁ xxmaj out of the powerful regions under earth , 
▁ xxmaj help me this once , that xxmaj france may get the field . 
▁ [ they walk and speak not ] 
▁ xxup o , hold me not with silence over - long ! 
▁ xxmaj where i was wo nt to feed you with my blood , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lop a member off and give it you 
▁ xxmaj in earnest of a further benefit , 
▁ xxmaj so you do condescend to help me now . 
▁ [ they hang their heads ] 
▁ xxmaj no hope to have redress ? xxmaj my body shall 
▁ xxmaj pay recompense , if you will grant my suit . 
▁ [ they shake their heads ] 
▁ xxmaj can not my body nor blood sacrifice 
▁ xxmaj entreat you to your wonted furtherance ? 
▁ xxmaj then take my soul - my body , soul , and all , 
▁ xxmaj before that xxmaj england give the xxmaj french the foil . 
▁ [ they depart ] 
▁ xxmaj see ! they forsake me . xxmaj now the time is come