xxbos xxmaj that xxmaj france must vail her lofty - plumed crest 
▁ xxmaj and let her head fall into xxmaj england 's lap . 
▁ xxmaj my ancient incantations are too weak , 
▁ xxmaj and hell too strong for me to buckle with . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj france , thy glory droopeth to the dust . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj excursions . xxmaj enter xxmaj french and xxmaj english , fighting . 
▁ xxup la xxup pucelle and xxup york fight hand to hand ; xxup la xxup pucelle 
▁ is taken . xxmaj the xxmaj french fly 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj damsel of xxmaj france , i think i have you fast . 
▁ xxmaj unchain your spirits now with spelling charms , 
▁ xxmaj and try if they can gain your liberty . 
▁ a goodly prize , fit for the devil 's grace ! 
▁ xxmaj see how the ugly witch doth bend her brows 
▁ xxmaj as if , with xxmaj circe , she would change my shape ! 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj chang'd to a worser shape thou canst not be . 
▁ xxup york . xxup o , xxmaj charles the xxmaj dauphin is a proper man : 
▁ xxmaj no shape but his can please your dainty eye . 
▁ xxup pucelle . a plaguing mischief fight on xxmaj charles and thee ! 
▁ xxmaj and may ye both be suddenly surpris'd 
▁ xxmaj by bloody hands , in sleeping on your beds ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj fell banning hag ; enchantress , hold thy tongue . 
▁ xxup pucelle . i prithee give me leave to curse awhile . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj curse , miscreant , when thou comest to the stake . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup suffolk , with xxup margaret in his hand 

▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj be what thou wilt , thou art my prisoner . 
▁ [ gazes on her ] 
▁ o fairest beauty , do not fear nor fly ! 
▁ xxmaj for i will touch thee but with reverent hands ; 
▁ i kiss these fingers for eternal peace , 
▁ xxmaj and lay them gently on thy tender side . 
▁ xxmaj who art thou ? xxmaj say , that i may honour thee . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj margaret my name , and daughter to a king , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king of xxmaj naples - whosoe'er thou art . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj an earl i am , and xxmaj suffolk am i call'd . 
▁ xxmaj be not offended , nature 's miracle , 
▁ xxmaj thou art allotted to be ta'en by me . 
▁ xxmaj so doth the swan her downy cygnets save , 
▁ xxmaj keeping them prisoner underneath her wings . 
▁ xxmaj yet , if this servile usage once offend , 
▁ xxmaj go and be free again as xxmaj suffolk 's friend . [ she is going ] 
▁ xxup o , stay ! [ aside ] i have no power to let her pass ; 
▁ xxmaj my hand would free her , but my heart says no . 
▁ xxmaj as plays the sun upon the glassy streams , 
▁ xxmaj twinkling another counterfeited beam , 
▁ xxmaj so seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes . 
▁ xxmaj fain would i woo her , yet i dare not speak . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll call for pen and ink , and write my mind . 
▁ xxmaj fie , de la xxmaj pole ! disable not thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj hast not a tongue ? xxmaj is she not here thy prisoner ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou be daunted at a woman 's sight ? 
▁ xxmaj ay , beauty 's princely majesty is such 
▁ xxmaj confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj say , xxmaj earl of xxmaj suffolk , if thy name be so , 
▁ xxmaj what ransom must i pay before i pass ? 
▁ xxmaj for i perceive i am thy prisoner . 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj how canst thou tell she will deny thy 
▁ suit , 
▁ xxmaj before thou make a trial of her love ? 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj why speak'st thou not ? xxmaj what ransom must i 
▁ pay ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj she 's beautiful , and therefore to be woo'd ; 
▁ xxmaj she is a woman , therefore to be won . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj wilt thou accept of ransom - yea or no ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj fond man , remember that thou hast a 
▁ wife ; 
▁ xxmaj then how can xxmaj margaret be thy paramour ? 
▁ xxup margaret . i were best leave him , for he will not hear . 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj there all is marr'd ; there lies a cooling 
▁ card . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj he talks at random ; sure , the man is mad . 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj and yet a dispensation may be had . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj and yet i would that you would answer me . 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj i 'll win this xxmaj lady xxmaj margaret . xxmaj for whom ? 
▁ xxmaj why , for my xxmaj king ! xxmaj tush , that 's a wooden thing ! 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj he talks of wood . xxmaj it is some carpenter . 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj yet so my fancy may be satisfied , 
▁ xxmaj and peace established between these realms . 
▁ xxmaj but there remains a scruple in that too ; 
▁ xxmaj for though her father be the xxmaj king of xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine , yet is he poor , 
▁ xxmaj and our nobility will scorn the match . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj hear ye , xxmaj captain - are you not at leisure ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside ] xxmaj it shall be so , disdain they ne'er so much . 
▁ xxmaj henry is youthful , and will quickly yield . 
▁ xxmaj madam , i have a secret to reveal . 
▁ xxup margaret . [ aside ] xxmaj what though i be enthrall'd ? xxmaj he seems 
▁ a knight , 
▁ xxmaj and will not any way dishonour me . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj lady , vouchsafe to listen what i say . 
▁ xxup margaret . [ aside ] xxmaj perhaps i shall be rescu'd by the xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj and then i need not crave his courtesy . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj sweet madam , give me hearing in a cause 
▁ xxup margaret . [ aside ] xxmaj tush ! women have been captivate ere 
▁ now . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj lady , wherefore talk you so ? 
▁ xxup margaret . i cry you mercy , ' tis but quid for quo . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj say , gentle xxmaj princess , would you not suppose 
▁ xxmaj your bondage happy , to be made a queen ? 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj to be a queen in bondage is more vile 
▁ xxmaj than is a slave in base servility ; 
▁ xxmaj for princes should be free . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj and so shall you , 
▁ xxmaj if happy xxmaj england 's royal king be free . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj why , what concerns his freedom unto me ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj i 'll undertake to make thee xxmaj henry 's queen , 
▁ xxmaj to put a golden sceptre in thy hand 
▁ xxmaj and set a precious crown upon thy head , 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt condescend to be my- 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj his love . 
▁ xxup margaret . i am unworthy to be xxmaj henry 's wife . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj no , gentle madam ; i unworthy am 
▁ xxmaj to woo so fair a dame to be his wife 
▁ xxmaj and have no portion in the choice myself . 
▁ xxmaj how say you , madam ? xxmaj are ye so content ? 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj an if my father please , i am content . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj then call our captains and our colours forth ! 
▁ xxmaj and , madam , at your father 's castle walls 
▁ xxmaj we 'll crave a parley to confer with him . 
▁
▁ xxmaj sound a parley . xxmaj enter xxup reignier on the walls 

▁ xxmaj see , xxmaj reignier , see , thy daughter prisoner ! 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj to whom ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj to me . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj suffolk , what remedy ? 
▁ i am a soldier and unapt to weep 
▁ xxmaj or to exclaim on fortune 's fickleness . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj yes , there is remedy enough , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj consent , and for thy honour give consent , 
▁ xxmaj thy daughter shall be wedded to my king , 
▁ xxmaj whom i with pain have woo'd and won thereto ; 
▁ xxmaj and this her easy - held imprisonment 
▁ xxmaj hath gain'd thy daughter princely liberty . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj speaks xxmaj suffolk as he thinks ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj fair xxmaj margaret knows 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj suffolk doth not flatter , face , or feign . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj upon thy princely warrant i descend 
▁ xxmaj to give thee answer of thy just demand . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup reignier from the walls 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj and here i will expect thy coming . 

▁ xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj enter xxup reignier below 

▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj welcome , brave xxmaj earl , into our territories ; 
▁ xxmaj command in xxmaj anjou what your xxmaj honour pleases . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thanks , xxmaj reignier , happy for so sweet a child , 
▁ xxmaj fit to be made companion with a king . 
▁ xxmaj what answer makes your xxmaj grace unto my suit ? 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj since thou dost deign to woo her little worth 
▁ xxmaj to be the princely bride of such a lord , 
▁ xxmaj upon condition i may quietly 
▁ xxmaj enjoy mine own , the country xxmaj maine and xxmaj anjou , 
▁ xxmaj free from oppression or the stroke of war , 
▁ xxmaj my daughter shall be xxmaj henry 's , if he please . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj that is her ransom ; i deliver her . 
▁ xxmaj and those two counties i will undertake 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace shall well and quietly enjoy . 
▁ xxup reignier . xxmaj and i again , in xxmaj henry 's royal name , 
▁ xxmaj as deputy unto that gracious king , 
▁ xxmaj give thee her hand for sign of plighted faith . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj reignier of xxmaj france , i give thee kingly thanks , 
▁ xxmaj because this is in traffic of a king . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj and yet , methinks , i could be well content 
▁ xxmaj to be mine own attorney in this case . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll over then to xxmaj england with this news , 
▁ xxmaj and make this marriage to be solemniz'd . 
▁ xxmaj so , farewell , xxmaj reignier . xxmaj set this diamond safe 
▁ xxmaj in golden palaces , as it becomes . 
▁ xxup reignier . i do embrace thee as i would embrace 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj christian prince , xxmaj king xxmaj henry , were he here . 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj farewell , my lord . xxmaj good wishes , praise , and 
▁ prayers , 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj suffolk ever have of xxmaj margaret . [ she is going ] 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj farewell , sweet madam . xxmaj but hark you , xxmaj margaret 
▁ xxmaj no princely commendations to my king ? 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj such commendations as becomes a maid , 
▁ a virgin , and his servant , say to him . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj words sweetly plac'd and modestly directed . 
▁ xxmaj but , madam , i must trouble you again 
▁ xxmaj no loving token to his xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj yes , my good lord : a pure unspotted heart , 
▁ xxmaj never yet taint with love , i send the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj and this withal . [ kisses her ] 
▁ xxup margaret . xxmaj that for thyself , i will not so presume 
▁ xxmaj to send such peevish tokens to a king . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup reignier and xxup margaret 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxup o , wert thou for myself ! xxmaj but , xxmaj suffolk , stay ; 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth : 
▁ xxmaj there xxmaj minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk . 
▁ xxmaj solicit xxmaj henry with her wondrous praise . 
▁ xxmaj bethink thee on her virtues that surmount , 
▁ xxmaj and natural graces that extinguish art ; 
▁ xxmaj repeat their semblance often on the seas , 
▁ xxmaj that , when thou com'st to kneel at xxmaj henry 's feet , 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder . xxmaj exit 




▁ xxup scene 4 . 

▁ xxmaj camp of the xxup duke xxup of xxup york in xxmaj anjou 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york , xxup warwick , and others 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj bring forth that sorceress , condemn'd to burn . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup la xxup pucelle , guarded , and a xxup shepherd 

▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj ah , xxmaj joan , this kills thy father 's heart outright ! 
▁ xxmaj have i sought every country far and near , 
▁ xxmaj and , now it is my chance to find thee out , 
▁ xxmaj must i behold thy timeless cruel death ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj joan , sweet daughter xxmaj joan , xxmaj i 'll die with thee ! 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj decrepit miser ! base ignoble wretch ! 
▁ i am descended of a gentler blood ; 
▁ xxmaj thou art no father nor no friend of mine . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj out , out ! xxmaj my lords , an please you , ' tis not so ; 
▁ i did beget her , all the parish knows . 
▁ xxmaj her mother liveth yet , can testify 
▁ xxmaj she was the first fruit of my bach'lorship . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj graceless , wilt thou deny thy parentage ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj this argues what her kind of life hath been- 
▁ xxmaj wicked and vile ; and so her death concludes . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj fie , xxmaj joan , that thou wilt be so obstacle ! 
▁ xxmaj god knows thou art a collop of my flesh ; 
▁ xxmaj and for thy sake have i shed many a tear . 
▁ xxmaj deny me not , i prithee , gentle xxmaj joan . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj peasant , avaunt ! xxmaj you have suborn'd this man 
▁ xxmaj of purpose to obscure my noble birth . 
▁ xxup shepherd . ' tis true , i gave a noble to the priest 
▁ xxmaj the morn that i was wedded to her mother . 
▁ xxmaj kneel down and take my blessing , good my girl . 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou not stoop ? xxmaj now cursed be the time 
▁ xxmaj of thy nativity . i would the milk 
▁ xxmaj thy mother gave thee when thou suck'dst her breast 
▁ xxmaj had been a little ratsbane for thy sake . 
▁ xxmaj or else , when thou didst keep my lambs afield , 
▁ i wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou deny thy father , cursed drab ? 
▁ xxup o , burn her , burn her ! xxmaj hanging is too good . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj take her away ; for she hath liv'd too long , 
▁ xxmaj to fill the world with vicious qualities . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj first let me tell you whom you have condemn'd : 
▁ xxmaj not me begotten of a shepherd swain , 
▁ xxmaj but issued from the progeny of kings ; 
▁ xxmaj virtuous and holy , chosen from above 
▁ xxmaj by inspiration of celestial grace , 
▁ xxmaj to work exceeding miracles on earth . 
▁ i never had to do with wicked spirits . 
▁ xxmaj but you , that are polluted with your lusts , 
▁ xxmaj stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents , 
▁ xxmaj corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices , 
▁ xxmaj because you want the grace that others have , 
▁ xxmaj you judge it straight a thing impossible 
▁ xxmaj to compass wonders but by help of devils . 
▁ xxmaj no , misconceived ! xxmaj joan of xxmaj arc hath been 
▁ a virgin from her tender infancy , 
▁ xxmaj chaste and immaculate in very thought ; 
▁ xxmaj whose maiden blood , thus rigorously effus'd , 
▁ xxmaj will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj ay , ay . xxmaj away with her to execution ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and hark ye , sirs ; because she is a maid , 
▁ xxmaj spare for no fagots , let there be enow . 
▁ xxmaj place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake , 
▁ xxmaj that so her torture may be shortened . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts ? 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj joan , discover thine infirmity 
▁ xxmaj that warranteth by law to be thy privilege : 
▁ i am with child , ye bloody homicides ; 
▁ xxmaj murder not then the fruit within my womb , 
▁ xxmaj although ye hale me to a violent death . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj now heaven forfend ! xxmaj the holy maid with child ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj the greatest miracle that e'er ye wrought : 
▁ xxmaj is all your strict preciseness come to this ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj she and the xxmaj dauphin have been juggling . 
▁ i did imagine what would be her refuge . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj well , go to ; we 'll have no bastards live ; 
▁ xxmaj especially since xxmaj charles must father it . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj you are deceiv'd ; my child is none of his : 
▁ xxmaj it was xxmaj alencon that enjoy'd my love . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj alencon , that notorious xxmaj machiavel ! 
▁ xxmaj it dies , an if it had a thousand lives . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxup o , give me leave , i have deluded you . 
▁ ' twas neither xxmaj charles nor yet the xxmaj duke i nam'd , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj reignier , xxmaj king of xxmaj naples , that prevail'd . 
▁ xxup warwick . a married man ! xxmaj that 's most intolerable . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj why , here 's a girl ! i think she knows not well 
▁ xxmaj there were so many - whom she may accuse . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj it 's sign she hath been liberal and free . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and yet , forsooth , she is a virgin pure . 
▁ xxmaj strumpet , thy words condemn thy brat and thee . 
▁ xxmaj use no entreaty , for it is in vain . 
▁ xxup pucelle . xxmaj then lead me hence - with whom i leave my 
▁ curse : 
▁ xxmaj may never glorious sun reflex his beams 
▁ xxmaj upon the country where you make abode ; 
▁ xxmaj but darkness and the gloomy shade of death 
▁ xxmaj environ you , till mischief and despair 
▁ xxmaj drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves ! 
▁ xxmaj exit , guarded 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj break thou in pieces and consume to ashes , 
▁ xxmaj thou foul accursed minister of hell ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cardinal xxup beaufort , attended 

▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj lord xxmaj regent , i do greet your xxmaj excellence 
▁ xxmaj with letters of commission from the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj for know , my lords , the states of xxmaj christendom , 
▁ xxmaj mov'd with remorse of these outrageous broils , 
▁ xxmaj have earnestly implor'd a general peace 
▁ xxmaj betwixt our nation and the aspiring xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj and here at hand the xxmaj dauphin and his train 
▁ xxmaj approacheth , to confer about some matter . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj is all our travail turn'd to this effect ? 
▁ xxmaj after the slaughter of so many peers , 
▁ xxmaj so many captains , gentlemen , and soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj that in this quarrel have been overthrown 
▁ xxmaj and sold their bodies for their country 's benefit , 
▁ xxmaj shall we at last conclude effeminate peace ? 
▁ xxmaj have we not lost most part of all the towns , 
▁ xxmaj by treason , falsehood , and by treachery , 
▁ xxmaj our great progenitors had conquered ? 
▁ o xxmaj warwick , xxmaj warwick ! i foresee with grief 
▁ xxmaj the utter loss of all the realm of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj be patient , xxmaj york . xxmaj if we conclude a peace , 
▁ xxmaj it shall be with such strict and severe covenants 
▁ xxmaj as little shall the xxmaj frenchmen gain thereby . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup charles , xxup alencon , xxup bastard , xxup reignier , and others 

▁ xxup charles . xxmaj since , lords of xxmaj england , it is thus agreed 
▁ xxmaj that peaceful truce shall be proclaim'd in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj we come to be informed by yourselves 
▁ xxmaj what the conditions of that league must be . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj speak , xxmaj winchester ; for boiling choler chokes 
▁ xxmaj the hollow passage of my poison'd voice , 
▁ xxmaj by sight of these our baleful enemies . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj charles , and the rest , it is enacted thus : 
▁ xxmaj that , in regard xxmaj king xxmaj henry gives consent , 
▁ xxmaj of mere compassion and of lenity , 
▁ xxmaj to ease your country of distressful war , 
▁ xxmaj an suffer you to breathe in fruitful peace , 
▁ xxmaj you shall become true liegemen to his crown ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj charles , upon condition thou wilt swear 
▁ xxmaj to pay him tribute and submit thyself , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be plac'd as viceroy under him , 
▁ xxmaj and still enjoy thy regal dignity . 
▁ xxup alencon . xxmaj must he be then as shadow of himself ? 
▁ xxmaj adorn his temples with a coronet 
▁ xxmaj and yet , in substance and authority , 
▁ xxmaj retain but privilege of a private man ? 
▁ xxmaj this proffer is absurd and reasonless . 
▁ xxup charles . ' tis known already that i am possess'd 
▁ xxmaj with more than half the xxmaj gallian territories , 
▁ xxmaj and therein reverenc'd for their lawful king . 
▁ xxmaj shall xxup i , for lucre of the rest unvanquish'd , 
▁ xxmaj detract so much from that prerogative 
▁ xxmaj as to be call'd but viceroy of the whole ? 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj lord xxmaj ambassador ; xxmaj i 'll rather keep 
▁ xxmaj that which i have than , coveting for more , 
▁ xxmaj be cast from possibility of all . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj insulting xxmaj charles ! xxmaj hast thou by secret means 
▁ xxmaj us'd intercession to obtain a league , 
▁ xxmaj and now the matter grows to compromise 
▁ xxmaj stand'st thou aloof upon comparison ? 
▁ xxmaj either accept the title thou usurp'st , 
▁ xxmaj of benefit proceeding from our king 
▁ xxmaj and not of any challenge of desert , 
▁ xxmaj or we will plague thee with incessant wars . 
▁ xxup reignier . [ to xxup charles ] xxmaj my lord , you do not well in 
▁ obstinacy 
▁ xxmaj to cavil in the course of this contract . 
▁ xxmaj if once it be neglected , ten to one 
▁ xxmaj we shall not find like opportunity . 
▁ xxup alencon . [ to xxup charles ] xxmaj to say the truth , it is your policy 
▁ xxmaj to save your subjects from such massacre 
▁ xxmaj and ruthless slaughters as are daily seen 
▁ xxmaj by our proceeding in hostility ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore take this compact of a truce , 
▁ xxmaj although you break it when your pleasure serves . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj how say'st thou , xxmaj charles ? xxmaj shall our condition 
▁ stand ? 
▁ xxup charles . xxmaj it shall ; 
▁ xxmaj only reserv'd , you claim no interest 
▁ xxmaj in any of our towns of garrison . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj then swear allegiance to his xxmaj majesty : 
▁ xxmaj as thou art knight , never to disobey 
▁ xxmaj nor be rebellious to the crown of xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj thou , nor thy nobles , to the crown of xxmaj england . 
▁ [ charles and the rest give tokens of fealty ] 
▁ xxmaj so , now dismiss your army when ye please ; 
▁ xxmaj hang up your ensigns , let your drums be still , 
▁ xxmaj for here we entertain a solemn peace . xxmaj exeunt 




▁ xxup scene 5 . 

▁ xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup suffolk , in conference with the xxup king , 
▁ xxup gloucester and xxup exeter 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj your wondrous rare description , noble xxmaj earl , 
▁ xxmaj of beauteous xxmaj margaret hath astonish'd me . 
▁ xxmaj her virtues , graced with external gifts , 
▁ xxmaj do breed love 's settled passions in my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and like as rigour of tempestuous gusts 
▁ xxmaj provokes the mightiest hulk against the tide , 
▁ xxmaj so am i driven by breath of her renown 
▁ xxmaj either to suffer shipwreck or arrive 
▁ xxmaj where i may have fruition of her love . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj tush , my good lord ! xxmaj this superficial tale 
▁ xxmaj is but a preface of her worthy praise . 
▁ xxmaj the chief perfections of that lovely dame , 
▁ xxmaj had i sufficient skill to utter them , 
▁ xxmaj would make a volume of enticing lines , 
▁ xxmaj able to ravish any dull conceit ; 
▁ xxmaj and , which is more , she is not so divine , 
▁ xxmaj so full - replete with choice of all delights , 
▁ xxmaj but with as humble lowliness of mind 
▁ xxmaj she is content to be at your command 
▁ xxmaj command , i mean , of virtuous intents , 
▁ xxmaj to love and honour xxmaj henry as her lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj and otherwise will xxmaj henry ne'er presume . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , give consent 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj margaret may be xxmaj england 's royal xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj so should i give consent to flatter sin . 
▁ xxmaj you know , my lord , your xxmaj highness is betroth'd 
▁ xxmaj unto another lady of esteem . 
▁ xxmaj how shall we then dispense with that contract , 
▁ xxmaj and not deface your honour with reproach ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj as doth a ruler with unlawful oaths ; 
▁ xxmaj or one that at a triumph , having vow'd 
▁ xxmaj to try his strength , forsaketh yet the lists 
▁ xxmaj by reason of his adversary 's odds : 
▁ a poor earl 's daughter is unequal odds , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore may be broke without offence . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , what , i pray , is xxmaj margaret more than 
▁ that ? 
▁ xxmaj her father is no better than an earl , 
▁ xxmaj although in glorious titles he excel . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj yes , my lord , her father is a king , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king of xxmaj naples and xxmaj jerusalem ; 
▁ xxmaj and of such great authority in xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj as his alliance will confirm our peace , 
▁ xxmaj and keep the xxmaj frenchmen in allegiance . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and so the xxmaj earl of xxmaj armagnac may do , 
▁ xxmaj because he is near kinsman unto xxmaj charles . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj beside , his wealth doth warrant a liberal dower ; 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj reignier sooner will receive than give . 
▁ xxup suffolk . a dow'r , my lords ! xxmaj disgrace not so your king , 
▁ xxmaj that he should be so abject , base , and poor , 
▁ xxmaj to choose for wealth and not for perfect love . 
▁ xxmaj henry is able to enrich his queen , 
▁ xxmaj and not to seek a queen to make him rich . 
▁ xxmaj so worthless peasants bargain for their wives , 
▁ xxmaj as market - men for oxen , sheep , or horse . 
▁ xxmaj marriage is a matter of more worth 
▁ xxmaj than to be dealt in by attorneyship ; 
▁ xxmaj not whom we will , but whom his xxmaj grace affects , 
▁ xxmaj must be companion of his nuptial bed . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , lords , since he affects her most , 
▁ xxmaj it most of all these reasons bindeth us 
▁ xxmaj in our opinions she should be preferr'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for what is wedlock forced but a hell , 
▁ xxmaj an age of discord and continual strife ? 
▁ xxmaj whereas the contrary bringeth bliss , 
▁ xxmaj and is a pattern of celestial peace . 
▁ xxmaj whom should we match with xxmaj henry , being a king , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj margaret , that is daughter to a king ? 
▁ xxmaj her peerless feature , joined with her birth , 
▁ xxmaj approves her fit for none but for a king ; 
▁ xxmaj her valiant courage and undaunted spirit , 
▁ xxmaj more than in women commonly is seen , 
▁ xxmaj will answer our hope in issue of a king ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj henry , son unto a conqueror , 
▁ xxmaj is likely to beget more conquerors , 
▁ xxmaj if with a lady of so high resolve 
▁ xxmaj as is fair xxmaj margaret he be link'd in love . 
▁ xxmaj then yield , my lords ; and here conclude with me 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj margaret shall be xxmaj queen , and none but she . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj whether it be through force of your report , 
▁ xxmaj my noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk , or for that 
▁ xxmaj my tender youth was never yet attaint 
▁ xxmaj with any passion of inflaming love , 
▁ i can not tell ; but this i am assur'd , 
▁ i feel such sharp dissension in my breast , 
▁ xxmaj such fierce alarums both of hope and fear , 
▁ xxmaj as i am sick with working of my thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj take therefore shipping ; post , my lord , to xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj agree to any covenants ; and procure 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj lady xxmaj margaret do vouchsafe to come 
▁ xxmaj to cross the seas to xxmaj england , and be crown'd 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's faithful and anointed queen . 
▁ xxmaj for your expenses and sufficient charge , 
▁ xxmaj among the people gather up a tenth . 
▁ xxmaj be gone , i say ; for till you do return 
▁ i rest perplexed with a thousand cares . 
▁ xxmaj and you , good uncle , banish all offence : 
▁ xxmaj if you do censure me by what you were , 
▁ xxmaj not what you are , i know it will excuse 
▁ xxmaj this sudden execution of my will . 
▁ xxmaj and so conduct me where , from company , 
▁ i may revolve and ruminate my grief . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , grief , i fear me , both at first and last . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gloucester and xxup exeter 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thus xxmaj suffolk hath prevail'd ; and thus he goes , 
▁ xxmaj as did the youthful xxmaj paris once to xxmaj greece , 
▁ xxmaj with hope to find the like event in love 
▁ xxmaj but prosper better than the xxmaj troyan did . 
▁ xxmaj margaret shall now be xxmaj queen , and rule the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will rule both her , the xxmaj king , and realm . xxmaj exit 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1591 

 xxup the xxup second xxup part xxup of xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 
▁ xxup humphrey , xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , his uncle 
▁ xxup cardinal xxup beaufort , xxup bishop xxup of xxup winchester , great - uncle to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup richard xxup plantagenet , xxup duke xxup of xxup york 
▁ xxup edward and xxup richard , his sons 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup somerset 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup buckingham 
▁ xxup lord xxup clifford 
▁ xxup young xxup clifford , his son 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup warwick 
▁ xxup lord xxup scales 
▁ xxup lord xxup say 
▁ xxup sir xxup humphrey xxup stafford 
▁ xxup william xxup stafford , his brother 
▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup stanley 
▁ xxup vaux 
▁ xxup matthew xxup goffe 
▁ a xxup lieutenant , a xxup shipmaster , a xxup master 's xxup mate , and xxup walter xxup whitmore 
▁ xxup two xxup gentlemen , prisoners with xxmaj suffolk 
▁ xxup john xxup hume and xxup john xxup southwell , two priests 
▁ xxup roger xxup bolingbroke , a conjurer 
▁ a xxup spirit raised by him 
▁ xxup thomas xxup horner , an armourer 
▁ xxup peter , his man 
▁ xxup clerk xxup of xxup chatham 
▁ xxup mayor xxup of xxup saint xxup albans 
▁ xxup saunder xxup simpcox , an impostor 
▁ xxup alexander xxup iden , a xxmaj kentish gentleman 
▁ xxup jack xxup cade , a rebel 
▁ xxup george xxup bevis , xxup john xxup holland , xxup dick xxup the xxup butcher , xxup smith xxup the xxup weaver , 
▁ xxup michael , & c. , followers of xxmaj cade 
▁ xxup two xxup murderers 

▁ xxup margaret , xxmaj queen to xxmaj king xxmaj henry 
▁ xxup eleanor , xxmaj duchess of xxmaj gloucester 
▁ xxup margery xxup jourdain , a witch 
▁ xxup wife to xxup simpcox 
▁
▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj ladies , and xxmaj attendants ; xxmaj petitioners , xxmaj aldermen , a xxmaj herald , 
▁ a xxmaj beadle , a xxmaj sheriff , xxmaj officers , xxmaj citizens , xxmaj prentices , xxmaj falconers , 
▁ xxmaj guards , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj messengers , & c. 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj england 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj flourish of trumpets ; then hautboys . xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup duke xxup humphrey 
 xxup of xxup gloucester , xxup salisbury , xxup warwick , and xxup cardinal xxup beaufort , on the one side ; 
 the xxup queen , xxup suffolk , xxup york , xxup somerset , and xxup buckingham , on the other 

▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj as by your high imperial xxmaj majesty 
▁ i had in charge at my depart for xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj as procurator to your xxmaj excellence , 
▁ xxmaj to marry xxmaj princess xxmaj margaret for your xxmaj grace ; 
▁ xxmaj so , in the famous ancient city xxmaj tours , 
▁ xxmaj in presence of the xxmaj kings of xxmaj france and xxmaj sicil , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dukes of xxmaj orleans , xxmaj calaber , xxmaj bretagne , and xxmaj alencon , 
▁ xxmaj seven earls , twelve barons , and twenty reverend bishops , 
▁ i have perform'd my task , and was espous'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and humbly now upon my bended knee , 
▁ xxmaj in sight of xxmaj england and her lordly peers , 
▁ xxmaj deliver up my title in the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj to your most gracious hands , that are the substance 
▁ xxmaj of that great shadow i did represent : 
▁ xxmaj the happiest gift that ever marquis gave , 
▁ xxmaj the fairest queen that ever king receiv'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj suffolk , arise . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret : 
▁ i can express no kinder sign of love 
▁ xxmaj than this kind kiss . o xxmaj lord , that lends me life , 
▁ xxmaj lend me a heart replete with thankfulness ! 
▁ xxmaj for thou hast given me in this beauteous face 
▁ a world of earthly blessings to my soul , 
▁ xxmaj if sympathy of love unite our thoughts . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj great xxmaj king of xxmaj england , and my gracious lord , 
▁ xxmaj the mutual conference that my mind hath had , 
▁ xxmaj by day , by night , waking and in my dreams , 
▁ xxmaj in courtly company or at my beads , 
▁ xxmaj with you , mine alder - liefest sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj makes me the bolder to salute my king 
▁ xxmaj with ruder terms , such as my wit affords 
▁ xxmaj and over - joy of heart doth minister . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj her sight did ravish , but her grace in speech , 
▁ xxmaj her words y - clad with wisdom 's majesty , 
▁ xxmaj makes me from wond'ring fall to weeping joys , 
▁ xxmaj such is the fulness of my heart 's content . 
▁ xxmaj lords , with one cheerful voice welcome my love . 
▁ xxup all . [ kneeling ] xxmaj long live xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret , xxmaj england 's happiness ! 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj we thank you all . [ flourish ] 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , so it please your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj here are the articles of contracted peace 
▁ xxmaj between our sovereign and the xxmaj french xxmaj king xxmaj charles , 
▁ xxmaj for eighteen months concluded by consent . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ reads ] ' imprimis : xxmaj it is agreed between the xxmaj french xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj charles and xxmaj william de la xxmaj pole , xxmaj marquess of xxmaj suffolk , ambassador 
▁ for xxmaj henry xxmaj king of xxmaj england , that the said xxmaj henry shall espouse the 
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj margaret , daughter unto xxmaj reignier xxmaj king of xxmaj naples , xxmaj sicilia , 
▁ and xxmaj jerusalem , and crown her xxmaj queen of xxmaj england ere the thirtieth 
▁ of xxmaj may next ensuing . 
▁ xxmaj item : xxmaj that the duchy of xxmaj anjou and the county of xxmaj maine shall be 
▁ released and delivered to the xxmaj king her father'- 
▁ [ lets the paper fall ] 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj uncle , how now ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj pardon me , gracious lord ; 
▁ xxmaj some sudden qualm hath struck me at the heart , 
▁ xxmaj and dimm'd mine eyes , that i can read no further . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj uncle of xxmaj winchester , i pray read on . 
▁ xxup cardinal . [ reads ] ' item : xxmaj it is further agreed between them that the 
▁ duchies of xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine shall be released and delivered over 
▁ to the xxmaj king her father , and she sent over of the xxmaj king of 
▁ xxmaj england 's own proper cost and charges , without having any dowry . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj they please us well . xxmaj lord xxmaj marquess , kneel down . 
▁ xxmaj we here create thee the first xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk , 
▁ xxmaj and girt thee with the sword . xxmaj cousin of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj we here discharge your xxmaj grace from being xxmaj regent 
▁ xxup i ' th ' parts of xxmaj france , till term of eighteen months 
▁ xxmaj be full expir'd . xxmaj thanks , uncle xxmaj winchester , 
▁ xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj york , xxmaj buckingham , xxmaj somerset , 
▁ xxmaj salisbury , and xxmaj warwick ; 
▁ xxmaj we thank you all for this great favour done 
▁ xxmaj in entertainment to my princely queen . 
▁ xxmaj come , let us in , and with all speed provide 
▁ xxmaj to see her coronation be perform'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup king , xxup queen , and xxup suffolk 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj brave peers of xxmaj england , pillars of the state , 
▁ xxmaj to you xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey must unload his grief 
▁ xxmaj your grief , the common grief of all the land . 
▁ xxmaj what ! did my brother xxmaj henry spend his youth , 
▁ xxmaj his valour , coin , and people , in the wars ? 
▁ xxmaj did he so often lodge in open field , 
▁ xxmaj in winter 's cold and summer 's parching heat , 
▁ xxmaj to conquer xxmaj france , his true inheritance ? 
▁ xxmaj and did my brother xxmaj bedford toil his wits 
▁ xxmaj to keep by policy what xxmaj henry got ? 
▁ xxmaj have you yourselves , xxmaj somerset , xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj brave xxmaj york , xxmaj salisbury , and victorious xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj receiv'd deep scars in xxmaj france and xxmaj normandy ? 
▁ xxmaj or hath mine uncle xxmaj beaufort and myself , 
▁ xxmaj with all the learned xxmaj council of the realm , 
▁ xxmaj studied so long , sat in the xxmaj council xxmaj house 
▁ xxmaj early and late , debating to and fro 
▁ xxmaj how xxmaj france and xxmaj frenchmen might be kept in awe ? 
▁ xxmaj and had his xxmaj highness in his infancy 
▁ xxmaj crowned in xxmaj paris , in despite of foes ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall these labours and these honours die ? 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj henry 's conquest , xxmaj bedford 's vigilance , 
▁ xxmaj your deeds of war , and all our counsel die ? 
▁ o peers of xxmaj england , shameful is this league ! 
▁ xxmaj fatal this marriage , cancelling your fame , 
▁ xxmaj blotting your names from books of memory , 
▁ xxmaj razing the characters of your renown , 
▁ xxmaj defacing monuments of conquer'd xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj undoing all , as all had never been ! 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj nephew , what means this passionate discourse , 
▁ xxmaj this peroration with such circumstance ? 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj france , ' tis ours ; and we will keep it still . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , uncle , we will keep it if we can ; 
▁ xxmaj but now it is impossible we should . 
▁ xxmaj suffolk , the new - made duke that rules the roast , 
▁ xxmaj hath given the duchy of xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine 
▁ xxmaj unto the poor xxmaj king xxmaj reignier , whose large style 
▁ xxmaj agrees not with the leanness of his purse . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj now , by the death of xxmaj him that died for all , 
▁ xxmaj these counties were the keys of xxmaj normandy ! 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore weeps xxmaj warwick , my valiant son ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj for grief that they are past recovery ; 
▁ xxmaj for were there hope to conquer them again 
▁ xxmaj my sword should shed hot blood , mine eyes no tears . 
▁ xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine ! myself did win them both ; 
▁ xxmaj those provinces these arms of mine did conquer ; 
▁ xxmaj and are the cities that i got with wounds 
▁ xxmaj deliver'd up again with peaceful words ? 
▁ xxmaj mort xxmaj dieu ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj for xxmaj suffolk 's duke , may he be suffocate , 
▁ xxmaj that dims the honour of this warlike isle ! 
▁ xxmaj france should have torn and rent my very heart 
▁ xxmaj before i would have yielded to this league . 
▁ i never read but xxmaj england 's kings have had 
▁ xxmaj large sums of gold and dowries with their wives ; 
▁ xxmaj and our xxmaj king xxmaj henry gives away his own 
▁ xxmaj to match with her that brings no vantages . 
▁ xxup gloucester . a proper jest , and never heard before , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj suffolk should demand a whole fifteenth 
▁ xxmaj for costs and charges in transporting her ! 
▁ xxmaj she should have stay'd in xxmaj france , and starv'd in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj before- 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester , now ye grow too hot : 
▁ xxmaj it was the pleasure of my lord the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , i know your mind ; 
▁ ' tis not my speeches that you do mislike , 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis my presence that doth trouble ye . 
▁ xxmaj rancour will out : proud prelate , in thy face 
▁ i see thy fury ; if i longer stay 
▁ xxmaj we shall begin our ancient bickerings . 
▁ xxmaj lordings , farewell ; and say , when i am gone , 
▁ i prophesied xxmaj france will be lost ere long . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj so , there goes our xxmaj protector in a rage . 
▁ ' tis known to you he is mine enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , more , an enemy unto you all , 
▁ xxmaj and no great friend , i fear me , to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj consider , lords , he is the next of blood 
▁ xxmaj and heir apparent to the xxmaj english crown . 
▁ xxmaj had xxmaj henry got an empire by his marriage 
▁ xxmaj and all the wealthy kingdoms of the west , 
▁ xxmaj there 's reason he should be displeas'd at it . 
▁ xxmaj look to it , lords ; let not his smoothing words 
▁ xxmaj bewitch your hearts ; be wise and circumspect . 
▁ xxmaj what though the common people favour him , 
▁ xxmaj calling him ' humphrey , the good xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester , ' 
▁ xxmaj clapping their hands , and crying with loud voice 
▁ ' jesu maintain your royal excellence ! ' 
▁ xxmaj with ' god preserve the good xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey ! ' 
▁ i fear me , lords , for all this flattering gloss , 
▁ xxmaj he will be found a dangerous xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj why should he then protect our sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj he being of age to govern of himself ? 
▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj somerset , join you with me , 
▁ xxmaj and all together , with the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll quickly hoise xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey from his seat . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj this weighty business will not brook delay ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk presently . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj cousin of xxmaj buckingham , though xxmaj humphrey 's pride 
▁ xxmaj and greatness of his place be grief to us , 
▁ xxmaj yet let us watch the haughty cardinal ; 
▁ xxmaj his insolence is more intolerable 
▁ xxmaj than all the princes in the land beside ; 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj gloucester be displac'd , he 'll be xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj or thou or xxup i , xxmaj somerset , will be xxmaj protector , 
▁ xxmaj despite xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey or the xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup buckingham and xxup somerset 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj pride went before , ambition follows him . 
▁ xxmaj while these do labour for their own preferment , 
▁ xxmaj behoves it us to labour for the realm . 
▁ i never saw but xxmaj humphrey xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 
▁ xxmaj did bear him like a noble gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj oft have i seen the haughty xxmaj cardinal- 
▁ xxmaj more like a soldier than a man o ' th ' church , 
▁ xxmaj as stout and proud as he were lord of all- 
▁ xxmaj swear like a ruffian and demean himself 
▁ xxmaj unlike the ruler of a commonweal . 
▁ xxmaj warwick my son , the comfort of my age , 
▁ xxmaj thy deeds , thy plainness , and thy housekeeping , 
▁ xxmaj hath won the greatest favour of the commons , 
▁ xxmaj excepting none but good xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey . 
▁ xxmaj and , brother xxmaj york , thy acts in xxmaj ireland , 
▁ xxmaj in bringing them to civil discipline , 
▁ xxmaj thy late exploits done in the heart of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj when thou wert xxmaj regent for our sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj have made thee fear'd and honour'd of the people : 
▁ xxmaj join we together for the public good , 
▁ xxmaj in what we can , to bridle and suppress 
▁ xxmaj the pride of xxmaj suffolk and the xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj somerset 's and xxmaj buckingham 's ambition ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as we may , cherish xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's deeds 
▁ xxmaj while they do tend the profit of the land . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj so xxmaj god help xxmaj warwick , as he loves the land 
▁ xxmaj and common profit of his country ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and so says xxmaj york- [ aside ] for he hath greatest cause . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj then let 's make haste away and look unto the main . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj unto the main ! o father , xxmaj maine is lost- 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj maine which by main force xxmaj warwick did win , 
▁ xxmaj and would have kept so long as breath did last . 
▁ xxmaj main chance , father , you meant ; but i meant xxmaj maine , 
▁ xxmaj which i will win from xxmaj france , or else be slain . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup warwick and xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine are given to the xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj paris is lost ; the state of xxmaj normandy 
▁ xxmaj stands on a tickle point now they are gone . 
▁ xxmaj suffolk concluded on the articles ; 
▁ xxmaj the peers agreed ; and xxmaj henry was well pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj to changes two dukedoms for a duke 's fair daughter . 
▁ i can not blame them all : what is't to them ? 
▁ ' tis thine they give away , and not their own . 
▁ xxmaj pirates may make cheap pennyworths of their pillage , 
▁ xxmaj and purchase friends , and give to courtezans , 
▁ xxmaj still revelling like lords till all be gone ; 
▁ xxmaj while as the silly owner of the goods 
▁ xxmaj weeps over them and wrings his hapless hands 
▁ xxmaj and shakes his head and trembling stands aloof , 
▁ xxmaj while all is shar'd and all is borne away , 
▁ xxmaj ready to starve and dare not touch his own . 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj york must sit and fret and bite his tongue , 
▁ xxmaj while his own lands are bargain'd for and sold . 
▁ xxmaj methinks the realms of xxmaj england , xxmaj france , and xxmaj ireland , 
▁ xxmaj bear that proportion to my flesh and blood 
▁ xxmaj as did the fatal brand xxmaj althaea burnt 
▁ xxmaj unto the prince 's heart of xxmaj calydon . 
▁ xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine both given unto the xxmaj french ! 
▁ xxmaj cold news for me , for i had hope of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj even as i have of fertile xxmaj england 's soil . 
▁ a day will come when xxmaj york shall claim his own ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore i will take the xxmaj nevils ' parts , 
▁ xxmaj and make a show of love to proud xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey , 
▁ xxmaj and when i spy advantage , claim the crown , 
▁ xxmaj for that 's the golden mark i seek to hit . 
▁ xxmaj nor shall proud xxmaj lancaster usurp my right , 
▁ xxmaj nor hold the sceptre in his childish fist , 
▁ xxmaj nor wear the diadem upon his head , 
▁ xxmaj whose church - like humours fits not for a crown . 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj york , be still awhile , till time do serve ; 
▁ xxmaj watch thou and wake , when others be asleep , 
▁ xxmaj to pry into the secrets of the state ; 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj henry , surfeiting in joys of love 
▁ xxmaj with his new bride and xxmaj england 's dear - bought queen , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj humphrey with the peers be fall'n at jars ; 
▁ xxmaj then will i raise aloft the milk - white rose , 
▁ xxmaj with whose sweet smell the air shall be perfum'd , 
▁ xxmaj and in my standard bear the arms of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj to grapple with the house of xxmaj lancaster ; 
▁ xxmaj and force perforce xxmaj i 'll make him yield the crown , 
▁ xxmaj whose bookish rule hath pull'd fair xxmaj england down . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke and his wife xxup eleanor 

▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj why droops my lord , like over - ripen'd corn 
▁ xxmaj hanging the head at xxmaj ceres ' plenteous load ? 
▁ xxmaj why doth the great xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey knit his brows , 
▁ xxmaj as frowning at the favours of the world ? 
▁ xxmaj why are thine eyes fix'd to the sullen earth , 
▁ xxmaj gazing on that which seems to dim thy sight ? 
▁ xxmaj what see'st thou there ? xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's diadem , 
▁ xxmaj enchas'd with all the honours of the world ? 
▁ xxmaj if so , gaze on , and grovel on thy face 
▁ xxmaj until thy head be circled with the same . 
▁ xxmaj put forth thy hand , reach at the glorious gold . 
▁ xxmaj what , is't too short ? xxmaj i 'll lengthen it with mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and having both together heav'd it up , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll both together lift our heads to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and never more abase our sight so low 
▁ xxmaj as to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground . 
▁ xxup gloucester . o xxmaj nell , sweet xxmaj nell , if thou dost love thy lord , 
▁ xxmaj banish the canker of ambitious thoughts ! 
▁ xxmaj and may that thought , when i imagine ill 
▁ xxmaj against my king and nephew , virtuous xxmaj henry , 
▁ xxmaj be my last breathing in this mortal world ! 
▁ xxmaj my troublous dreams this night doth make me sad . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what dream'd my lord ? xxmaj tell me , and xxmaj i 'll requite it 
▁ xxmaj with sweet rehearsal of my morning 's dream . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj methought this staff , mine office - badge in court , 
▁ xxmaj was broke in twain ; by whom i have forgot , 
▁ xxmaj but , as i think , it was by th ' xxmaj cardinal ; 
▁ xxmaj and on the pieces of the broken wand 
▁ xxmaj were plac'd the heads of xxmaj edmund xxmaj duke of xxmaj somerset 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj william de la xxmaj pole , first xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk . 
▁ xxmaj this was my dream ; what it doth bode xxmaj god knows . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj tut , this was nothing but an argument 
▁ xxmaj that he that breaks a stick of xxmaj gloucester 's grove 
▁ xxmaj shall lose his head for his presumption . 
▁ xxmaj but list to me , my xxmaj humphrey , my sweet xxmaj duke : 
▁ xxmaj methought i sat in seat of majesty 
▁ xxmaj in the cathedral church of xxmaj westminster , 
▁ xxmaj and in that chair where kings and queens were crown'd ; 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj henry and xxmaj dame xxmaj margaret kneel'd to me , 
▁ xxmaj and on my head did set the diadem . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj nay , xxmaj eleanor , then must i chide outright . 
▁ xxmaj presumptuous dame , ill - nurtur'd xxmaj eleanor ! 
▁ xxmaj art thou not second woman in the realm , 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj protector 's wife , belov'd of him ? 
▁ xxmaj hast thou not worldly pleasure at command 
▁ xxmaj above the reach or compass of thy thought ? 
▁ xxmaj and wilt thou still be hammering treachery 
▁ xxmaj to tumble down thy husband and thyself 
▁ xxmaj from top of honour to disgrace 's feet ? 
▁ xxmaj away from me , and let me hear no more ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what , what , my lord ! xxmaj are you so choleric 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj eleanor for telling but her dream ? 
▁ xxmaj next time xxmaj i 'll keep my dreams unto myself 
▁ xxmaj and not be check'd . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj nay , be not angry ; i am pleas'd again . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , ' tis his xxmaj highness ' pleasure 
▁ xxmaj you do prepare to ride unto xxmaj saint xxmaj albans , 
▁ xxmaj where as the xxmaj king and xxmaj queen do mean to hawk . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i go . xxmaj come , xxmaj nell , thou wilt ride with us ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj yes , my good lord , xxmaj i 'll follow presently . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gloucester and xxup messenger 
▁ xxmaj follow i must ; i can not go before , 
▁ xxmaj while xxmaj gloucester bears this base and humble mind . 
▁ xxmaj were i a man , a duke , and next of blood , 
▁ i would remove these tedious stumbling - blocks 
▁ xxmaj and smooth my way upon their headless necks ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being a woman , i will not be slack 
▁ xxmaj to play my part in xxmaj fortune 's pageant . 
▁ xxmaj where are you there , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? xxmaj nay , fear not , man , 
▁ xxmaj we are alone ; here 's none but thee and xxup i. 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hume 

▁ xxup hume . xxmaj jesus preserve your royal xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what say'st thou ? xxmaj majesty ! i am but xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup hume . xxmaj but , by the grace of xxmaj god and xxmaj hume 's advice , 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace 's title shall be multiplied . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what say'st thou , man ? xxmaj hast thou as yet conferr'd 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj margery xxmaj jourdain , the cunning witch of xxmaj eie , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj roger xxmaj bolingbroke , the conjurer ? 
▁ xxmaj and will they undertake to do me good ? 
▁ xxup hume . xxmaj this they have promised , to show your xxmaj highness 
▁ a spirit rais'd from depth of underground 
▁ xxmaj that shall make answer to such questions 
▁ xxmaj as by your xxmaj grace shall be propounded him 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj it is enough ; xxmaj i 'll think upon the questions ; 
▁ xxmaj when from xxmaj saint xxmaj albans we do make return 
▁ xxmaj we 'll see these things effected to the full . 
▁ xxmaj here , xxmaj hume , take this reward ; make merry , man , 
▁ xxmaj with thy confederates in this weighty cause . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hume . xxmaj hume must make merry with the xxmaj duchess ' gold ; 
▁ xxmaj marry , and shall . xxmaj but , how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj hume ! 
▁ xxmaj seal up your lips and give no words but mum : 
▁ xxmaj the business asketh silent secrecy . 
▁ xxmaj dame xxmaj eleanor gives gold to bring the witch : 
▁ xxmaj gold can not come amiss were she a devil . 
▁ xxmaj yet have i gold flies from another coast- 
▁ i dare not say from the rich xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj and from the great and new - made xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk ; 
▁ xxmaj yet i do find it so ; for , to be plain , 
▁ xxmaj they , knowing xxmaj dame xxmaj eleanor 's aspiring humour , 
▁ xxmaj have hired me to undermine the xxmaj duchess , 
▁ xxmaj and buzz these conjurations in her brain . 
▁ xxmaj they say ' a crafty knave does need no broker ' ; 
▁ xxmaj yet am i xxmaj suffolk and the xxmaj cardinal 's broker . 
▁ xxmaj hume , if you take not heed , you shall go near 
▁ xxmaj to call them both a pair of crafty knaves . 
▁ xxmaj well , so its stands ; and thus , i fear , at last 
▁ xxmaj hume 's knavery will be the xxmaj duchess ' wreck , 
▁ xxmaj and her attainture will be xxmaj humphrey 's fall