xxbos xxmaj sort how it will , i shall have gold for all . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter three or four xxup petitioners , xxup peter , the xxmaj armourer 's man , being one 

▁ xxup first xxup petitioner . xxmaj my masters , let 's stand close ; my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector 
▁ will come this way by and by , and then we may deliver our 
▁ supplications in the quill . 
▁ xxup second xxup petitioner . xxmaj marry , the xxmaj lord protect him , for he 's a good 
▁ man , xxmaj jesu bless him ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup suffolk and xxup queen 

▁ xxup first xxup petitioner . xxmaj here ' a comes , methinks , and the xxmaj queen with him . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be the first , sure . 
▁ xxup second xxup petitioner . xxmaj come back , fool ; this is the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk and 
▁ not my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj how now , fellow ! xxmaj wouldst anything with me ? 
▁ xxup first xxup petitioner . i pray , my lord , pardon me ; i took ye for my xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup queen . [ reads ] ' to my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector ! ' xxmaj are your supplications to 
▁ his lordship ? xxmaj let me see them . xxmaj what is thine ? 
▁ xxup first xxup petitioner . xxmaj mine is , an't please your xxmaj grace , against xxmaj john 
▁ xxmaj goodman , my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal 's man , for keeping my house and lands , 
▁ and wife and all , from me . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thy wife too ! xxmaj that 's some wrong indeed . xxmaj what 's yours ? 
▁ xxmaj what 's here ! [ reads ] ' against the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk , for enclosing 
▁ the commons of xxmaj melford . ' xxmaj how now , sir knave ! 
▁ xxup second xxup petitioner . xxmaj alas , sir , i am but a poor petitioner of our 
▁ whole township . 
▁ xxup peter . [ presenting his petition ] xxmaj against my master , xxmaj thomas xxmaj horner , 
▁ for saying that the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york was rightful heir to the crown . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj what say'st thou ? xxmaj did the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york say he was rightful 
▁ heir to the crown ? 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj that my master was ? xxmaj no , forsooth . xxmaj my master said that he 
▁ was , and that the xxmaj king was an usurper . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj who is there ? [ enter servant ] xxmaj take this fellow in , and 
▁ send for his master with a pursuivant presently . xxmaj we 'll hear more 
▁ of your matter before the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj exit servant with xxup peter 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and as for you , that love to be protected 
▁ xxmaj under the wings of our xxmaj protector 's grace , 
▁ xxmaj begin your suits anew , and sue to him . 
▁ [ tears the supplications ] 
▁ xxmaj away , base cullions ! xxmaj suffolk , let them go . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj come , let 's be gone . xxmaj exeunt 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk , say , is this the guise , 
▁ xxmaj is this the fashions in the court of xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxmaj is this the government of xxmaj britain 's isle , 
▁ xxmaj and this the royalty of xxmaj albion 's king ? 
▁ xxmaj what , shall xxmaj king xxmaj henry be a pupil still , 
▁ xxmaj under the surly xxmaj gloucester 's governance ? 
▁ xxmaj am i a queen in title and in style , 
▁ xxmaj and must be made a subject to a duke ? 
▁ i tell thee , xxmaj pole , when in the city xxmaj tours 
▁ xxmaj thou ran'st a tilt in honour of my love 
▁ xxmaj and stol'st away the ladies ' hearts of xxmaj france , 
▁ i thought xxmaj king xxmaj henry had resembled thee 
▁ xxmaj in courage , courtship , and proportion ; 
▁ xxmaj but all his mind is bent to holiness , 
▁ xxmaj to number ave - maries on his beads ; 
▁ xxmaj his champions are the prophets and apostles ; 
▁ xxmaj his weapons , holy saws of sacred writ ; 
▁ xxmaj his study is his tilt - yard , and his loves 
▁ xxmaj are brazen images of canonized saints . 
▁ i would the college of the xxmaj cardinals 
▁ xxmaj would choose him xxmaj pope , and carry him to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and set the triple crown upon his head ; 
▁ xxmaj that were a state fit for his holiness . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj madam , be patient . xxmaj as i was cause 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness came to xxmaj england , so will i 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj england work your xxmaj grace 's full content . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj beside the haughty xxmaj protector , have we xxmaj beaufort 
▁ xxmaj the imperious churchman ; xxmaj somerset , xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj and grumbling xxmaj york ; and not the least of these 
▁ xxmaj but can do more in xxmaj england than the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj and he of these that can do most of all 
▁ xxmaj can not do more in xxmaj england than the xxmaj nevils ; 
▁ xxmaj salisbury and xxmaj warwick are no simple peers . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj not all these lords do vex me half so much 
▁ xxmaj as that proud dame , the xxmaj lord xxmaj protector 's wife . 
▁ xxmaj she sweeps it through the court with troops of ladies , 
▁ xxmaj more like an empress than xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's wife . 
▁ xxmaj strangers in court do take her for the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj she bears a duke 's revenues on her back , 
▁ xxmaj and in her heart she scorns our poverty ; 
▁ xxmaj shall i not live to be aveng'd on her ? 
▁ xxmaj contemptuous base - born callet as she is , 
▁ xxmaj she vaunted ' mongst her minions t ' other day 
▁ xxmaj the very train of her worst wearing gown 
▁ xxmaj was better worth than all my father 's lands , 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj suffolk gave two dukedoms for his daughter . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj madam , myself have lim'd a bush for her , 
▁ xxmaj and plac'd a quire of such enticing birds 
▁ xxmaj that she will light to listen to the lays , 
▁ xxmaj and never mount to trouble you again . 
▁ xxmaj so , let her rest . xxmaj and , madam , list to me , 
▁ xxmaj for i am bold to counsel you in this : 
▁ xxmaj although we fancy not the xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj yet must we join with him and with the lords , 
▁ xxmaj till we have brought xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey in disgrace . 
▁ xxmaj as for the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , this late complaint 
▁ xxmaj will make but little for his benefit . 
▁ xxmaj so one by one we 'll weed them all at last , 
▁ xxmaj and you yourself shall steer the happy helm . 

▁ xxmaj sound a sennet . xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup duke xxup humphrey , 
▁ xxup cardinal xxup beaufort , xxup buckingham , xxup york , xxup somerset , xxup salisbury , 
▁ xxup warwick , and the xxup duchess xxup of xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj for my part , noble lords , i care not which : 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj somerset or xxmaj york , all 's one to me . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj if xxmaj york have ill demean'd himself in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj then let him be denay'd the regentship . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj if xxmaj somerset be unworthy of the place , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj york be xxmaj regent ; i will yield to him . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj whether your xxmaj grace be worthy , yea or no , 
▁ xxmaj dispute not that ; xxmaj york is the worthier . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj ambitious xxmaj warwick , let thy betters speak . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal 's not my better in the field . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj all in this presence are thy betters , xxmaj warwick . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj warwick may live to be the best of all . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj peace , son ! xxmaj and show some reason , xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj why xxmaj somerset should be preferr'd in this . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj because the xxmaj king , forsooth , will have it so . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj madam , the xxmaj king is old enough himself 
▁ xxmaj to give his censure . xxmaj these are no women 's matters . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj if he be old enough , what needs your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj to be xxmaj protector of his xxmaj excellence ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj madam , i am xxmaj protector of the realm ; 
▁ xxmaj and at his pleasure will resign my place . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj resign it then , and leave thine insolence . 
▁ xxmaj since thou wert king- as who is king but thou?- 
▁ xxmaj the commonwealth hath daily run to wrack , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin hath prevail'd beyond the seas , 
▁ xxmaj and all the peers and nobles of the realm 
▁ xxmaj have been as bondmen to thy sovereignty . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj the commons hast thou rack'd ; the clergy 's bags 
▁ xxmaj are lank and lean with thy extortions . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj thy sumptuous buildings and thy wife 's attire 
▁ xxmaj have cost a mass of public treasury . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj thy cruelty in execution 
▁ xxmaj upon offenders hath exceeded law , 
▁ xxmaj and left thee to the mercy of the law . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj thy sale of offices and towns in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj if they were known , as the suspect is great , 
▁ xxmaj would make thee quickly hop without thy head . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup gloucester . xxmaj the xxup queen drops xxup queen her fan 
▁ xxmaj give me my fan . xxmaj what , minion , can ye not ? 
▁ [ she gives the xxup duchess a box on the ear ] 
▁ i cry your mercy , madam ; was it you ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj was't xxup i ? xxmaj yea , i it was , proud xxmaj frenchwoman . 
▁ xxmaj could i come near your beauty with my nails , 
▁ i could set my ten commandments in your face . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj sweet aunt , be quiet ; ' twas against her will . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj against her will , good xxmaj king ? xxmaj look to ' t in time ; 
▁ xxmaj she 'll hamper thee and dandle thee like a baby . 
▁ xxmaj though in this place most master wear no breeches , 
▁ xxmaj she shall not strike xxmaj dame xxmaj eleanor unreveng'd . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , i will follow xxmaj eleanor , 
▁ xxmaj and listen after xxmaj humphrey , how he proceeds . 
▁ xxmaj she 's tickled now ; her fume needs no spurs , 
▁ xxmaj she 'll gallop far enough to her destruction . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now , lords , my choler being overblown 
▁ xxmaj with walking once about the quadrangle , 
▁ i come to talk of commonwealth affairs . 
▁ xxmaj as for your spiteful false objections , 
▁ xxmaj prove them , and i lie open to the law ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj god in mercy so deal with my soul 
▁ xxmaj as i in duty love my king and country ! 
▁ xxmaj but to the matter that we have in hand : 
▁ i say , my sovereign , xxmaj york is meetest man 
▁ xxmaj to be your xxmaj regent in the realm of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj before we make election , give me leave 
▁ xxmaj to show some reason , of no little force , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj york is most unmeet of any man . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj i 'll tell thee , xxmaj suffolk , why i am unmeet : 
▁ xxmaj first , for i can not flatter thee in pride ; 
▁ xxmaj next , if i be appointed for the place , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj somerset will keep me here 
▁ xxmaj without discharge , money , or furniture , 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj france be won into the xxmaj dauphin 's hands . 
▁ xxmaj last time i danc'd attendance on his will 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj paris was besieg'd , famish'd , and lost . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj that can i witness ; and a fouler fact 
▁ xxmaj did never traitor in the land commit . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj peace , headstrong xxmaj warwick ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj image of pride , why should i hold my peace ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup horner , the xxmaj armourer , and his man xxup peter , guarded 

▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj because here is a man accus'd of treason : 
▁ xxmaj pray xxmaj god the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york excuse himself ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj doth any one accuse xxmaj york for a traitor ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what mean'st thou , xxmaj suffolk ? xxmaj tell me , what are these ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj please it your xxmaj majesty , this is the man 
▁ xxmaj that doth accuse his master of high treason ; 
▁ xxmaj his words were these : that xxmaj richard xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj was rightful heir unto the xxmaj english crown , 
▁ xxmaj and that your xxmaj majesty was an usurper . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj say , man , were these thy words ? 
▁ xxup horner . xxmaj an't shall please your xxmaj majesty , i never said nor thought 
▁ any such matter . xxmaj god is my witness , i am falsely accus'd by the 
▁ villain . 
▁ xxup peter . [ holding up his hands ] xxmaj by these ten bones , my lords , he did 
▁ speak them to me in the garret one night , as we were scouring my 
▁ xxmaj lord of xxmaj york 's armour . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj base dunghill villain and mechanical , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have thy head for this thy traitor 's speech . 
▁ i do beseech your royal xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj let him have all the rigour of the law . 
▁ xxup horner ` . xxmaj alas , my lord , hang me if ever i spake the words . xxmaj my 
▁ accuser is my prentice ; and when i did correct him for his fault 
▁ the other day , he did vow upon his knees he would be even with 
▁ me . i have good witness of this ; therefore i beseech your 
▁ xxmaj majesty , do not cast away an honest man for a villain 's 
▁ accusation . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj uncle , what shall we say to this in law ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj this doom , my lord , if i may judge : 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj somerset be xxmaj regent o'er the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj because in xxmaj york this breeds suspicion ; 
▁ xxmaj and let these have a day appointed them 
▁ xxmaj for single combat in convenient place , 
▁ xxmaj for he hath witness of his servant 's malice . 
▁ xxmaj this is the law , and this xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's doom . 
▁ xxup somerset . i humbly thank your royal xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup horner . xxmaj and i accept the combat willingly . 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj alas , my lord , i can not fight ; for xxmaj god 's sake , pity my case ! 
▁ xxmaj the spite of man prevaileth against me . o xxmaj lord , have mercy upon 
▁ me , i shall never be able to fight a blow ! o xxmaj lord , my heart ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sirrah , or you must fight or else be hang'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj away with them to prison ; and the day of combat shall 
▁ be the last of the next month . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj somerset , we 'll see thee sent away . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup margery xxup jourdain , the witch ; the two priests , xxup hume and xxup southwell ; 
 and xxup bolingbroke 

▁ xxup hume . xxmaj come , my masters ; the xxmaj duchess , i tell you , expects 
▁ performance of your promises . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj master xxmaj hume , we are therefore provided ; will her 
▁ ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms ? 
▁ xxup hume . xxmaj ay , what else ? xxmaj fear you not her courage . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i have heard her reported to be a woman of an 
▁ invincible spirit ; but it shall be convenient , xxmaj master xxmaj hume , that 
▁ you be by her aloft while we be busy below ; and so i pray you go , 
▁ in xxmaj god 's name , and leave us . [ exit xxup hume ] xxmaj mother xxmaj jourdain , be you 
▁ prostrate and grovel on the earth ; xxmaj john xxmaj southwell , read you ; and 
▁ let us to our work . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duchess aloft , followed by xxup hume 

▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj well said , my masters ; and welcome all . xxmaj to this gear , the 
▁ sooner the better . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj patience , good lady ; wizards know their times : 
▁ xxmaj deep night , dark night , the silent of the night , 
▁ xxmaj the time of night when xxmaj troy was set on fire ; 
▁ xxmaj the time when screech - owls cry and ban - dogs howl , 
▁ xxmaj and spirits walk and ghosts break up their graves- 
▁ xxmaj that time best fits the work we have in hand . 
▁ xxmaj madam , sit you , and fear not : whom we raise 
▁ xxmaj we will make fast within a hallow'd verge . 

▁ [ here they do the ceremonies belonging , and make the circle ; 
▁ xxup bolingbroke or xxup southwell reads : ' conjuro te , ' & c. 
▁ xxmaj it thunders and lightens terribly ; then the xxup spirit riseth ] 

▁ xxup spirit . xxmaj adsum . 
▁ xxup margery xxup jourdain . xxmaj asmath , 
▁ xxmaj by the eternal xxmaj god , whose name and power 
▁ xxmaj thou tremblest at , answer that i shall ask ; 
▁ xxmaj for till thou speak thou shalt not pass from hence . 
▁ xxup spirit . xxmaj ask what thou wilt ; that i had said and done . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . [ reads ] ' first of the king : what shall of him become ? ' 
▁ xxup spirit . xxmaj the xxmaj duke yet lives that xxmaj henry shall depose ; 
▁ xxmaj but him outlive , and die a violent death . 
▁ [ as the xxup spirit speaks , xxup southwell writes the answer ] 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . ' what fates await the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk ? ' 
▁ xxup spirit . xxmaj by water shall he die and take his end . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . ' what shall befall the xxmaj duke of xxmaj somerset ? ' 
▁ xxup spirit . xxmaj let him shun castles : 
▁ xxmaj safer shall he be upon the sandy plains 
▁ xxmaj than where castles mounted stand . 
▁ xxmaj have done , for more i hardly can endure . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj descend to darkness and the burning lake ; 
▁ xxmaj false fiend , avoid ! xxmaj thunder and lightning . xxmaj exit xxup spirit 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup york and the xxup duke xxup of 
▁ xxup buckingham with guard , and break in 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj lay hands upon these traitors and their trash . 
▁ xxmaj beldam , i think we watch'd you at an inch . 
▁ xxmaj what , madam , are you there ? xxmaj the xxmaj king and commonweal 
▁ xxmaj are deeply indebted for this piece of pains ; 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector will , i doubt it not , 
▁ xxmaj see you well guerdon'd for these good deserts . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj not half so bad as thine to xxmaj england 's king , 
▁ xxmaj injurious xxmaj duke , that threatest where 's no cause . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj true , madam , none at all . xxmaj what can you this ? 
▁ xxmaj away with them ! let them be clapp'd up close , 
▁ xxmaj and kept asunder . xxmaj you , madam , shall with us . 
▁ xxmaj stafford , take her to thee . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming . 
▁ xxmaj all , away ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt , above , xxup duchess and xxup hume , guarded ; below , 
▁ xxup witch , xxup southwell and xxup bolingbroke , guarded 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj lord xxmaj buckingham , methinks you watch'd her well . 
▁ a pretty plot , well chosen to build upon ! 
▁ xxmaj now , pray , my lord , let 's see the devil 's writ . 
▁ xxmaj what have we here ? [ reads ] 
▁ ' the duke yet lives that xxmaj henry shall depose ; 
▁ xxmaj but him outlive , and die a violent death . ' 
▁ xxmaj why , this is just 
▁ ' aio te , xxmaj aeacida , xxmaj romanos vincere posse . ' 
▁ xxmaj well , to the rest : 
▁ ' tell me what fate awaits the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk ? ' 
▁ ' by water shall he die and take his end . ' 
▁ ' what shall betide the xxmaj duke of xxmaj somerset ? ' 
▁ ' let him shun castles ; 
▁ xxmaj safer shall he be upon the sandy plains 
▁ xxmaj than where castles mounted stand . ' 
▁ xxmaj come , come , my lords ; 
▁ xxmaj these oracles are hardly attain'd , 
▁ xxmaj and hardly understood . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is now in progress towards xxmaj saint xxmaj albans , 
▁ xxmaj with him the husband of this lovely lady ; 
▁ xxmaj thither go these news as fast as horse can carry them- 
▁ a sorry breakfast for my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj your xxmaj grace shall give me leave , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj to be the post , in hope of his reward . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj at your pleasure , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj who 's within there , ho ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a serving - man 

▁ xxmaj invite my xxmaj lords of xxmaj salisbury and xxmaj warwick 
▁ xxmaj to sup with me to - morrow night . xxmaj away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj saint xxmaj albans 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup queen , xxup gloucester , xxup cardinal , and xxup suffolk , 
 with xxmaj falconers halloing 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj believe me , lords , for flying at the brook , 
▁ i saw not better sport these seven years ' day ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , by your leave , the wind was very high , 
▁ xxmaj and ten to one old xxmaj joan had not gone out . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj but what a point , my lord , your falcon made , 
▁ xxmaj and what a pitch she flew above the rest ! 
▁ xxmaj to see how xxmaj god in all xxmaj his creatures works ! 
▁ xxmaj yea , man and birds are fain of climbing high . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj no marvel , an it like your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector 's hawks do tow'r so well ; 
▁ xxmaj they know their master loves to be aloft , 
▁ xxmaj and bears his thoughts above his falcon 's pitch . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my lord , ' tis but a base ignoble mind 
▁ xxmaj that mounts no higher than a bird can soar . 
▁ xxup cardinal . i thought as much ; he would be above the clouds . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , my lord xxmaj cardinal , how think you by that ? 
▁ xxmaj were it not good your xxmaj grace could fly to heaven ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj the treasury of everlasting joy ! 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj thy heaven is on earth ; thine eyes and thoughts 
▁ xxmaj beat on a crown , the treasure of thy heart ; 
▁ xxmaj pernicious xxmaj protector , dangerous peer , 
▁ xxmaj that smooth'st it so with xxmaj king and commonweal . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what , xxmaj cardinal , is your priesthood grown peremptory ? 
▁ xxmaj tantaene animis coelestibus irae ? 
▁ xxmaj churchmen so hot ? xxmaj good uncle , hide such malice ; 
▁ xxmaj with such holiness can you do it ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj no malice , sir ; no more than well becomes 
▁ xxmaj so good a quarrel and so bad a peer . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj as who , my lord ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj why , as you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj an't like your lordly xxmaj lord 's xxmaj protectorship . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , xxmaj suffolk , xxmaj england knows thine insolence . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and thy ambition , xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i prithee , peace , 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj queen , and whet not on these furious peers ; 
▁ xxmaj for blessed are the peacemakers on earth . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj let me be blessed for the peace i make 
▁ xxmaj against this proud xxmaj protector with my sword ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup cardinal ] xxmaj faith , holy uncle , would ' twere 
▁ come to that ! 
▁ xxup cardinal . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] xxmaj marry , when thou dar'st . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup cardinal ] xxmaj make up no factious numbers for the 
▁ matter ; 
▁ xxmaj in thine own person answer thy abuse . 
▁ xxup cardinal . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] xxmaj ay , where thou dar'st not peep ; an 
▁ if thou dar'st , 
▁ xxmaj this evening on the east side of the grove . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how now , my lords ! 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj believe me , cousin xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj had not your man put up the fowl so suddenly , 
▁ xxmaj we had had more sport . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] xxmaj come with thy 
▁ two - hand sword . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj true , uncle . 
▁ xxup cardinal . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] xxmaj are ye advis'd ? xxmaj the east side of 
▁ the grove ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup cardinal ] xxmaj cardinal , i am with you . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , how now , uncle xxmaj gloucester ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj talking of hawking ; nothing else , my lord . 
▁ [ aside to xxup cardinal ] xxmaj now , by xxmaj god 's xxmaj mother , priest , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll shave your crown for this , 
▁ xxmaj or all my fence shall fail . 
▁ xxup cardinal . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] xxmaj medice , teipsum ; 
▁ xxmaj protector , see to't well ; protect yourself . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj the winds grow high ; so do your stomachs , lords . 
▁ xxmaj how irksome is this music to my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj when such strings jar , what hope of harmony ? 
▁ i pray , my lords , let me compound this strife . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup townsman of xxmaj saint xxmaj albans , crying ' a miracle ! ' 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what means this noise ? 
▁ xxmaj fellow , what miracle dost thou proclaim ? 
▁ xxup townsman . a miracle ! a miracle ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj come to the xxmaj king , and tell him what miracle . 
▁ xxup townsman . xxmaj forsooth , a blind man at xxmaj saint xxmaj albans shrine 
▁ xxmaj within this half hour hath receiv'd his sight ; 
▁ a man that ne'er saw in his life before . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj now xxmaj god be prais'd that to believing souls 
▁ xxmaj gives light in darkness , comfort in despair ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup mayor xxup of xxup saint xxup albans and his brethren , 
▁ bearing xxmaj simpcox between two in a chair ; 
▁ his xxup wife and a multitude following 

▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj here comes the townsmen on procession 
▁ xxmaj to present your xxmaj highness with the man . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj great is his comfort in this earthly vale , 
▁ xxmaj although by his sight his sin be multiplied . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj stand by , my masters ; bring him near the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj highness ' pleasure is to talk with him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj good fellow , tell us here the circumstance , 
▁ xxmaj that we for thee may glorify the xxmaj lord . 
▁ xxmaj what , hast thou been long blind and now restor'd ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj born blind , an't please your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup wife . xxmaj ay indeed was he . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj what woman is this ? 
▁ xxup wife . xxmaj his wife , an't like your worship . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj hadst thou been his mother , thou couldst have better 
▁ told . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj where wert thou born ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj at xxmaj berwick in the north , an't like your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj poor soul , xxmaj god 's goodness hath been great to thee . 
▁ xxmaj let never day nor night unhallowed pass , 
▁ xxmaj but still remember what the xxmaj lord hath done . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj tell me , good fellow , cam'st thou here by chance , 
▁ xxmaj or of devotion , to this holy shrine ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj god knows , of pure devotion ; being call'd 
▁ a hundred times and oft'ner , in my sleep , 
▁ xxmaj by good xxmaj saint xxmaj alban , who said ' simpcox , come , 
▁ xxmaj come , offer at my shrine , and i will help thee . ' 
▁ xxup wife . xxmaj most true , forsooth ; and many time and oft 
▁ xxmaj myself have heard a voice to call him so . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj what , art thou lame ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj ay , xxmaj god xxmaj almighty help me ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj how cam'st thou so ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . a fall off of a tree . 
▁ xxup wife . a plum tree , master . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj how long hast thou been blind ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxup o , born so , master ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what , and wouldst climb a tree ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj but that in all my life , when i was a youth . 
▁ xxup wife . xxmaj too true ; and bought his climbing very dear . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj mass , thou lov'dst plums well , that wouldst venture so . 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj alas , good master , my wife desir'd some damsons 
▁ xxmaj and made me climb , xxmaj with danger of my life . 
▁ xxup gloucester . a subtle knave ! xxmaj but yet it shall not serve : 
▁ xxmaj let me see thine eyes ; wink now ; now open them ; 
▁ xxmaj in my opinion yet thou seest not well . 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj yes , master , clear as day , i thank xxmaj god and xxmaj saint xxmaj alban . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj say'st thou me so ? xxmaj what colour is this cloak of ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj red , master ; red as blood . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , that 's well said . xxmaj what colour is my gown of ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj black , forsooth ; coal - black as jet . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , then , thou know'st what colour jet is of ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj and yet , i think , jet did he never see . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj but cloaks and gowns before this day a many . 
▁ xxup wife . xxmaj never before this day in all his life . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj tell me , sirrah , what 's my name ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj alas , master , i know not . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what 's his name ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . i know not . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj nor his ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj no , indeed , master . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what 's thine own name ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj saunder xxmaj simpcox , an if it please you , master . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj then , xxmaj saunder , sit there , the lying'st knave in 
▁ xxmaj christendom . xxmaj if thou hadst been born blind , thou mightst as well 
▁ have known all our names as thus to name the several colours we 
▁ do wear . xxmaj sight may distinguish of colours ; but suddenly to 
▁ nominate them all , it is impossible . xxmaj my lords , xxmaj saint xxmaj alban here 
▁ hath done a miracle ; and would ye not think his cunning to be 
▁ great that could restore this cripple to his legs again ? 
▁ xxup simpcox . o master , that you could ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my masters of xxmaj saint xxmaj albans , have you not beadles in 
▁ your town , and things call'd whips ? 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj yes , my lord , if it please your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj then send for one presently . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj sirrah , go fetch the beadle hither straight . 
▁ xxmaj exit an attendant 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now fetch me a stool hither by and by . [ a stool 
▁ brought ] xxmaj now , sirrah , if you mean to save yourself from whipping , 
▁ leap me over this stool and run away . 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj alas , master , i am not able to stand alone ! 
▁ xxmaj you go about to torture me in vain . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup beadle with whips 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well , sir , we must have you find your legs . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah beadle , whip him till he leap over that same stool . 
▁ xxup beadle . i will , my lord . xxmaj come on , sirrah ; off with your doublet 
▁ quickly . 
▁ xxup simpcox . xxmaj alas , master , what shall i do ? i am not able to stand . 

▁ xxmaj after the xxup beadle hath hit him once , he leaps over 
▁ the stool and runs away ; and they follow and cry 
▁ ' a miracle ! ' 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . o xxmaj god , seest xxmaj thou this , and bearest so long ? 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj it made me laugh to see the villain run . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj follow the knave , and take this drab away . 
▁ xxup wife . xxmaj alas , sir , we did it for pure need ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj let them be whipp'd through every market town till they 
▁ come to xxmaj berwick , from whence they came . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup mayor , xxup beadle , xxup wife , & c. 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey has done a miracle to - day . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj true ; made the lame to leap and fly away . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj but you have done more miracles than xxup i : 
▁ xxmaj you made in a day , my lord , whole towns to fly . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what tidings with our cousin xxmaj buckingham ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj such as my heart doth tremble to unfold : 
▁ a sort of naughty persons , lewdly bent , 
▁ xxmaj under the countenance and confederacy 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj lady xxmaj eleanor , the xxmaj protector 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj the ringleader and head of all this rout , 
▁ xxmaj have practis'd dangerously against your state , 
▁ xxmaj dealing with witches and with conjurers , 
▁ xxmaj whom we have apprehended in the fact , 
▁ xxmaj raising up wicked spirits from under ground , 
▁ xxmaj demanding of xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's life and death 
▁ xxmaj and other of your xxmaj highness ' xxmaj privy xxmaj council , 
▁ xxmaj as more at large your xxmaj grace shall understand . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj and so , my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector , by this means 
▁ xxmaj your lady is forthcoming yet at xxmaj london . 
▁ xxmaj this news , i think , hath turn'd your weapon 's edge ; 
▁ ' tis like , my lord , you will not keep your hour . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ambitious churchman , leave to afflict my heart . 
▁ xxmaj sorrow and grief have vanquish'd all my powers ; 
▁ xxmaj and , vanquish'd as i am , i yield to the 
▁ xxmaj or to the meanest groom . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o xxmaj god , what mischiefs work the wicked ones , 
▁ xxmaj heaping confusion on their own heads thereby ! 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj gloucester , see here the tainture of thy nest ; 
▁ xxmaj and look thyself be faultless , thou wert best . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj madam , for myself , to heaven i do appeal 
▁ xxmaj how i have lov'd my xxmaj king and commonweal ; 
▁ xxmaj and for my wife i know not how it stands . 
▁ xxmaj sorry i am to hear what i have heard . 
▁ xxmaj noble she is ; but if she have forgot 
▁ xxmaj honour and virtue , and convers'd with such 
▁ xxmaj as , like to pitch , defile nobility , 
▁ i banish her my bed and company 
▁ xxmaj and give her as a prey to law and shame , 
▁ xxmaj that hath dishonoured xxmaj gloucester 's honest name . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj well , for this night we will repose us here . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow toward xxmaj london back again 
▁ xxmaj to look into this business thoroughly 
▁ xxmaj and call these foul offenders to their answers , 
▁ xxmaj and poise the cause in justice ' equal scales , 
▁ xxmaj whose beam stands sure , whose rightful cause prevails . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxup duke xxup of xxup york 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup york , xxup salisbury , and xxup warwick 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj now , my good xxmaj lords of xxmaj salisbury and xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj our simple supper ended , give me leave 
▁ xxmaj in this close walk to satisfy myself 
▁ xxmaj in craving your opinion of my tide , 
▁ xxmaj which is infallible , to xxmaj england 's crown . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj my lord , i long to hear it at full . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj sweet xxmaj york , begin ; and if thy claim be good , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj nevils are thy subjects to command . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj then thus : 
▁ xxmaj edward the xxmaj third , my lords , had seven sons ; 
▁ xxmaj the first , xxmaj edward the xxmaj black xxmaj prince , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales ; 
▁ xxmaj the second , xxmaj william of xxmaj hatfield ; and the third , 
▁ xxmaj lionel xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence ; next to whom 
▁ xxmaj was xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster ; 
▁ xxmaj the fifth was xxmaj edmund xxmaj langley , xxmaj duke of xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj the sixth was xxmaj thomas of xxmaj woodstock , xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester ; 
▁ xxmaj william of xxmaj windsor was the seventh and last . 
▁ xxmaj edward the xxmaj black xxmaj prince died before his father 
▁ xxmaj and left behind him xxmaj richard , his only son , 
▁ xxmaj who , after xxmaj edward the xxmaj third 's death , reign'd as king 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj henry xxmaj bolingbroke , xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj the eldest son and heir of xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , 
▁ xxmaj crown'd by the name of xxmaj henry the xxmaj fourth , 
▁ xxmaj seiz'd on the realm , depos'd the rightful king , 
▁ xxmaj sent his poor queen to xxmaj france , from whence she came . 
▁ xxmaj and him to xxmaj pomfret , where , as all you know , 
▁ xxmaj harmless xxmaj richard was murdered traitorously . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj father , the xxmaj duke hath told the truth ; 
▁ xxmaj thus got the house of xxmaj lancaster the crown . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj which now they hold by force , and not by right ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj richard , the first son 's heir , being dead , 
▁ xxmaj the issue of the next son should have reign'd . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj but xxmaj william of xxmaj hatfield died without an heir . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj the third son , xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence , from whose line 
▁ i claim the crown , had issue xxmaj philippe , a daughter , 
▁ xxmaj who married xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer , xxmaj earl of xxmaj march ; 
▁ xxmaj edmund had issue , xxmaj roger xxmaj earl of xxmaj march ; 
▁ xxmaj roger had issue , xxmaj edmund , xxmaj anne , and xxmaj eleanor . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj this xxmaj edmund , in the reign of xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxmaj as i have read , laid claim unto the crown ; 
▁ xxmaj and , but for xxmaj owen xxmaj glendower , had been king , 
▁ xxmaj who kept him in captivity till he died . 
▁ xxmaj but , to the rest . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj his eldest sister , xxmaj anne , 
▁ xxmaj my mother , being heir unto the crown , 
▁ xxmaj married xxmaj richard xxmaj earl of xxmaj cambridge , who was 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj edmund xxmaj langley , xxmaj edward the xxmaj third 's fifth son , son . 
▁ xxmaj by her i claim the kingdom : she was heir 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj roger xxmaj earl of xxmaj march , who was the son 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer , who married xxmaj philippe , 
▁ xxmaj sole daughter unto xxmaj lionel xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence ; 
▁ xxmaj so , if the issue of the elder son 
▁ xxmaj succeed before the younger , i am xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what plain proceedings is more plain than this ? 
▁ xxmaj henry doth claim the crown from xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , 
▁ xxmaj the fourth son : xxmaj york claims it from the third . 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj lionel 's issue fails , his should not reign . 
▁ xxmaj it fails not yet , but flourishes in thee 
▁ xxmaj and in thy sons , fair slips of such a stock . 
▁ xxmaj then , father xxmaj salisbury , kneel we together , 
▁ xxmaj and in this private plot be we the first 
▁ xxmaj that shall salute our rightful sovereign 
▁ xxmaj with honour of his birthright to the crown . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj long live our sovereign xxmaj richard , xxmaj england 's xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj we thank you , lords . xxmaj but i am not your king 
▁ xxmaj till i be crown'd , and that my sword be stain'd 
▁ xxmaj with heart - blood of the house of xxmaj lancaster ; 
▁ xxmaj and that 's not suddenly to be perform'd , 
▁ xxmaj but with advice and silent secrecy . 
▁ xxmaj do you as i do in these dangerous days : 
▁ xxmaj wink at the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk 's insolence , 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj beaufort 's pride , at xxmaj somerset 's ambition , 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj buckingham , and all the crew of them , 
▁ xxmaj till they have snar'd the shepherd of the flock , 
▁ xxmaj that virtuous prince , the good xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey ; 
▁ ' tis that they seek ; and they , in seeking that , 
▁ xxmaj shall find their deaths , if xxmaj york can prophesy . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj my lord , break we off ; we know your mind at full . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj my heart assures me that the xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick 
▁ xxmaj shall one day make the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york a king . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and , xxmaj nevil , this i do assure myself , 
▁ xxmaj richard shall live to make the xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick 
▁ xxmaj the greatest man in xxmaj england but the xxmaj king . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj london . a hall of justice 

 xxmaj sound trumpets . xxmaj enter the xxup king and xxmaj state : the xxup queen , xxup gloucester , xxup york , 
 xxup suffolk , and xxup salisbury , with guard , to banish the xxup duchess . xxmaj enter , guarded , 
 the xxup duchess xxup of xxup gloucester , xxup margery xxup jourdain , xxup hume , xxup southwell , and xxup bolingbroke 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj stand forth , xxmaj dame xxmaj eleanor xxmaj cobham , xxmaj gloucester 's wife : 
▁ xxmaj in sight of xxmaj god and us , your guilt is great ; 
▁ xxmaj receive the sentence of the law for sins 
▁ xxmaj such as by xxmaj god 's book are adjudg'd to death . 
▁ xxmaj you four , from hence to prison back again ; 
▁ xxmaj from thence unto the place of execution : 
▁ xxmaj the witch in xxmaj smithfield shall be burnt to ashes , 
▁ xxmaj and you three shall be strangled on the gallows . 
▁ xxmaj you , madam , for you are more nobly born , 
▁ xxmaj despoiled of your honour in your life , 
▁ xxmaj shall , after three days ' open penance done , 
▁ xxmaj live in your country here in banishment 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj stanley in the xxmaj isle of xxmaj man . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj welcome is banishment ; welcome were my death . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj eleanor , the law , thou seest , hath judged thee . 
▁ i can not justify whom the law condemns . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt the xxup duchess and the other prisoners , guarded 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes are full of tears , my heart of grief . 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj humphrey , this dishonour in thine age 
▁ xxmaj will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground ! 
▁ i beseech your xxmaj majesty give me leave to go ; 
▁ xxmaj sorrow would solace , and mine age would ease . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj stay , xxmaj humphrey xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester ; ere thou go , 
▁ xxmaj give up thy staff ; xxmaj henry will to himself 
▁ xxmaj protector be ; and xxmaj god shall be my hope , 
▁ xxmaj my stay , my guide , and lantern to my feet . 
▁ xxmaj and go in peace , xxmaj humphrey , no less belov'd 
▁ xxmaj than when thou wert xxmaj protector to thy xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup queen . i see no reason why a king of years 
▁ xxmaj should be to be protected like a child . 
▁ xxmaj god and xxmaj king xxmaj henry govern xxmaj england 's realm ! 
▁ xxmaj give up your staff , sir , and the xxmaj king his realm . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my staff ! xxmaj here , noble xxmaj henry , is my staff . 
▁ xxmaj as willingly do i the same resign 
▁ xxmaj as ere thy father xxmaj henry made it mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and even as willingly at thy feet i leave it 
▁ xxmaj as others would ambitiously receive it . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj king ; when i am dead and gone , 
▁ xxmaj may honourable peace attend thy throne ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj why , now is xxmaj henry xxmaj king , and xxmaj margaret xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj humphrey xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester scarce himself , 
▁ xxmaj that bears so shrewd a maim : two pulls at once- 
▁ xxmaj his lady banish'd and a limb lopp'd off . 
▁ xxmaj this staff of honour raught , there let it stand 
▁ xxmaj where it best fits to be , in xxmaj henry 's hand . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays ; 
▁ xxmaj thus xxmaj eleanor 's pride dies in her youngest days . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj lords , let him go . xxmaj please it your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj this is the day appointed for the combat ; 
▁ xxmaj and ready are the appellant and defendant , 
▁ xxmaj the armourer and his man , to enter the lists , 
▁ xxmaj so please your xxmaj highness to behold the fight . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj ay , good my lord ; for purposely therefore 
▁ xxmaj left i the court , to see this quarrel tried . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . a xxmaj god 's name , see the lists and all things fit ; 
▁ xxmaj here let them end it , and xxmaj god defend the right ! 
▁ xxup york . i never saw a fellow worse bested , 
▁ xxmaj or more afraid to fight , than is the appellant , 
▁ xxmaj the servant of his armourer , my lords . 

▁ xxmaj enter at one door , xxup horner , the xxmaj armourer , and his 
▁ xxup neighbours , drinking to him so much that he is 
▁ drunk ; and he enters with a drum before him and 
▁ his staff with a sand - bag fastened to it ; and at the 
▁ other door xxup peter , his man , with a drum and sandbag , 
▁ and xxup prentices drinking to him 

▁ xxup first xxup neighbour . xxmaj here , neighbour xxmaj horner , i drink to you in a cup of 
▁ sack ; and fear not , neighbour , you shall do well enough . 
▁ xxup second xxup neighbour . xxmaj and here , neighbour , here 's a cup of charneco . 
▁ xxup third xxup neighbour . xxmaj and here 's a pot of good double beer , neighbour ; 
▁ drink , and fear not your man . 
▁ xxup horner . xxmaj let it come , i ' faith , and xxmaj i 'll pledge you all ; and a fig 
▁ for xxmaj peter ! 
▁ xxup first xxup prentice . xxmaj here , xxmaj peter , i drink to thee ; and be not afraid . 
▁ xxup second xxup prentice . xxmaj be merry , xxmaj peter , and fear not thy master : fight 
▁ for credit of the prentices . 
▁ xxup peter . i thank you all . xxmaj drink , and pray for me , i pray you ; for i 
▁ think i have taken my last draught in this world . xxmaj here , xxmaj robin , an 
▁ if i die , i give thee my apron ; and , xxmaj will , thou shalt have my 
▁ hammer ; and here , xxmaj tom , take all the money that i have . o xxmaj lord 
▁ bless me , i pray xxmaj god ! for i am never able to deal with my master , 
▁ he hath learnt so much fence already . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj come , leave your drinking and fall to blows . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , what 's thy name ? 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj peter , forsooth . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj peter ? xxmaj what more ? 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj thump . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj thump ? xxmaj then see thou thump thy master well . 
▁ xxup horner . xxmaj masters , i am come hither , as it were , upon my man 's 
▁ instigation , to prove him a knave and myself an honest man ; and 
▁ touching the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , i will take my death i never meant him 
▁ any ill , nor the xxmaj king , nor the xxmaj queen ; and therefore , xxmaj peter , have 
▁ at thee with a down right blow ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj dispatch- this knave 's tongue begins to double . 
▁ xxmaj sound , trumpets , alarum to the combatants ! 
▁ [ alarum . xxmaj they fight and xxup peter strikes him down ] 
▁ xxup horner . xxmaj hold , xxmaj peter , hold ! i confess , i confess treason . 
▁ [ dies ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj take away his weapon . xxmaj fellow , thank xxmaj god , and the good wine in 
▁ thy master 's way . 
▁ xxup peter . o xxmaj god , have i overcome mine enemies in this presence ? o 
▁ xxmaj peter , thou hast prevail'd in right ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj go , take hence that traitor from our sight , 
▁ xxmaj for by his death we do perceive his guilt ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj god in justice hath reveal'd to us 
▁ xxmaj the truth and innocence of this poor fellow , 
▁ xxmaj which he had thought to have murder'd wrongfully . 
▁ xxmaj come , fellow , follow us for thy reward . 
▁ xxmaj sound a flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup humphrey and his men , in mourning cloaks 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud , 
▁ xxmaj and after summer evermore succeeds 
▁ xxmaj barren winter , with his wrathful nipping cold ; 
▁ xxmaj so cares and joys abound , as seasons fleet . 
▁ xxmaj sirs , what 's o'clock ? 
▁ xxup serving - man . xxmaj ten , my lord . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ten is the hour that was appointed me 
▁ xxmaj to watch the coming of my punish'd duchess . 
▁ xxmaj uneath may she endure the flinty streets 
▁ xxmaj to tread them with her tender - feeling feet . 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj nell , ill can thy noble mind abrook 
▁ xxmaj the abject people gazing on thy face , 
▁ xxmaj with envious looks , laughing at thy shame , 
▁ xxmaj that erst did follow thy proud chariot wheels 
▁ xxmaj when thou didst ride in triumph through the streets . 
▁ xxmaj but , soft ! i think she comes , and xxmaj i 'll prepare 
▁ xxmaj my tear - stain'd eyes to see her miseries . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup duchess xxup of xxup gloucester in a white sheet , 
▁ and a taper burning in her hand , with xxup sir xxup john 
▁ xxup stanley , the xxup sheriff , and xxup officers 

▁ xxup serving - man . xxmaj so please your xxmaj grace , we 'll take her from the sheriff . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj no , stir not for your lives ; let her pass by . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj come you , my lord , to see my open shame ? 
▁ xxmaj now thou dost penance too . xxmaj look how they gaze ! 
▁ xxmaj see how the giddy multitude do point 
▁ xxmaj and nod their heads and throw their eyes on thee ; 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj gloucester , hide thee from their hateful looks , 
▁ xxmaj and , in thy closet pent up , rue my shame 
▁ xxmaj and ban thine enemies , both mine and thine ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj be patient , gentle xxmaj nell ; forget this grief . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj ah , xxmaj gloucester , teach me to forget myself ! 
▁ xxmaj for whilst i think i am thy married wife 
▁ xxmaj and thou a prince , xxmaj protector of this land , 
▁ xxmaj methinks i should not thus be led along , 
▁ xxmaj mail'd up in shame , with papers on my back , 
▁ xxmaj and follow'd with a rabble that rejoice 
▁ xxmaj to see my tears and hear my deep - fet groans . 
▁ xxmaj the ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet , 
▁ xxmaj and when i start , the envious people laugh 
▁ xxmaj and bid me be advised how i tread . 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj humphrey , can i bear this shameful yoke ? 
▁ xxmaj trowest thou that e'er xxmaj i 'll look upon the world 
▁ xxmaj or count them happy that enjoy the sun ? 
▁ xxmaj no ; dark shall be my light and night my day ; 
▁ xxmaj to think upon my pomp shall be my hell . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes xxmaj i 'll say i am xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj and he a prince , and ruler of the land ; 
▁ xxmaj yet so he rul'd , and such a prince he was , 
▁ xxmaj as he stood by whilst xxup i , his forlorn duchess , 
▁ xxmaj was made a wonder and a pointing - stock 
▁ xxmaj to every idle rascal follower . 
▁ xxmaj but be thou mild , and blush not at my shame , 
▁ xxmaj nor stir at nothing till the axe of death 
▁ xxmaj hang over thee , as sure it shortly will . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj suffolk- he that can do all in all 
▁ xxmaj with her that hateth thee and hates us all- 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj york , and impious xxmaj beaufort , that false priest , 
▁ xxmaj have all lim'd bushes to betray thy wings , 
▁ xxmaj and , fly thou how thou canst , they 'll tangle thee . 
▁ xxmaj but fear not thou until thy foot be snar'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor never seek prevention of thy foes . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ah , xxmaj nell , forbear ! xxmaj thou aimest all awry . 
▁ i must offend before i be attainted ; 
▁ xxmaj and had i twenty times so many foes , 
▁ xxmaj and each of them had twenty times their power , 
▁ xxmaj all these could not procure me any scathe 
▁ xxmaj so long as i am loyal , true , and crimeless . 
▁ xxmaj wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach ? 
▁ xxmaj why , yet thy scandal were not wip'd away , 
▁ xxmaj but i in danger for the breach of law . 
▁ xxmaj thy greatest help is quiet , gentle xxmaj nell . 
▁ i pray thee sort thy heart to patience ; 
▁ xxmaj these few days ' wonder will be quickly worn . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup herald 

▁ xxup herald . i summon your xxmaj grace to his xxmaj majesty 's xxmaj parliament , 
▁ xxmaj holden at xxmaj bury the first of this next month . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and my consent ne'er ask'd herein before ! 
▁ xxmaj this is close dealing . xxmaj well , i will be there . xxmaj exit xxup herald 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj nell , i take my leave- and , master sheriff , 
▁ xxmaj let not her penance exceed the xxmaj king 's commission . 
▁ xxup sheriff . xxmaj an't please your xxmaj grace , here my commission stays ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj stanley is appointed now 
▁ xxmaj to take her with him to the xxmaj isle of xxmaj man . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj must you , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , protect my lady here ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj so am i given in charge , may't please your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj entreat her not the worse in that i pray 
▁ xxmaj you use her well ; the world may laugh again , 
▁ xxmaj and i may live to do you kindness if 
▁ xxmaj you do it her . xxmaj and so , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , farewell . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what , gone , my lord , and bid me not farewell ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj witness my tears , i can not stay to speak . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gloucester and servants 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj art thou gone too ? xxmaj all comfort go with thee ! 
▁ xxmaj for none abides with me . xxmaj my joy is death- 
▁ xxmaj death , at whose name i oft have been afeard , 
▁ xxmaj because i wish'd this world 's eternity . 
▁ xxmaj stanley , i prithee go , and take me hence ; 
▁ i care not whither , for i beg no favour , 
▁ xxmaj only convey me where thou art commanded . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj why , madam , that is to the xxmaj isle of xxmaj man , 
▁ xxmaj there to be us'd according to your state . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj that 's bad enough , for i am but reproach- 
▁ xxmaj and shall i then be us'd reproachfully ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj like to a duchess and xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's lady ; 
▁ xxmaj according to that state you shall be us'd . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj sheriff , farewell , and better than i fare , 
▁ xxmaj although thou hast been conduct of my shame . 
▁ xxup sheriff . xxmaj it is my office ; and , madam , pardon me . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj ay , ay , farewell ; thy office is discharg'd . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj stanley , shall we go ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj madam , your penance done , throw off this sheet , 
▁ xxmaj and go we to attire you for our journey . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj my shame will not be shifted with my sheet . 
▁ xxmaj no , it will hang upon my richest robes 
▁ xxmaj and show itself , attire me how i can . 
▁ xxmaj go , lead the way ; i long to see my prison . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the xxmaj abbey at xxmaj bury xxmaj st . xxmaj edmunds 

 xxmaj sound a sennet . xxmaj enter the xxup king , the xxup queen , xxup cardinal , xxup suffolk , xxup york , 
 xxup buckingham , xxup salisbury , and xxup warwick , to the xxmaj parliament 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . i muse my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester is not come . 
▁ ' tis not his wo nt to be the hindmost man , 
▁ xxmaj whate'er occasion keeps him from us now . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj can you not see , or will ye not observe 
▁ xxmaj the strangeness of his alter'd countenance ? 
▁ xxmaj with what a majesty he bears himself ; 
▁ xxmaj how insolent of late he is become , 
▁ xxmaj how proud , how peremptory , and unlike himself ? 
▁ xxmaj we know the time since he was mild and affable , 
▁ xxmaj and if we did but glance a far - off look 
▁ xxmaj immediately he was upon his knee , 
▁ xxmaj that all the court admir'd him for submission . 
▁ xxmaj but meet him now and be it in the morn , 
▁ xxmaj when every one will give the time of day , 
▁ xxmaj he knits his brow and shows an angry eye 
▁ xxmaj and passeth by with stiff unbowed knee , 
▁ xxmaj disdaining duty that to us belongs . 
▁ xxmaj small curs are not regarded when they grin , 
▁ xxmaj but great men tremble when the lion roars , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj humphrey is no little man in xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj first note that he is near you in descent , 
▁ xxmaj and should you fall he is the next will mount ; 
▁ xxmaj me seemeth , then , it is no policy- 
▁ xxmaj respecting what a rancorous mind he bears , 
▁ xxmaj and his advantage following your decease- 
▁ xxmaj that he should come about your royal person 
▁ xxmaj or be admitted to your xxmaj highness ' xxmaj council . 
▁ xxmaj by flattery hath he won the commons ' hearts ; 
▁ xxmaj and when he please to make commotion , 
▁ ' tis to be fear'd they all will follow him . 
▁ xxmaj now ' tis the spring , and weeds are shallow - rooted ; 
▁ xxmaj suffer them now , and they 'll o'ergrow the garden