xxbos xxmaj and choke the herbs for want of husbandry . 
▁ xxmaj the reverent care i bear unto my lord 
▁ xxmaj made me collect these dangers in the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxmaj if it be fond , can it a woman 's fear ; 
▁ xxmaj which fear if better reasons can supplant , 
▁ i will subscribe , and say i wrong'd the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk , xxmaj buckingham , and xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj reprove my allegation if you can , 
▁ xxmaj or else conclude my words effectual . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj well hath your xxmaj highness seen into this duke ; 
▁ xxmaj and had i first been put to speak my mind , 
▁ i think i should have told your xxmaj grace 's tale . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duchess , by his subornation , 
▁ xxmaj upon my life , began her devilish practices ; 
▁ xxmaj or if he were not privy to those faults , 
▁ xxmaj yet by reputing of his high descent- 
▁ xxmaj as next the xxmaj king he was successive heir- 
▁ xxmaj and such high vaunts of his nobility , 
▁ xxmaj did instigate the bedlam brainsick xxmaj duchess 
▁ xxmaj by wicked means to frame our sovereign 's fall . 
▁ xxmaj smooth runs the water where the brook is deep , 
▁ xxmaj and in his simple show he harbours treason . 
▁ xxmaj the fox barks not when he would steal the lamb . 
▁ xxmaj no , no , my sovereign , xxmaj gloucester is a man 
▁ xxmaj unsounded yet , and full of deep deceit . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj did he not , contrary to form of law , 
▁ xxmaj devise strange deaths for small offences done ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and did he not , in his protectorship , 
▁ xxmaj levy great sums of money through the realm 
▁ xxmaj for soldiers ' pay in xxmaj france , and never sent it ? 
▁ xxmaj by means whereof the towns each day revolted . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj tut , these are petty faults to faults unknown 
▁ xxmaj which time will bring to light in smooth xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my lords , at once : the care you have of us , 
▁ xxmaj to mow down thorns that would annoy our foot , 
▁ xxmaj is worthy praise ; but shall i speak my conscience ? 
▁ xxmaj our kinsman xxmaj gloucester is as innocent 
▁ xxmaj from meaning treason to our royal person 
▁ xxmaj as is the sucking lamb or harmless dove : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke is virtuous , mild , and too well given 
▁ xxmaj to dream on evil or to work my downfall . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj ah , what 's more dangerous than this fond affiance ? 
▁ xxmaj seems he a dove ? xxmaj his feathers are but borrow'd , 
▁ xxmaj for he 's disposed as the hateful raven . 
▁ xxmaj is he a lamb ? xxmaj his skin is surely lent him , 
▁ xxmaj for he 's inclin'd as is the ravenous wolf . 
▁ xxmaj who can not steal a shape that means deceit ? 
▁ xxmaj take heed , my lord ; the welfare of us all 
▁ xxmaj hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup somerset 

▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj all health unto my gracious sovereign ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj lord xxmaj somerset . xxmaj what news from xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj that all your interest in those territories 
▁ xxmaj is utterly bereft you ; all is lost . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj cold news , xxmaj lord xxmaj somerset ; but xxmaj god 's will be done ! 
▁ xxup york . [ aside ] xxmaj cold news for me ; for i had hope of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj as firmly as i hope for fertile xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud , 
▁ xxmaj and caterpillars eat my leaves away ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will remedy this gear ere long , 
▁ xxmaj or sell my title for a glorious grave . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj all happiness unto my lord the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxmaj pardon , my liege , that i have stay'd so long . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj nay , xxmaj gloucester , know that thou art come too soon , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou wert more loyal than thou art . 
▁ i do arrest thee of high treason here . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well , xxmaj suffolk , thou shalt not see me blush 
▁ xxmaj nor change my countenance for this arrest : 
▁ a heart unspotted is not easily daunted . 
▁ xxmaj the purest spring is not so free from mud 
▁ xxmaj as i am clear from treason to my sovereign . 
▁ xxmaj who can accuse me ? xxmaj wherein am i guilty ? 
▁ xxup york . ' tis thought , my lord , that you took bribes of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj and , being xxmaj protector , stay'd the soldiers ' pay ; 
▁ xxmaj by means whereof his xxmaj highness hath lost xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj is it but thought so ? xxmaj what are they that think it ? 
▁ i never robb'd the soldiers of their pay 
▁ xxmaj nor ever had one penny bribe from xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj so help me xxmaj god , as i have watch'd the night- 
▁ xxmaj ay , night by night- in studying good for xxmaj england ! 
▁ xxmaj that doit that e'er i wrested from the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj or any groat i hoarded to my use , 
▁ xxmaj be brought against me at my trial - day ! 
▁ xxmaj no ; many a pound of mine own proper store , 
▁ xxmaj because i would not tax the needy commons , 
▁ xxmaj have i dispursed to the garrisons , 
▁ xxmaj and never ask'd for restitution . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj it serves you well , my lord , to say so much . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i say no more than truth , so help me xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj in your protectorship you did devise 
▁ xxmaj strange tortures for offenders , never heard of , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj england was defam'd by tyranny . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , ' tis well known that whiles i was xxmaj protector 
▁ xxmaj pity was all the fault that was in me ; 
▁ xxmaj for i should melt at an offender 's tears , 
▁ xxmaj and lowly words were ransom for their fault . 
▁ xxmaj unless it were a bloody murderer , 
▁ xxmaj or foul felonious thief that fleec'd poor passengers , 
▁ i never gave them condign punishment . 
▁ xxmaj murder indeed , that bloody sin , i tortur'd 
▁ xxmaj above the felon or what trespass else . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj my lord , these faults are easy , quickly answer'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but mightier crimes are laid unto your charge , 
▁ xxmaj whereof you can not easily purge yourself . 
▁ i do arrest you in xxmaj his xxmaj highness ' name , 
▁ xxmaj and here commit you to my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj to keep until your further time of trial . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester , ' tis my special hope 
▁ xxmaj that you will clear yourself from all suspense . 
▁ xxmaj my conscience tells me you are innocent . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ah , gracious lord , these days are dangerous ! 
▁ xxmaj virtue is chok'd with foul ambition , 
▁ xxmaj and charity chas'd hence by rancour 's hand ; 
▁ xxmaj foul subornation is predominant , 
▁ xxmaj and equity exil'd your xxmaj highness ' land . 
▁ i know their complot is to have my life ; 
▁ xxmaj and if my death might make this island happy 
▁ xxmaj and prove the period of their tyranny , 
▁ i would expend it with all willingness . 
▁ xxmaj but mine is made the prologue to their play ; 
▁ xxmaj for thousands more that yet suspect no peril 
▁ xxmaj will not conclude their plotted tragedy . 
▁ xxmaj beaufort 's red sparkling eyes blab his heart 's malice , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj suffolk 's cloudy brow his stormy hate ; 
▁ xxmaj sharp xxmaj buckingham unburdens with his tongue 
▁ xxmaj the envious load that lies upon his heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and dogged xxmaj york , that reaches at the moon , 
▁ xxmaj whose overweening arm i have pluck'd back , 
▁ xxmaj by false accuse doth level at my life . 
▁ xxmaj and you , my sovereign lady , with the rest , 
▁ xxmaj causeless have laid disgraces on my head , 
▁ xxmaj and with your best endeavour have stirr'd up 
▁ xxmaj my liefest liege to be mine enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , all of you have laid your heads together- 
▁ xxmaj myself had notice of your conventicles- 
▁ xxmaj and all to make away my guiltless life . 
▁ i shall not want false witness to condemn me 
▁ xxmaj nor store of treasons to augment my guilt . 
▁ xxmaj the ancient proverb will be well effected : 
▁ ' a staff is quickly found to beat a dog . ' 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj my liege , his railing is intolerable . 
▁ xxmaj if those that care to keep your royal person 
▁ xxmaj from treason 's secret knife and traitor 's rage 
▁ xxmaj be thus upbraided , chid , and rated at , 
▁ xxmaj and the offender granted scope of speech , 
▁ ' twill make them cool in zeal unto your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj hath he not twit our sovereign lady here 
▁ xxmaj with ignominious words , though clerkly couch'd , 
▁ xxmaj as if she had suborned some to swear 
▁ xxmaj false allegations to o'erthrow his state ? 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj but i can give the loser leave to chide . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj far truer spoke than meant : i lose indeed . 
▁ xxmaj beshrew the winners , for they play'd me false ! 
▁ xxmaj and well such losers may have leave to speak . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj he 'll wrest the sense , and hold us here all day . 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , he is your prisoner . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj sirs , take away the xxmaj duke , and guard him sure . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ah , thus xxmaj king xxmaj henry throws away his crutch 
▁ xxmaj before his legs be firm to bear his body ! 
▁ xxmaj thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side , 
▁ xxmaj and wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first . 
▁ xxmaj ah , that my fear were false ! ah , that it were ! 
▁ xxmaj for , good xxmaj king xxmaj henry , thy decay i fear . xxmaj exit , guarded 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my lords , what to your wisdoms seemeth best 
▁ xxmaj do or undo , as if ourself were here . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj what , will your xxmaj highness leave the xxmaj parliament ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ay , xxmaj margaret ; my heart is drown'd with grief , 
▁ xxmaj whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj my body round engirt with misery- 
▁ xxmaj for what 's more miserable than discontent ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , uncle xxmaj humphrey , in thy face i see 
▁ xxmaj the map of honour , truth , and loyalty ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet , good xxmaj humphrey , is the hour to come 
▁ xxmaj that e'er i prov'd thee false or fear'd thy faith . 
▁ xxmaj what louring star now envies thy estate 
▁ xxmaj that these great lords , and xxmaj margaret our xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj do seek subversion of thy harmless life ? 
▁ xxmaj thou never didst them wrong , nor no man wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj and as the butcher takes away the calf , 
▁ xxmaj and binds the wretch , and beats it when it strays , 
▁ xxmaj bearing it to the bloody slaughter - house , 
▁ xxmaj even so , remorseless , have they borne him hence ; 
▁ xxmaj and as the dam runs lowing up and down , 
▁ xxmaj looking the way her harmless young one went , 
▁ xxmaj and can do nought but wail her darling 's loss , 
▁ xxmaj even so myself bewails good xxmaj gloucester 's case 
▁ xxmaj with sad unhelpful tears , and with dimm'd eyes 
▁ xxmaj look after him , and can not do him good , 
▁ xxmaj so mighty are his vowed enemies . 
▁ xxmaj his fortunes i will weep , and ' twixt each groan 
▁ xxmaj say ' who 's a traitor ? xxmaj gloucester he is none . ' xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj free lords , cold snow melts with the sun 's hot beams : 
▁ xxmaj henry my lord is cold in great affairs , 
▁ xxmaj too full of foolish pity ; and xxmaj gloucester 's show 
▁ xxmaj beguiles him as the mournful crocodile 
▁ xxmaj with sorrow snares relenting passengers ; 
▁ xxmaj or as the snake , roll'd in a flow'ring bank , 
▁ xxmaj with shining checker'd slough , doth sting a child 
▁ xxmaj that for the beauty thinks it excellent . 
▁ xxmaj believe me , lords , were none more wise than xxup i- 
▁ xxmaj and yet herein i judge mine own wit good- 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj gloucester should be quickly rid the world 
▁ xxmaj to rid us from the fear we have of him . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj that he should die is worthy policy ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet we want a colour for his death . 
▁ ' tis meet he be condemn'd by course of law . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj but , in my mind , that were no policy : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king will labour still to save his life ; 
▁ xxmaj the commons haply rise to save his life ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet we have but trivial argument , 
▁ xxmaj more than mistrust , that shows him worthy death . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj so that , by this , you would not have him die . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj ah , xxmaj york , no man alive so fain as xxup i ! 
▁ xxup york . ' tis xxmaj york that hath more reason for his death . 
▁ xxmaj but , my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , and you , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk , 
▁ xxmaj say as you think , and speak it from your souls : 
▁ xxmaj were't not all one an empty eagle were set 
▁ xxmaj to guard the chicken from a hungry kite 
▁ xxmaj as place xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey for the xxmaj king 's xxmaj protector ? 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj so the poor chicken should be sure of death . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj madam , ' tis true ; and were't not madness then 
▁ xxmaj to make the fox surveyor of the fold ? 
▁ xxmaj who being accus'd a crafty murderer , 
▁ xxmaj his guilt should be but idly posted over , 
▁ xxmaj because his purpose is not executed . 
▁ xxmaj no ; let him die , in that he is a fox , 
▁ xxmaj by nature prov'd an enemy to the flock , 
▁ xxmaj before his chaps be stain'd with crimson blood , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj humphrey , prov'd by reasons , to my liege . 
▁ xxmaj and do not stand on quillets how to slay him ; 
▁ xxmaj be it by gins , by snares , by subtlety , 
▁ xxmaj sleeping or waking , ' tis no matter how , 
▁ xxmaj so he be dead ; for that is good deceit 
▁ xxmaj which mates him first that first intends deceit . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj thrice - noble xxmaj suffolk , ' tis resolutely spoke . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj not resolute , except so much were done , 
▁ xxmaj for things are often spoke and seldom meant ; 
▁ xxmaj but that my heart accordeth with my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj seeing the deed is meritorious , 
▁ xxmaj and to preserve my sovereign from his foe , 
▁ xxmaj say but the word , and i will be his priest . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj but i would have him dead , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk , 
▁ xxmaj ere you can take due orders for a priest ; 
▁ xxmaj say you consent and censure well the deed , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll provide his executioner- 
▁ i tender so the safety of my liege . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj here is my hand the deed is worthy doing . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and so say xxup i. 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and xxup i. xxmaj and now we three have spoke it , 
▁ xxmaj it skills not greatly who impugns our doom . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup post 

▁ xxup post . xxmaj great lords , from xxmaj ireland am i come amain 
▁ xxmaj to signify that rebels there are up 
▁ xxmaj and put the xxmaj englishmen unto the sword . 
▁ xxmaj send succours , lords , and stop the rage betime , 
▁ xxmaj before the wound do grow uncurable ; 
▁ xxmaj for , being green , there is great hope of help . 
▁ xxup cardinal . a breach that craves a quick expedient stop ! 
▁ xxmaj what counsel give you in this weighty cause ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj that xxmaj somerset be sent as xxmaj regent thither ; 
▁ ' tis meet that lucky ruler be employ'd , 
▁ xxmaj witness the fortune he hath had in xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj if xxmaj york , with all his far - fet policy , 
▁ xxmaj had been the xxmaj regent there instead of me , 
▁ xxmaj he never would have stay'd in xxmaj france so long . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj no , not to lose it all as thou hast done . 
▁ i rather would have lost my life betimes 
▁ xxmaj than bring a burden of dishonour home 
▁ xxmaj by staying there so long till all were lost . 
▁ xxmaj show me one scar character'd on thy skin : 
▁ xxmaj men 's flesh preserv'd so whole do seldom win . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj nay then , this spark will prove a raging fire , 
▁ xxmaj if wind and fuel be brought to feed it with ; 
▁ xxmaj no more , good xxmaj york ; sweet xxmaj somerset , be still . 
▁ xxmaj thy fortune , xxmaj york , hadst thou been xxmaj regent there , 
▁ xxmaj might happily have prov'd far worse than his . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj what , worse than nought ? xxmaj nay , then a shame take all ! 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj and in the number , thee that wishest shame ! 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , try what your fortune is . 
▁ xxmaj th ' uncivil kerns of xxmaj ireland are in arms 
▁ xxmaj and temper clay with blood of xxmaj englishmen ; 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj ireland will you lead a band of men , 
▁ xxmaj collected choicely , from each county some , 
▁ xxmaj and try your hap against the xxmaj irishmen ? 
▁ xxup york . i will , my lord , so please his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj why , our authority is his consent , 
▁ xxmaj and what we do establish he confirms ; 
▁ xxmaj then , noble xxmaj york , take thou this task in hand . 
▁ xxup york . i am content ; provide me soldiers , lords , 
▁ xxmaj whiles i take order for mine own affairs . 
▁ xxup suffolk . a charge , xxmaj lord xxmaj york , that i will see perform'd . 
▁ xxmaj but now return we to the false xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj no more of him ; for i will deal with him 
▁ xxmaj that henceforth he shall trouble us no more . 
▁ xxmaj and so break off ; the day is almost spent . 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj suffolk , you and i must talk of that event . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk , within fourteen days 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj bristol i expect my soldiers ; 
▁ xxmaj for there xxmaj i 'll ship them all for xxmaj ireland . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj i 'll see it truly done , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup york 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj now , xxmaj york , or never , steel thy fearful thoughts 
▁ xxmaj and change misdoubt to resolution ; 
▁ xxmaj be that thou hop'st to be ; or what thou art 
▁ xxmaj resign to death- it is not worth th ' enjoying . 
▁ xxmaj let pale - fac'd fear keep with the mean - born man 
▁ xxmaj and find no harbour in a royal heart . 
▁ xxmaj faster than spring - time show'rs comes thought on thought , 
▁ xxmaj and not a thought but thinks on dignity . 
▁ xxmaj my brain , more busy than the labouring spider , 
▁ xxmaj weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies . 
▁ xxmaj well , nobles , well , ' tis politicly done 
▁ xxmaj to send me packing with an host of men . 
▁ i fear me you but warm the starved snake , 
▁ xxmaj who , cherish'd in your breasts , will sting your hearts . 
▁ ' twas men i lack'd , and you will give them me ; 
▁ i take it kindly . xxmaj yet be well assur'd 
▁ xxmaj you put sharp weapons in a madman 's hands . 
▁ xxmaj whiles i in xxmaj ireland nourish a mighty band , 
▁ i will stir up in xxmaj england some black storm 
▁ xxmaj shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell ; 
▁ xxmaj and this fell tempest shall not cease to rage 
▁ xxmaj until the golden circuit on my head , 
▁ xxmaj like to the glorious sun 's transparent beams , 
▁ xxmaj do calm the fury of this mad - bred flaw . 
▁ xxmaj and for a minister of my intent 
▁ i have seduc'd a headstrong xxmaj kentishman , 
▁ xxmaj john xxmaj cade of xxmaj ashford , 
▁ xxmaj to make commotion , as full well he can , 
▁ xxmaj under the tide of xxmaj john xxmaj mortimer . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj ireland have i seen this stubborn xxmaj cade 
▁ xxmaj oppose himself against a troop of kerns , 
▁ xxmaj and fought so long tiff that his thighs with darts 
▁ xxmaj were almost like a sharp - quill'd porpentine ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the end being rescu'd , i have seen 
▁ xxmaj him caper upright like a wild xxmaj morisco , 
▁ xxmaj shaking the bloody darts as he his bells . 
▁ xxmaj full often , like a shag - hair'd crafty kern , 
▁ xxmaj hath he conversed with the enemy , 
▁ xxmaj and undiscover'd come to me again 
▁ xxmaj and given me notice of their villainies . 
▁ xxmaj this devil here shall be my substitute ; 
▁ xxmaj for that xxmaj john xxmaj mortimer , which now is dead , 
▁ xxmaj in face , in gait , in speech , he doth resemble . 
▁ xxmaj by this i shall perceive the commons ' mind , 
▁ xxmaj how they affect the house and claim of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj say he be taken , rack'd , and tortured ; 
▁ i know no pain they can inflict upon him 
▁ xxmaj will make him say i mov'd him to those arms . 
▁ xxmaj say that he thrive , as ' tis great like he will , 
▁ xxmaj why , then from xxmaj ireland come i with my strength , 
▁ xxmaj and reap the harvest which that rascal sow'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj humphrey being dead , as he shall be , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj henry put apart , the next for me . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj bury xxmaj st . xxmaj edmunds . a room of state 

 xxmaj enter two or three xxup murderers running over the stage , 
 from the murder of xxup duke xxup humphrey 

▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj run to my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk ; let him know 
▁ xxmaj we have dispatch'd the xxmaj duke , as he commanded . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . o that it were to do ! xxmaj what have we done ? 
▁ xxmaj didst ever hear a man so penitent ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup suffolk 

▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj here comes my lord . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj now , sirs , have you dispatch'd this thing ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj ay , my good lord , he 's dead . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj why , that 's well said . xxmaj go , get you to my house ; 
▁ i will reward you for this venturous deed . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king and all the peers are here at hand . 
▁ xxmaj have you laid fair the bed ? xxmaj is all things well , 
▁ xxmaj according as i gave directions ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . ' tis , my good lord . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj away ! be gone . xxmaj exeunt xxup murderers 

▁ xxmaj sound trumpets . xxmaj enter the xxup king , the xxup queen , 
▁ xxup cardinal , xxup somerset , with attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj go call our uncle to our presence straight ; 
▁ xxmaj say we intend to try his xxmaj grace to - day , 
▁ xxmaj if he be guilty , as ' tis published . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj i 'll call him presently , my noble lord . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj lords , take your places ; and , i pray you all , 
▁ xxmaj proceed no straiter ' gainst our uncle xxmaj gloucester 
▁ xxmaj than from true evidence , of good esteem , 
▁ xxmaj he be approv'd in practice culpable . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj god forbid any malice should prevail 
▁ xxmaj that faultless may condemn a nobleman ! 
▁ xxmaj pray xxmaj god he may acquit him of suspicion ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i thank thee , xxmaj meg ; these words content me much . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup suffolk 
▁
▁ xxmaj how now ! xxmaj why look'st thou pale ? xxmaj why tremblest thou ? 
▁ xxmaj where is our uncle ? xxmaj what 's the matter , xxmaj suffolk ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj dead in his bed , my lord ; xxmaj gloucester is dead . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj marry , xxmaj god forfend ! 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj god 's secret judgment ! i did dream to - night 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke was dumb and could not speak a word . 
▁ [ the xxup king swoons ] 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj how fares my lord ? xxmaj help , lords ! xxmaj the xxmaj king is dead . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj rear up his body ; wring him by the nose . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj run , go , help , help ! o xxmaj henry , ope thine eyes ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj he doth revive again ; madam , be patient . 
▁ xxup king . o heavenly xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj how fares my gracious lord ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj comfort , my sovereign ! xxmaj gracious xxmaj henry , comfort ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what , doth my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk comfort me ? 
▁ xxmaj came he right now to sing a raven 's note , 
▁ xxmaj whose dismal tune bereft my vital pow'rs ; 
▁ xxmaj and thinks he that the chirping of a wren , 
▁ xxmaj by crying comfort from a hollow breast , 
▁ xxmaj can chase away the first conceived sound ? 
▁ xxmaj hide not thy poison with such sug'red words ; 
▁ xxmaj lay not thy hands on me ; forbear , i say , 
▁ xxmaj their touch affrights me as a serpent 's sting . 
▁ xxmaj thou baleful messenger , out of my sight ! 
▁ xxmaj upon thy eye - balls murderous tyranny 
▁ xxmaj sits in grim majesty to fright the world . 
▁ xxmaj look not upon me , for thine eyes are wounding ; 
▁ xxmaj yet do not go away ; come , basilisk , 
▁ xxmaj and kill the innocent gazer with thy sight ; 
▁ xxmaj for in the shade of death i shall find joy- 
▁ xxmaj in life but double death,'now xxmaj gloucester 's dead . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj why do you rate my xxmaj lord of xxmaj suffolk thus ? 
▁ xxmaj although the xxmaj duke was enemy to him , 
▁ xxmaj yet he most xxmaj christian - like laments his death ; 
▁ xxmaj and for myself- foe as he was to me- 
▁ xxmaj might liquid tears , or heart - offending groans , 
▁ xxmaj or blood - consuming sighs , recall his life , 
▁ i would be blind with weeping , sick with groans , 
▁ xxmaj look pale as primrose with blood - drinking sighs , 
▁ xxmaj and all to have the noble xxmaj duke alive . 
▁ xxmaj what know i how the world may deem of me ? 
▁ xxmaj for it is known we were but hollow friends : 
▁ xxmaj it may be judg'd i made the xxmaj duke away ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall my name with slander 's tongue be wounded , 
▁ xxmaj and princes ' courts be fill'd with my reproach . 
▁ xxmaj this get i by his death . xxmaj ay me , unhappy ! 
▁ xxmaj to be a queen and crown'd with infamy ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ah , woe is me for xxmaj gloucester , wretched man ! 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj be woe for me , more wretched than he is . 
▁ xxmaj what , dost thou turn away , and hide thy face ? 
▁ i am no loathsome leper- look on me . 
▁ xxmaj what , art thou like the adder waxen deaf ? 
▁ xxmaj be poisonous too , and kill thy forlorn xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj is all thy comfort shut in xxmaj gloucester 's tomb ? 
▁ xxmaj why , then xxmaj dame xxmaj margaret was ne'er thy joy . 
▁ xxmaj erect his statue and worship it , 
▁ xxmaj and make my image but an alehouse sign . 
▁ xxmaj was i for this nigh wreck'd upon the sea , 
▁ xxmaj and twice by awkward wind from xxmaj england 's bank 
▁ xxmaj drove back again unto my native clime ? 
▁ xxmaj what boded this but well - forewarning wind 
▁ xxmaj did seem to say ' seek not a scorpion 's nest , 
▁ xxmaj nor set no footing on this unkind shore ' ? 
▁ xxmaj what did i then but curs'd the gentle gusts , 
▁ xxmaj and he that loos'd them forth their brazen caves ; 
▁ xxmaj and bid them blow towards xxmaj england 's blessed shore , 
▁ xxmaj or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock ? 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj aeolus would not be a murderer , 
▁ xxmaj but left that hateful office unto thee . 
▁ xxmaj the pretty - vaulting sea refus'd to drown me , 
▁ xxmaj knowing that thou wouldst have me drown'd on shore 
▁ xxmaj with tears as salt as sea through thy unkindness ; 
▁ xxmaj the splitting rocks cow'r'd in the sinking sands 
▁ xxmaj and would not dash me with their ragged sides , 
▁ xxmaj because thy flinty heart , more hard than they , 
▁ xxmaj might in thy palace perish xxmaj margaret . 
▁ xxmaj as far as i could ken thy chalky cliffs , 
▁ xxmaj when from thy shore the tempest beat us back , 
▁ i stood upon the hatches in the storm ; 
▁ xxmaj and when the dusky sky began to rob 
▁ xxmaj my earnest - gaping sight of thy land 's view , 
▁ i took a costly jewel from my neck- 
▁ a heart it was , bound in with diamonds- 
▁ xxmaj and threw it towards thy land . xxmaj the sea receiv'd it ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i wish'd thy body might my heart . 
▁ xxmaj and even with this i lost fair xxmaj england 's view , 
▁ xxmaj and bid mine eyes be packing with my heart , 
▁ xxmaj and call'd them blind and dusky spectacles 
▁ xxmaj for losing ken of xxmaj albion 's wished coast . 
▁ xxmaj how often have i tempted xxmaj suffolk 's tongue- 
▁ xxmaj the agent of thy foul inconstancy- 
▁ xxmaj to sit and witch me , as xxmaj ascanius did 
▁ xxmaj when he to madding xxmaj dido would unfold 
▁ xxmaj his father 's acts commenc'd in burning xxmaj troy ! 
▁ xxmaj am i not witch'd like her ? xxmaj or thou not false like him ? 
▁ xxmaj ay me , i can no more ! xxmaj die , xxmaj margaret , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj henry weeps that thou dost live so long . 

▁ xxmaj noise within . xxmaj enter xxup warwick , xxup salisbury , 
▁ and many commons 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj it is reported , mighty sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj that good xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey traitorously is murd'red 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj suffolk and the xxmaj cardinal xxmaj beaufort 's means . 
▁ xxmaj the commons , like an angry hive of bees 
▁ xxmaj that want their leader , scatter up and down 
▁ xxmaj and care not who they sting in his revenge . 
▁ xxmaj myself have calm'd their spleenful mutiny 
▁ xxmaj until they hear the order of his death . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj that he is dead , good xxmaj warwick , ' tis too true ; 
▁ xxmaj but how he died xxmaj god knows , not xxmaj henry . 
▁ xxmaj enter his chamber , view his breathless corpse , 
▁ xxmaj and comment then upon his sudden death . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj that shall i do , my liege . xxmaj stay , xxmaj salisbury , 
▁ xxmaj with the rude multitude till i return . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup salisbury with the commons 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o xxmaj thou that judgest all things , stay my thoughts- 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts that labour to persuade my soul 
▁ xxmaj some violent hands were laid on xxmaj humphrey 's life ! 
▁ xxmaj if my suspect be false , forgive me , xxmaj god ; 
▁ xxmaj for judgment only doth belong to xxmaj thee . 
▁ xxmaj fain would i go to chafe his paly lips 
▁ xxmaj with twenty thousand kisses and to drain 
▁ xxmaj upon his face an ocean of salt tears 
▁ xxmaj to tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk ; 
▁ xxmaj and with my fingers feel his hand un - feeling ; 
▁ xxmaj but all in vain are these mean obsequies ; 
▁ xxmaj and to survey his dead and earthy image , 
▁ xxmaj what were it but to make my sorrow greater ? 

▁ xxmaj bed put forth with the body . xxmaj enter xxup warwick 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj come hither , gracious sovereign , view this body . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj that is to see how deep my grave is made ; 
▁ xxmaj for with his soul fled all my worldly solace , 
▁ xxmaj for , seeing him , i see my life in death . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj as surely as my soul intends to live 
▁ xxmaj with that dread xxmaj king that took our state upon xxmaj him 
▁ xxmaj to free us from his xxmaj father 's wrathful curse , 
▁ i do believe that violent hands were laid 
▁ xxmaj upon the life of this thrice - famed xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup suffolk . a dreadful oath , sworn with a solemn tongue ! 
▁ xxmaj what instance gives xxmaj lord xxmaj warwick for his vow ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj see how the blood is settled in his face . 
▁ xxmaj oft have i seen a timely - parted ghost , 
▁ xxmaj of ashy semblance , meagre , pale , and bloodless , 
▁ xxmaj being all descended to the labouring heart , 
▁ xxmaj who , in the conflict that it holds with death , 
▁ xxmaj attracts the same for aidance ' gainst the enemy , 
▁ xxmaj which with the heart there cools , and ne'er returneth 
▁ xxmaj to blush and beautify the cheek again . 
▁ xxmaj but see , his face is black and full of blood ; 
▁ xxmaj his eye - balls further out than when he liv'd , 
▁ xxmaj staring full ghastly like a strangled man ; 
▁ xxmaj his hair uprear'd , his nostrils stretch'd with struggling ; 
▁ xxmaj his hands abroad display'd , as one that grasp'd 
▁ xxmaj and tugg'd for life , and was by strength subdu'd . 
▁ xxmaj look , on the sheets his hair , you see , is sticking ; 
▁ xxmaj his well - proportion'd beard made rough and rugged , 
▁ xxmaj like to the summer 's corn by tempest lodged . 
▁ xxmaj it can not be but he was murd'red here : 
▁ xxmaj the least of all these signs were probable . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj why , xxmaj warwick , who should do the xxmaj duke to death ? 
▁ xxmaj myself and xxmaj beaufort had him in protection ; 
▁ xxmaj and we , i hope , sir , are no murderers . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj but both of you were vow'd xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's foes ; 
▁ xxmaj and you , forsooth , had the good xxmaj duke to keep . 
▁ ' tis like you would not feast him like a friend ; 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis well seen he found an enemy . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj then you , belike , suspect these noblemen 
▁ xxmaj as guilty of xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's timeless death . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh , 
▁ xxmaj and sees fast by a butcher with an axe , 
▁ xxmaj but will suspect ' twas he that made the slaughter ? 
▁ xxmaj who finds the partridge in the puttock 's nest 
▁ xxmaj but may imagine how the bird was dead , 
▁ xxmaj although the kite soar with unbloodied beak ? 
▁ xxmaj even so suspicious is this tragedy . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj are you the butcher , xxmaj suffolk ? xxmaj where 's your knife ? 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj beaufort term'd a kite ? xxmaj where are his talons ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . i wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men ; 
▁ xxmaj but here 's a vengeful sword , rusted with ease , 
▁ xxmaj that shall be scoured in his rancorous heart 
▁ xxmaj that slanders me with murder 's crimson badge . 
▁ xxmaj say if thou dar'st , proud xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwickshire , 
▁ xxmaj that i am faulty in xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's death . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cardinal , xxup somerset , and others 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what dares not xxmaj warwick , if false xxmaj suffolk dare him ? 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj he dares not calm his contumelious spirit , 
▁ xxmaj nor cease to be an arrogant controller , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj suffolk dare him twenty thousand times . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj madam , be still- with reverence may i say ; 
▁ xxmaj for every word you speak in his behalf 
▁ xxmaj is slander to your royal dignity . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj blunt - witted lord , ignoble in demeanour , 
▁ xxmaj if ever lady wrong'd her lord so much , 
▁ xxmaj thy mother took into her blameful bed 
▁ xxmaj some stern untutor'd churl , and noble stock 
▁ xxmaj was graft with crab - tree slip , whose fruit thou art , 
▁ xxmaj and never of the xxmaj nevils ' noble race . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj but that the guilt of murder bucklers thee , 
▁ xxmaj and i should rob the deathsman of his fee , 
▁ xxmaj quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames , 
▁ xxmaj and that my sovereign 's presence makes me mild , 
▁ i would , false murd'rous coward , on thy knee 
▁ xxmaj make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech 
▁ xxmaj and say it was thy mother that thou meant'st , 
▁ xxmaj that thou thyself was born in bastardy ; 
▁ xxmaj and , after all this fearful homage done , 
▁ xxmaj give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell , 
▁ xxmaj pernicious blood - sucker of sleeping men . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thou shalt be waking while i shed thy blood , 
▁ xxmaj if from this presence thou dar'st go with me . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj away even now , or i will drag thee hence . 
▁ xxmaj unworthy though thou art , xxmaj i 'll cope with thee , 
▁ xxmaj and do some service to xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's ghost . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup suffolk and xxup warwick 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what stronger breastplate than a heart untainted ? 
▁ xxmaj thrice is he arm'd that hath his quarrel just ; 
▁ xxmaj and he but naked , though lock'd up in steel , 
▁ xxmaj whose conscience with injustice is corrupted . 
▁ [ a noise within ] 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj what noise is this ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup suffolk and xxup warwick , with their weapons drawn 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj why , how now , lords , your wrathful weapons drawn 
▁ xxmaj here in our presence ! xxmaj dare you be so bold ? 
▁ xxmaj why , what tumultuous clamour have we here ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj the trait'rous xxmaj warwick , with the men of xxmaj bury , 
▁ xxmaj set all upon me , mighty sovereign . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup salisbury 

▁ xxup salisbury . [ to the xxmaj commons within ] xxmaj sirs , stand apart , the xxmaj king 
▁ shall know your mind . 
▁ xxmaj dread lord , the commons send you word by me 
▁ xxmaj unless xxmaj lord xxmaj suffolk straight be done to death , 
▁ xxmaj or banished fair xxmaj england 's territories , 
▁ xxmaj they will by violence tear him from your palace 
▁ xxmaj and torture him with grievous ling'ring death . 
▁ xxmaj they say by him the good xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey died ; 
▁ xxmaj they say in him they fear your xxmaj highness ' death ; 
▁ xxmaj and mere instinct of love and loyalty , 
▁ xxmaj free from a stubborn opposite intent , 
▁ xxmaj as being thought to contradict your liking , 
▁ xxmaj makes them thus forward in his banishment . 
▁ xxmaj they say , in care of your most royal person , 
▁ xxmaj that if your xxmaj highness should intend to sleep 
▁ xxmaj and charge that no man should disturb your rest , 
▁ xxmaj in pain of your dislike or pain of death , 
▁ xxmaj yet , notwithstanding such a strait edict , 
▁ xxmaj were there a serpent seen with forked tongue 
▁ xxmaj that slily glided towards your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj it were but necessary you were wak'd , 
▁ xxmaj lest , being suffer'd in that harmful slumber , 
▁ xxmaj the mortal worm might make the sleep eternal . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore do they cry , though you forbid , 
▁ xxmaj that they will guard you , whe'er you will or no , 
▁ xxmaj from such fell serpents as false xxmaj suffolk is ; 
▁ xxmaj with whose envenomed and fatal sting 
▁ xxmaj your loving uncle , twenty times his worth , 
▁ xxmaj they say , is shamefully bereft of life . 
▁ xxup commons . [ within ] xxmaj an answer from the xxmaj king , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj salisbury ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . ' tis like the commons , rude unpolish'd hinds , 
▁ xxmaj could send such message to their sovereign ; 
▁ xxmaj but you , my lord , were glad to be employ'd , 
▁ xxmaj to show how quaint an orator you are . 
▁ xxmaj but all the honour xxmaj salisbury hath won 
▁ xxmaj is that he was the lord ambassador 
▁ xxmaj sent from a sort of tinkers to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup commons . [ within ] xxmaj an answer from the xxmaj king , or we will all break in ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj go , xxmaj salisbury , and tell them all from me 
▁ i thank them for their tender loving care ; 
▁ xxmaj and had i not been cited so by them , 
▁ xxmaj yet did i purpose as they do entreat ; 
▁ xxmaj for sure my thoughts do hourly prophesy 
▁ xxmaj mischance unto my state by xxmaj suffolk 's means . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore by xxmaj his xxmaj majesty i swear , 
▁ xxmaj whose far unworthy deputy i am , 
▁ xxmaj he shall not breathe infection in this air 
▁ xxmaj but three days longer , on the pain of death . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup queen . o xxmaj henry , let me plead for gentle xxmaj suffolk ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ungentle xxmaj queen , to call him gentle xxmaj suffolk ! 
▁ xxmaj no more , i say ; if thou dost plead for him , 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath . 
▁ xxmaj had i but said , i would have kept my word ; 
▁ xxmaj but when i swear , it is irrevocable . 
▁ xxmaj if after three days ' space thou here be'st found 
▁ xxmaj on any ground that i am ruler of , 
▁ xxmaj the world shall not be ransom for thy life . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj warwick , come , good xxmaj warwick , go with me ; 
▁ i have great matters to impart to thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup queen and xxup suffolk 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj mischance and sorrow go along with you ! 
▁ xxmaj heart 's discontent and sour affliction 
▁ xxmaj be playfellows to keep you company ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's two of you ; the devil make a third , 
▁ xxmaj and threefold vengeance tend upon your steps ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj cease , gentle xxmaj queen , these execrations , 
▁ xxmaj and let thy xxmaj suffolk take his heavy leave . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj fie , coward woman and soft - hearted wretch , 
▁ xxmaj has thou not spirit to curse thine enemy ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . a plague upon them ! xxmaj wherefore should i curse them ? 
▁ xxmaj would curses kill as doth the mandrake 's groan , 
▁ i would invent as bitter searching terms , 
▁ xxmaj as curst , as harsh , and horrible to hear , 
▁ xxmaj deliver'd strongly through my fixed teeth , 
▁ xxmaj with full as many signs of deadly hate , 
▁ xxmaj as lean - fac'd xxmaj envy in her loathsome cave . 
▁ xxmaj my tongue should stumble in mine earnest words , 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint , 
▁ xxmaj mine hair be fix'd an end , as one distract ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , every joint should seem to curse and ban ; 
▁ xxmaj and even now my burden'd heart would break , 
▁ xxmaj should i not curse them . xxmaj poison be their drink ! 
▁ xxmaj gall , worse than gall , the daintiest that they taste ! 
▁ xxmaj their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees ! 
▁ xxmaj their chiefest prospect murd'ring basilisks ! 
▁ xxmaj their softest touch as smart as lizards ' stings ! 
▁ xxmaj their music frightful as the serpent 's hiss , 
▁ xxmaj and boding screech - owls make the consort full ! 
▁ all the foul terrors in dark - seated hell- 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj enough , sweet xxmaj suffolk , thou torment'st thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj and these dread curses , like the sun ' gainst glass , 
▁ xxmaj or like an overcharged gun , recoil , 
▁ xxmaj and turns the force of them upon thyself . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj you bade me ban , and will you bid me leave ? 
▁ xxmaj now , by the ground that i am banish'd from , 
▁ xxmaj well could i curse away a winter 's night , 
▁ xxmaj though standing naked on a mountain top 
▁ xxmaj where biting cold would never let grass grow , 
▁ xxmaj and think it but a minute spent in sport . 
▁ xxup queen . xxup o , let me entreat thee cease ! xxmaj give me thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj that i may dew it with my mournful tears ; 
▁ xxmaj nor let the rain of heaven wet this place 
▁ xxmaj to wash away my woeful monuments . 
▁ xxup o , could this kiss be printed in thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj that thou might'st think upon these by the seal , 
▁ xxmaj through whom a thousand sighs are breath'd for thee ! 
▁ xxmaj so , get thee gone , that i may know my grief ; 
▁ ' tis but surmis'd whiles thou art standing by , 
▁ xxmaj as one that surfeits thinking on a want . 
▁ i will repeal thee or , be well assur'd , 
▁ xxmaj adventure to be banished myself ; 
▁ xxmaj and banished i am , if but from thee . 
▁ xxmaj go , speak not to me ; even now be gone . 
▁ xxup o , go not yet ! xxmaj even thus two friends condemn'd 
▁ xxmaj embrace , and kiss , and take ten thousand leaves , 
▁ xxmaj loather a hundred times to part than die . 
▁ xxmaj yet now , farewell ; and farewell life with thee ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thus is poor xxmaj suffolk ten times banished , 
▁ xxmaj once by the xxmaj king and three times thrice by thee , 
▁ ' tis not the land i care for , wert thou thence ; 
▁ a wilderness is populous enough , 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj suffolk had thy heavenly company ; 
▁ xxmaj for where thou art , there is the world itself , 
▁ xxmaj with every several pleasure in the world ; 
▁ xxmaj and where thou art not , desolation . 
▁ i can no more : xxmaj live thou to joy thy life ; 
▁ xxmaj myself no joy in nought but that thou liv'st . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup vaux 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj whither goes xxmaj vaux so fast ? xxmaj what news , i prithee ? 
▁ xxup vaux . xxmaj to signify unto his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj cardinal xxmaj beaufort is at point of death ; 
▁ xxmaj for suddenly a grievous sickness took him 
▁ xxmaj that makes him gasp , and stare , and catch the air , 
▁ xxmaj blaspheming xxmaj god , and cursing men on earth . 
▁ xxmaj sometime he talks as if xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's ghost 
▁ xxmaj were by his side ; sometime he calls the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj and whispers to his pillow , as to him , 
▁ xxmaj the secrets of his overcharged soul ; 
▁ xxmaj and i am sent to tell his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj that even now he cries aloud for him . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj go tell this heavy message to the xxmaj king . xxmaj exit xxup vaux 
▁ xxmaj ay me ! xxmaj what is this world ! xxmaj what news are these ! 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore grieve i at an hour 's poor loss , 
▁ xxmaj omitting xxmaj suffolk 's exile , my soul 's treasure ? 
▁ xxmaj why only , xxmaj suffolk , mourn i not for thee , 
▁ xxmaj and with the southern clouds contend in tears- 
▁ xxmaj theirs for the earth 's increase , mine for my sorrows ? 
▁ xxmaj now get thee hence : the xxmaj king , thou know'st , is coming ; 
▁ xxmaj if thou be found by me ; thou art but dead . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj if i depart from thee i can not live ; 
▁ xxmaj and in thy sight to die , what were it else 
▁ xxmaj but like a pleasant slumber in thy lap ? 
▁ xxmaj here could i breathe my soul into the air , 
▁ xxmaj as mild and gentle as the cradle - babe 
▁ xxmaj dying with mother 's dug between its lips ; 
▁ xxmaj where , from thy sight , i should be raging mad 
▁ xxmaj and cry out for thee to close up mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj to have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth ; 
▁ xxmaj so shouldst thou either turn my flying soul , 
▁ xxmaj or i should breathe it so into thy body , 
▁ xxmaj and then it liv'd in sweet xxmaj elysium . 
▁ xxmaj to die by thee were but to die in jest : 
▁ xxmaj from thee to die were torture more than death . 
▁ xxup o , let me stay , befall what may befall ! 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj away ! xxmaj though parting be a fretful corrosive , 
▁ xxmaj it is applied to a deathful wound . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj france , sweet xxmaj suffolk . xxmaj let me hear from thee ; 
▁ xxmaj for whereso'er thou art in this world 's globe 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have an xxmaj iris that shall find thee out . 
▁ xxup suffolk . i go . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and take my heart with thee . [ she kisses him ] 
▁ xxup suffolk . a jewel , lock'd into the woefull'st cask 
▁ xxmaj that ever did contain a thing of worth . 
▁ xxmaj even as a splitted bark , so sunder we : 
▁ xxmaj this way fall i to death . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj this way for me . xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj london . xxup cardinal xxup beaufort 's bedchamber 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , xxup salisbury , and xxup warwick , to the xxup cardinal in bed 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how fares my lord ? xxmaj speak , xxmaj beaufort , to thy sovereign . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj if thou be'st xxmaj death xxmaj i 'll give thee xxmaj england 's treasure , 
▁ xxmaj enough to purchase such another island , 
▁ xxmaj so thou wilt let me live and feel no pain . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ah , what a sign it is of evil life 
▁ xxmaj where death 's approach is seen so terrible ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj beaufort , it is thy sovereign speaks to thee . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj bring me unto my trial when you will . 
▁ xxmaj died he not in his bed ? xxmaj where should he die ? 
▁ xxmaj can i make men live , whe'er they will or no ? 
▁ xxup o , torture me no more ! i will confess . 
▁ xxmaj alive again ? xxmaj then show me where he is ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give a thousand pound to look upon him . 
▁ xxmaj he hath no eyes , the dust hath blinded them . 
▁ xxmaj comb down his hair ; look , look ! it stands upright , 
▁ xxmaj like lime - twigs set to catch my winged soul ! 
▁ xxmaj give me some drink ; and bid the apothecary 
▁ xxmaj bring the strong poison that i bought of him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o xxmaj thou eternal xxmaj mover of the heavens , 
▁ xxmaj look with a gentle eye upon this wretch ! 
▁ xxup o , beat away the busy meddling fiend 
▁ xxmaj that lays strong siege unto this wretch 's soul , 
▁ xxmaj and from his bosom purge this black despair ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj see how the pangs of death do make him grin 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj disturb him not , let him pass peaceably . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj peace to his soul , if xxmaj god 's good pleasure be ! 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj card'nal , if thou think'st on heaven 's bliss , 
▁ xxmaj hold up thy hand , make signal of thy hope . 
▁ xxmaj he dies , and makes no sign : o xxmaj god , forgive him ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj so bad a death argues a monstrous life . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj forbear to judge , for we are sinners all . 
▁ xxmaj close up his eyes , and draw the curtain close ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us all to meditation . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the coast of xxmaj kent 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj fight at sea . xxmaj ordnance goes off . xxmaj enter a xxup lieutenant , 
 a xxup shipmaster and his xxup mate , and xxup walter xxup whitmore , with sailors ; 
 xxup suffolk and other xxup gentlemen , as prisoners 

▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj the gaudy , blabbing , and remorseful day 
▁ xxmaj is crept into the bosom of the sea ; 
▁ xxmaj and now loud - howling wolves arouse the jades 
▁ xxmaj that drag the tragic melancholy night ; 
▁ xxmaj who with their drowsy , slow , and flagging wings 
▁ xxmaj clip dead men 's graves , and from their misty jaws 
▁ xxmaj breathe foul contagious darkness in the air . 
▁ xxmaj therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize ; 
▁ xxmaj for , whilst our pinnace anchors in the xxmaj downs , 
▁ xxmaj here shall they make their ransom on the sand , 
▁ xxmaj or with their blood stain this discoloured shore . 
▁ xxmaj master , this prisoner freely give i thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou that art his mate make boot of this ; 
▁ xxmaj the other , xxmaj walter xxmaj whitmore , is thy share . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj what is my ransom , master , let me know ? 
▁ xxup master . a thousand crowns , or else lay down your head . 
▁ xxup mate . xxmaj and so much shall you give , or off goes yours . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj what , think you much to pay two thousand crowns , 
▁ xxmaj and bear the name and port of gentlemen ? 
▁ xxmaj cut both the villains ' throats- for die you shall ; 
▁ xxmaj the lives of those which we have lost in fight 
▁ xxmaj be counterpois'd with such a petty sum ! 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj i 'll give it , sir : and therefore spare my life . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj and so will xxup i , and write home for it straight . 
▁ xxup whitmore . i lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard , 
▁ [ to xxup suffolk ] xxmaj and therefore , to revenge it , shalt thou die ; 
▁ xxmaj and so should these , if i might have my will . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj be not so rash ; take ransom , let him live . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj look on my xxmaj george , i am a gentleman : 
▁ xxmaj rate me at what thou wilt , thou shalt be paid . 
▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj and so am xxup i : my name is xxmaj walter xxmaj whitmore . 
▁ xxmaj how now ! xxmaj why start'st thou ? xxmaj what , doth death affright ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thy name affrights me , in whose sound is death . 
▁ a cunning man did calculate my birth 
▁ xxmaj and told me that by water i should die ; 
▁ xxmaj yet let not this make thee be bloody - minded ; 
▁ xxmaj thy name is xxmaj gualtier , being rightly sounded . 
▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj gualtier or xxmaj walter , which it is i care not : 
▁ xxmaj never yet did base dishonour blur our name 
▁ xxmaj but with our sword we wip'd away the blot ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , when merchant - like i sell revenge , 
▁ xxmaj broke be my sword , my arms torn and defac'd , 
▁ xxmaj and i proclaim'd a coward through the world . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj stay , xxmaj whitmore , for thy prisoner is a prince , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk , xxmaj william de la xxmaj pole . 
▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk muffled up in rags ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj ay , but these rags are no part of the xxmaj duke : 
▁ xxmaj jove sometime went disguis'd , and why not xxup i ? 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj but xxmaj jove was never slain , as thou shalt be . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj obscure and lowly swain , xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj the honourable blood of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj must not be shed by such a jaded groom . 
▁ xxmaj hast thou not kiss'd thy hand and held my stirrup , 
▁ xxmaj bareheaded plodded by my foot - cloth mule , 
▁ xxmaj and thought thee happy when i shook my head ? 
▁ xxmaj how often hast thou waited at my cup , 
▁ xxmaj fed from my trencher , kneel'd down at the board , 
▁ xxmaj when i have feasted with xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret ? 
▁ xxmaj remember it , and let it make thee crestfall'n , 
▁ xxmaj ay , and allay thus thy abortive pride , 
▁ xxmaj how in our voiding - lobby hast thou stood 
▁ xxmaj and duly waited for my coming forth . 
▁ xxmaj this hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue . 
▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj speak , xxmaj captain , shall i stab the forlorn swain ? 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj first let my words stab him , as he hath me . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj base slave , thy words are blunt , and so art thou . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj convey him hence , and on our longboat 's side 
▁ xxmaj strike off his head . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj thou dar'st not , for thy own . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj poole ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj poole ? 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj ay , kennel , puddle , sink , whose filth and dirt 
▁ xxmaj troubles the silver spring where xxmaj england drinks ; 
▁ xxmaj now will i dam up this thy yawning mouth 
▁ xxmaj for swallowing the treasure of the realm . 
▁ xxmaj thy lips , that kiss'd the xxmaj queen , shall sweep the ground ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou that smil'dst at good xxmaj duke xxmaj humphrey 's death 
▁ xxmaj against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain , 
▁ xxmaj who in contempt shall hiss at thee again ; 
▁ xxmaj and wedded be thou to the hags of hell 
▁ xxmaj for daring to affy a mighty lord 
▁ xxmaj unto the daughter of a worthless king , 
▁ xxmaj having neither subject , wealth , nor diadem . 
▁ xxmaj by devilish policy art thou grown great , 
▁ xxmaj and , like ambitious xxmaj sylla , overgorg'd 
▁ xxmaj with gobbets of thy mother 's bleeding heart . 
▁ xxmaj by thee xxmaj anjou and xxmaj maine were sold to xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj the false revolting xxmaj normans thorough thee 
▁ xxmaj disdain to call us lord ; and xxmaj picardy 
▁ xxmaj hath slain their governors , surpris'd our forts , 
▁ xxmaj and sent the ragged soldiers wounded home . 
▁ xxmaj the princely xxmaj warwick , and the xxmaj nevils all , 
▁ xxmaj whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain , 
▁ xxmaj as hating thee , are rising up in arms ; 
▁ xxmaj and now the house of xxmaj york- thrust from the crown 
▁ xxmaj by shameful murder of a guiltless king 
▁ xxmaj and lofty proud encroaching tyranny- 
▁ xxmaj burns with revenging fire , whose hopeful colours 
▁ xxmaj advance our half - fac'd sun , striving to shine , 
▁ xxmaj under the which is writ ' invitis nubibus . ' 
▁ xxmaj the commons here in xxmaj kent are up in arms ; 
▁ xxmaj and to conclude , reproach and beggary 
▁ xxmaj is crept into the palace of our xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and all by thee . xxmaj away ! convey him hence . 
▁ xxup suffolk . o that i were a god , to shoot forth thunder 
▁ xxmaj upon these paltry , servile , abject drudges ! 
▁ xxmaj small things make base men proud : this villain here , 
▁ xxmaj being captain of a pinnace , threatens more 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj bargulus , the strong xxmaj illyrian pirate . 
▁ xxmaj drones suck not eagles ' blood but rob beehives . 
▁ xxmaj it is impossible that i should die 
▁ xxmaj by such a lowly vassal as thyself . 
▁ xxmaj thy words move rage and not remorse in me . 
▁ i go of message from the xxmaj queen to xxmaj france : 
▁ i charge thee waft me safely cross the xxmaj channel .