xxbos xxup lieutenant . xxmaj walter- 
▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj come , xxmaj suffolk , i must waft thee to thy death . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj gelidus timor occupat artus : it is thee i fear . 
▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj thou shalt have cause to fear before i leave thee . 
▁ xxmaj what , are ye daunted now ? xxmaj now will ye stoop ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj my gracious lord , entreat him , speak him fair . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj suffolk 's imperial tongue is stem and rough , 
▁ xxmaj us'd to command , untaught to plead for favour . 
▁ xxmaj far be it we should honour such as these 
▁ xxmaj with humble suit : no , rather let my head 
▁ xxmaj stoop to the block than these knees bow to any 
▁ xxmaj save to the xxmaj god of heaven and to my king ; 
▁ xxmaj and sooner dance upon a bloody pole 
▁ xxmaj than stand uncover'd to the vulgar groom . 
▁ xxmaj true nobility is exempt from fear : 
▁ xxmaj more can i bear than you dare execute . 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj hale him away , and let him talk no more . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj come , soldiers , show what cruelty ye can , 
▁ xxmaj that this my death may never be forgot- 
▁ xxmaj great men oft die by vile bezonians : 
▁ a xxmaj roman sworder and banditto slave 
▁ xxmaj murder'd sweet xxmaj tully ; xxmaj brutus ' bastard hand 
▁ xxmaj stabb'd xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar ; savage islanders 
▁ xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great ; and xxmaj suffolk dies by pirates . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup walter with xxup suffolk 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj and as for these , whose ransom we have set , 
▁ xxmaj it is our pleasure one of them depart ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore come you with us , and let him go . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup first xxup gentleman 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup whitmore with xxup suffolk 's body 

▁ xxup whitmore . xxmaj there let his head and lifeless body lie , 
▁ xxmaj until the xxmaj queen his mistress bury it . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . o barbarous and bloody spectacle ! 
▁ xxmaj his body will i bear unto the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj if he revenge it not , yet will his friends ; 
▁ xxmaj so will the xxmaj queen , that living held him dear . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the body 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj blackheath 

 xxmaj enter xxup george xxup bevis and xxup john xxup holland 

▁ xxup george . xxmaj come and get thee a sword , though made of a lath ; they have 
▁ been up these two days . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj they have the more need to sleep now , then . 
▁ xxup george . i tell thee xxmaj jack xxmaj cade the clothier means to dress the 
▁ commonwealth , and turn it , and set a new nap upon it . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj so he had need , for ' tis threadbare . xxmaj well , i say it was never 
▁ merry world in xxmaj england since gentlemen came up . 
▁ xxup george . o miserable age ! xxmaj virtue is not regarded in handicraftsmen . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj the nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj nay , more , the xxmaj king 's xxmaj council are no good workmen . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj true ; and yet it is said ' labour in thy vocation ' ; which is 
▁ as much to say as ' let the magistrates be labouring men ' ; and 
▁ therefore should we be magistrates . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj thou hast hit it ; for there 's no better sign of a brave 
▁ mind than a hard hand . 
▁ xxup john . i see them ! i see them ! xxmaj there 's xxmaj best 's son , the tanner of 
▁ xxmaj wingham- 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj he shall have the skins of our enemies to make dog 's 
▁ leather of . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj and xxmaj dick the butcher- 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj then is sin struck down , like an ox , and iniquity 's throat 
▁ cut like a calf . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj and xxmaj smith the weaver- 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj argo , their thread of life is spun . 
▁ xxup john . xxmaj come , come , let 's fall in with them . 

▁ xxmaj drum . xxmaj enter xxup cade , xxup dick xxup the xxup butcher , xxup smith 
▁ xxup the xxup weaver , and a xxup sawyer , with infinite numbers 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj we xxmaj john xxmaj cade , so term'd of our supposed father- 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] xxmaj or rather , of stealing a cade of herrings . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj for our enemies shall fall before us , inspired with the 
▁ spirit of putting down kings and princes- command silence . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj silence ! 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj my father was a xxmaj mortimer- 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] xxmaj he was an honest man and a good bricklayer . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj my mother a xxmaj plantagenet- 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] i knew her well ; she was a midwife . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj my wife descended of the xxmaj lacies- 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] xxmaj she was , indeed , a pedlar 's daughter , and sold many 
▁ laces . 
▁ xxup smith . [ aside ] xxmaj but now of late , not able to travel with her furr'd 
▁ pack , she washes bucks here at home . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj therefore am i of an honourable house . 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] xxmaj ay , by my faith , the field is honourable , and there 
▁ was he born , under a hedge , for his father had never a house but 
▁ the cage . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj valiant i am . 
▁ xxup smith . [ aside ] ' a must needs ; for beggary is valiant . 
▁ xxup cade . i am able to endure much . 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] xxmaj no question of that ; for i have seen him whipt three 
▁ market days together . 
▁ xxup cade . i fear neither sword nor fire . 
▁ xxup smith . [ aside ] xxmaj he need not fear the sword , for his coat is of 
▁ proof . 
▁ xxup dick . [ aside ] xxmaj but methinks he should stand in fear of fire , being 
▁ burnt i ' th ' hand for stealing of sheep . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj be brave , then , for your captain is brave , and vows 
▁ reformation . xxmaj there shall be in xxmaj england seven halfpenny loaves 
▁ sold for a penny ; the three - hoop'd pot shall have ten hoops ; and 
▁ i will make it felony to drink small beer . xxmaj all the realm shall be 
▁ in common , and in xxmaj cheapside shall my palfrey go to grass . xxmaj and 
▁ when i am king- as king i will be 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj god save your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup cade . i thank you , good people- there shall be no money ; all shall 
▁ eat and drink on my score , and i will apparel them all in one 
▁ livery , that they may agree like brothers and worship me their 
▁ lord . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj the first thing we do , let 's kill all the lawyers . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj nay , that i mean to do . xxmaj is not this a lamentable thing , that 
▁ of the skin of an innocent lamb should be made parchment ? xxmaj that 
▁ parchment , being scribbl'd o'er , should undo a man ? xxmaj some say the 
▁ bee stings ; but i say ' tis the bee 's wax ; for i did but seal once 
▁ to a thing , and i was never mine own man since . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj who 's 
▁ there ? 

▁ xxmaj enter some , bringing in the xxup clerk xxup of xxup chatham 

▁ xxup smith . xxmaj the clerk of xxmaj chatham . xxmaj he can write and read and cast 
▁ accompt . 
▁ xxup cade . o monstrous ! 
▁ xxup smith . xxmaj we took him setting of boys ' copies . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj here 's a villain ! 
▁ xxup smith . xxmaj has a book in his pocket with red letters in't . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj nay , then he is a conjurer . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj nay , he can make obligations and write court - hand . 
▁ xxup cade . i am sorry for't ; the man is a proper man , of mine honour ; 
▁ unless i find him guilty , he shall not die . xxmaj come hither , sirrah , 
▁ i must examine thee . xxmaj what is thy name ? 
▁ xxup clerk . xxmaj emmanuel . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj they use to write it on the top of letters ; ' twill go hard 
▁ with you . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj let me alone . xxmaj dost thou use to write thy name , or hast thou a 
▁ mark to thyself , like a honest plain - dealing man ? 
▁ xxup clerk . xxmaj sir , i thank xxmaj god , i have been so well brought up that i can 
▁ write my name . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj he hath confess'd . xxmaj away with him ! xxmaj he 's a villain and a 
▁ traitor . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj away with him , i say ! xxmaj hang him with his pen and inkhorn about 
▁ his neck . xxmaj exit one with the xxup clerk 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup michael 

▁ xxup michael . xxmaj where 's our xxmaj general ? 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj here i am , thou particular fellow . 
▁ xxup michael . xxmaj fly , fly , fly ! xxmaj sir xxmaj humphrey xxmaj stafford and his brother are 
▁ hard by , with the xxmaj king 's forces . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj stand , villain , stand , or xxmaj i 'll fell thee down . xxmaj he shall be 
▁ encount'red with a man as good as himself . xxmaj he is but a knight , 
▁ is ' a ? 
▁ xxup michael . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj to equal him , i will make myself a knight presently . 
▁ [ kneels ] xxmaj rise up , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj mortimer . [ rises ] xxmaj now have at him ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup humphrey xxup stafford and xxup william 
▁ his brother , with drum and soldiers 
▁
▁ xxup stafford . xxmaj rebellious hinds , the filth and scum of xxmaj kent , 
▁ xxmaj mark'd for the gallows , lay your weapons down ; 
▁ xxmaj home to your cottages , forsake this groom ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is merciful if you revolt . 
▁ xxup william xxup stafford . xxmaj but angry , wrathful , and inclin'd to blood , 
▁ xxmaj if you go forward ; therefore yield or die . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj as for these silken - coated slaves , i pass not ; 
▁ xxmaj it is to you , good people , that i speak , 
▁ xxmaj o'er whom , in time to come , i hope to reign ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am rightful heir unto the crown . 
▁ xxup stafford . xxmaj villain , thy father was a plasterer ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou thyself a shearman , art thou not ? 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj and xxmaj adam was a gardener . 
▁ xxup william xxup stafford . xxmaj and what of that ? 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj marry , this : xxmaj edmund xxmaj mortimer , xxmaj earl of xxmaj march , 
▁ xxmaj married the xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence ' daughter , did he not ? 
▁ xxup stafford . xxmaj ay , sir . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj by her he had two children at one birth . 
▁ xxup william xxup stafford . xxmaj that 's false . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj ay , there 's the question ; but i say ' tis true . 
▁ xxmaj the elder of them being put to nurse , 
▁ xxmaj was by a beggar - woman stol'n away , 
▁ xxmaj and , ignorant of his birth and parentage , 
▁ xxmaj became a bricklayer when he came to age . 
▁ xxmaj his son am xxup i ; deny it if you can . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj nay , ' tis too true ; therefore he shall be king . 
▁ xxup smith . xxmaj sir , he made a chimney in my father 's house , and the bricks 
▁ are alive at this day to testify it ; therefore deny it not . 
▁ xxup stafford . xxmaj and will you credit this base drudge 's words 
▁ xxmaj that speaks he knows not what ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj ay , marry , will we ; therefore get ye gone . 
▁ xxup william xxup stafford . xxmaj jack xxmaj cade , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york hath taught you this . 
▁ xxup cade . [ aside ] xxmaj he lies , for i invented it myself- xxmaj go to , sirrah , 
▁ tell the xxmaj king from me that for his father 's sake , xxmaj henry the 
▁ xxmaj fifth , in whose time boys went to span - counter for xxmaj french crowns , 
▁ i am content he shall reign ; but xxmaj i 'll be xxmaj protector over him . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj and furthermore , we 'll have the xxmaj lord xxmaj say 's head for selling 
▁ the dukedom of xxmaj maine . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj and good reason ; for thereby is xxmaj england main'd and fain to go 
▁ with a staff , but that my puissance holds it up . xxmaj fellow kings , i 
▁ tell you that that xxmaj lord xxmaj say hath gelded the commonwealth and made 
▁ it an eunuch ; and more than that , he can speak xxmaj french , and 
▁ therefore he is a traitor . 
▁ xxup stafford . o gross and miserable ignorance ! 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj nay , answer if you can ; the xxmaj frenchmen are our enemies . xxmaj go to , 
▁ then , i ask but this : can he that speaks with the tongue of an 
▁ enemy be a good counsellor , or no ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj no , no ; and therefore we 'll have his head . 
▁ xxup william xxup stafford . xxmaj well , seeing gentle words will not prevail , 
▁ xxmaj assail them with the army of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup stafford . xxmaj herald , away ; and throughout every town 
▁ xxmaj proclaim them traitors that are up with xxmaj cade ; 
▁ xxmaj that those which fly before the battle ends 
▁ xxmaj may , even in their wives'and children 's sight , 
▁ xxmaj be hang'd up for example at their doors . 
▁ xxmaj and you that be the xxmaj king 's friends , follow me . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt the xxup two xxup staffords and soldiers 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj and you that love the commons follow me . 
▁ xxmaj now show yourselves men ; ' tis for liberty . 
▁ xxmaj we will not leave one lord , one gentleman ; 
▁ xxmaj spare none but such as go in clouted shoon , 
▁ xxmaj for they are thrifty honest men and such 
▁ xxmaj as would- but that they dare not- take our parts . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj they are all in order , and march toward us . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj but then are we in order when we are most out of order . xxmaj come , 
▁ march forward . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another part of xxmaj blackheath 

 xxmaj alarums to the fight , wherein both the xxup staffords are slain . 
 xxmaj enter xxup cade and the rest 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj where 's xxmaj dick , the butcher of xxmaj ashford ? 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj they fell before thee like sheep and oxen , and thou behavedst 
▁ thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own slaughter - house ; 
▁ therefore thus will i reward thee- the xxmaj lent shall be as long 
▁ again as it is , and thou shalt have a licence to kill for a 
▁ hundred lacking one . 
▁ xxup dick . i desire no more . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj and , to speak truth , thou deserv'st no less . [ putting on xxup sir 
▁ xxup humphrey 's brigandine ] xxmaj this monument of the victory will i bear , 
▁ and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels till i do come 
▁ to xxmaj london , where we will have the mayor 's sword borne before us . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj if we mean to thrive and do good , break open the gaols and 
▁ let out the prisoners . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj fear not that , i warrant thee . xxmaj come , let 's march towards 
▁ xxmaj london . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king with a supplication , and the xxup queen with xxup suffolk 's head ; 
 the xxup duke xxup of xxup buckingham , and the xxup lord xxup say 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj oft have i heard that grief softens the mind 
▁ xxmaj and makes it fearful and degenerate ; 
▁ xxmaj think therefore on revenge and cease to weep . 
▁ xxmaj but who can cease to weep , and look on this ? 
▁ xxmaj here may his head lie on my throbbing breast ; 
▁ xxmaj but where 's the body that i should embrace ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj what answer makes your xxmaj grace to the rebels ' 
▁ supplication ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj i 'll send some holy bishop to entreat ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god forbid so many simple souls 
▁ xxmaj should perish by the sword ! xxmaj and i myself , 
▁ xxmaj rather than bloody war shall cut them short , 
▁ xxmaj will parley with xxmaj jack xxmaj cade their general . 
▁ xxmaj but stay , xxmaj i 'll read it over once again . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj ah , barbarous villains ! xxmaj hath this lovely face 
▁ xxmaj rul'd like a wandering planet over me , 
▁ xxmaj and could it not enforce them to relent 
▁ xxmaj that were unworthy to behold the same ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj lord xxmaj say , xxmaj jack xxmaj cade hath sworn to have thy head . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj ay , but i hope your xxmaj highness shall have his . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how now , madam ! 
▁ xxmaj still lamenting and mourning for xxmaj suffolk 's death ? 
▁ i fear me , love , if that i had been dead , 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst not have mourn'd so much for me . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj no , my love , i should not mourn , but die for thee . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what news ? xxmaj why com'st thou in such haste ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the rebels are in xxmaj southwark ; fly , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj jack xxmaj cade proclaims himself xxmaj lord xxmaj mortimer , 
▁ xxmaj descended from the xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence ' house , 
▁ xxmaj and calls your xxmaj grace usurper , openly , 
▁ xxmaj and vows to crown himself in xxmaj westminster . 
▁ xxmaj his army is a ragged multitude 
▁ xxmaj of hinds and peasants , rude and merciless ; 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj humphrey xxmaj stafford and his brother 's death 
▁ xxmaj hath given them heart and courage to proceed . 
▁ xxmaj all scholars , lawyers , courtiers , gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj they call false caterpillars and intend their death . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o graceless men ! they know not what they do . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my gracious lord , retire to xxmaj killingworth 
▁ xxmaj until a power be rais'd to put them down . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj ah , were the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk now alive , 
▁ xxmaj these xxmaj kentish rebels would be soon appeas'd ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj lord xxmaj say , the traitors hate thee ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore away with us to xxmaj killingworth . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj so might your xxmaj grace 's person be in danger . 
▁ xxmaj the sight of me is odious in their eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore in this city will i stay 
▁ xxmaj and live alone as secret as i may . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup messenger 

▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj jack xxmaj cade hath gotten xxmaj london xxmaj bridge . 
▁ xxmaj the citizens fly and forsake their houses ; 
▁ xxmaj the rascal people , thirsting after prey , 
▁ xxmaj join with the traitor ; and they jointly swear 
▁ xxmaj to spoil the city and your royal court . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj then linger not , my lord ; away , take horse . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj come xxmaj margaret ; xxmaj god , our hope , will succour us . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj my hope is gone , now xxmaj suffolk is deceas'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . [ to xxup lord xxup say ] xxmaj farewell , my lord , trust not the xxmaj kentish 
▁ rebels . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj trust nobody , for fear you be betray'd . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj the trust i have is in mine innocence , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore am i bold and resolute . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup scales xxmaj upon the xxmaj tower , walking . xxmaj then enter two or three xxup citizens , 
 below 

▁ xxup scales . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj is xxmaj jack xxmaj cade slain ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj no , my lord , nor likely to be slain ; for they have 
▁ won the bridge , killing all those that withstand them . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor craves aid of your honour from the 
▁ xxmaj tower , to defend the city from the rebels . 
▁ xxup scales . xxmaj such aid as i can spare you shall command , 
▁ xxmaj but i am troubled here with them myself ; 
▁ xxmaj the rebels have assay'd to win the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxmaj but get you to xxmaj smithfield , and gather head , 
▁ xxmaj and thither i will send you xxmaj matthew xxmaj goffe ; 
▁ xxmaj fight for your xxmaj king , your country , and your lives ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , farewell , for i must hence again . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj cannon street 

 xxmaj enter xxup jack xxup cade and the rest , and strikes his staff on xxmaj london xxmaj stone 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj now is xxmaj mortimer lord of this city . xxmaj and here , sitting upon 
▁ xxmaj london xxmaj stone , i charge and command that , of the city 's cost , the 
▁ pissing conduit run nothing but claret wine this first year of 
▁ our reign . xxmaj and now henceforward it shall be treason for any that 
▁ calls me other than xxmaj lord xxmaj mortimer . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup soldier , running 

▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj jack xxmaj cade ! xxmaj jack xxmaj cade ! 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj knock him down there . [ they kill him ] 
▁ xxup smith . xxmaj if this fellow be wise , he 'll never call ye xxmaj jack xxmaj cade more ; 
▁ i think he hath a very fair warning . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj my lord , there 's an army gathered together in xxmaj smithfield . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj come then , let 's go fight with them . xxmaj but first go and set 
▁ xxmaj london xxmaj bridge on fire ; and , if you can , burn down the xxmaj tower too . 
▁ xxmaj come , let 's away . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj smithfield 

 xxmaj alarums . xxup matthew xxup goffe is slain , and all the rest . xxmaj then enter xxup jack xxup cade , 
 with his company 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj so , sirs . xxmaj now go some and pull down the xxmaj savoy ; others to th ' 
▁ xxmaj inns of xxmaj court ; down with them all . 
▁ xxup dick . i have a suit unto your lordship . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj be it a lordship , thou shalt have it for that word . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj only that the laws of xxmaj england may come out of your mouth . 
▁ xxup john . [ aside ] xxmaj mass , ' twill be sore law then ; for he was thrust in 
▁ the mouth with a spear , and ' tis not whole yet . 
▁ xxup smith . [ aside ] xxmaj nay , xxmaj john , it will be stinking law ; for his breath 
▁ stinks with eating toasted cheese . 
▁ xxup cade . i have thought upon it ; it shall be so . xxmaj away , burn all the 
▁ records of the realm . xxmaj my mouth shall be the xxmaj parliament of 
▁ xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup john . [ aside ] xxmaj then we are like to have biting statutes , unless his 
▁ teeth be pull'd out . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj and henceforward all things shall be in common . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord , a prize , a prize ! xxmaj here 's the xxmaj lord xxmaj say , which 
▁ sold the towns in xxmaj france ; he that made us pay one and twenty 
▁ fifteens , and one shining to the pound , the last subsidy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup george xxup bevis , with the xxup lord xxup say 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj well , he shall be beheaded for it ten times . xxmaj ah , thou say , 
▁ thou serge , nay , thou buckram lord ! xxmaj now art thou within point 
▁ blank of our jurisdiction regal . xxmaj what canst thou answer to my 
▁ xxmaj majesty for giving up of xxmaj normandy unto xxmaj mounsieur xxmaj basimecu the 
▁ xxmaj dauphin of xxmaj france ? xxmaj be it known unto thee by these presence , even 
▁ the presence of xxmaj lord xxmaj mortimer , that i am the besom that must 
▁ sweep the court clean of such filth as thou art . xxmaj thou hast most 
▁ traitorously corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a 
▁ grammar school ; and whereas , before , our forefathers had no other 
▁ books but the score and the tally , thou hast caused printing to 
▁ be us'd , and , contrary to the xxmaj king , his crown , and dignity , thou 
▁ hast built a paper - mill . xxmaj it will be proved to thy face that thou 
▁ hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and a verb , and 
▁ such abominable words as no xxmaj christian ear can endure to hear . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast appointed justices of peace , to call poor men before 
▁ them about matters they were not able to answer . xxmaj moreover , thou 
▁ hast put them in prison , and because they could not read , thou 
▁ hast hang'd them , when , indeed , only for that cause they have 
▁ been most worthy to live . xxmaj thou dost ride in a foot - cloth , dost 
▁ thou not ? 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj what of that ? 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj marry , thou ought'st not to let thy horse wear a cloak , when 
▁ honester men than thou go in their hose and doublets . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj and work in their shirt too , as myself , for example , that am 
▁ a butcher . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj you men of xxmaj kent- 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj what say you of xxmaj kent ? 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj nothing but this : ' tis ' bona terra , mala gens . ' 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj away with him , away with him ! xxmaj he speaks xxmaj latin . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj hear me but speak , and bear me where you will . 
▁ xxmaj kent , in the xxmaj commentaries xxmaj caesar writ , 
▁ xxmaj is term'd the civil'st place of all this isle . 
▁ xxmaj sweet is the country , because full of riches ; 
▁ xxmaj the people liberal valiant , active , wealthy ; 
▁ xxmaj which makes me hope you are not void of pity . 
▁ i sold not xxmaj maine , i lost not xxmaj normandy ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , to recover them , would lose my life . 
▁ xxmaj justice with favour have i always done ; 
▁ xxmaj pray'rs and tears have mov'd me , gifts could never . 
▁ xxmaj when have i aught exacted at your hands , 
▁ xxmaj but to maintain the xxmaj king , the realm , and you ? 
▁ xxmaj large gifts have i bestow'd on learned clerks , 
▁ xxmaj because my book preferr'd me to the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and seeing ignorance is the curse of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits 
▁ xxmaj you can not but forbear to murder me . 
▁ xxmaj this tongue hath parley'd unto foreign kings 
▁ xxmaj for your behoof . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj tut , when struck'st thou one blow in the field ? 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj great men have reaching hands . xxmaj oft have i struck 
▁ xxmaj those that i never saw , and struck them dead . 
▁ xxup george . o monstrous coward ! xxmaj what , to come behind folks ? 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj these cheeks are pale for watching for your good . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj give him a box o ' th ' ear , and that will make 'em red again . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj long sitting to determine poor men 's causes 
▁ xxmaj hath made me full of sickness and diseases . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj ye shall have a hempen caudle then , and the help of hatchet . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj why dost thou quiver , man ? 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj the palsy , and not fear , provokes me . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj nay , he nods at us , as who should say ' i 'll be even with 
▁ you ' ; xxmaj i 'll see if his head will stand steadier on a pole , or no . 
▁ xxmaj take him away , and behead him . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj tell me : wherein have i offended most ? 
▁ xxmaj have i affected wealth or honour ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold ? 
▁ xxmaj is my apparel sumptuous to behold ? 
▁ xxmaj whom have i injur'd , that ye seek my death ? 
▁ xxmaj these hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding , 
▁ xxmaj this breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts . 
▁ xxup o , let me live ! 
▁ xxup cade . [ aside ] i feel remorse in myself with his words ; but xxmaj i 'll 
▁ bridle it . xxmaj he shall die , an it be but for pleading so well for 
▁ his life.- xxmaj away with him ! xxmaj he has a familiar under his tongue ; he 
▁ speaks not o ' xxmaj god 's name . xxmaj go , take him away , i say , and strike 
▁ off his head presently , and then break into his son - in - law 's 
▁ house , xxmaj sir xxmaj james xxmaj cromer , and strike off his head , and bring them 
▁ both upon two poles hither . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj it shall be done . 
▁ xxup say . xxmaj ah , countrymen ! if when you make your pray'rs , 
▁ xxmaj god should be so obdurate as yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj how would it fare with your departed souls ? 
▁ xxmaj and therefore yet relent and save my life . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj away with him , and do as i command ye . [ exeunt some with 
▁ xxup lord xxup say ] xxmaj the proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head 
▁ on his shoulders , unless he pay me tribute ; there shall not a 
▁ maid be married , but she shall pay to me her maidenhead ere they 
▁ have it . xxmaj men shall hold of me in capite ; and we charge and 
▁ command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue 
▁ can tell . 
▁ xxup dick . xxmaj my lord , when shall we go to xxmaj cheapside , and take up 
▁ commodities upon our bills ? 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj marry , presently . 
▁ xxup all . xxup o , brave ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter one with the heads 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj but is not this braver ? xxmaj let them kiss one another , for they 
▁ lov'd well when they were alive . xxmaj now part them again , lest they 
▁ consult about the giving up of some more towns in xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj soldiers , defer the spoil of the city until night ; for with these 
▁ borne before us instead of maces will we ride through the 
▁ streets , and at every corner have them kiss . xxmaj away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj southwark 

 xxmaj alarum and retreat . xxmaj enter again xxup cade and all his rabblement 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj up xxmaj fish xxmaj street ! down xxmaj saint xxmaj magnus ' xxmaj corner ! xxmaj kill and knock 
▁ down ! xxmaj throw them into xxmaj thames ! [ sound a parley ] 
▁ xxmaj what noise is this i hear ? xxmaj dare any be so bold to sound retreat 
▁ or parley when i command them kill ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham and old xxup clifford , attended 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj ay , here they be that dare and will disturb thee . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore yet relent , and save my life . 
▁ xxmaj know , xxmaj cade , we come ambassadors from the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj unto the commons whom thou hast misled ; 
▁ xxmaj and here pronounce free pardon to them all 
▁ xxmaj that will forsake thee and go home in peace . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj what say ye , countrymen ? xxmaj will ye relent 
▁ xxmaj and yield to mercy whilst ' tis offer'd you , 
▁ xxmaj or let a rebel lead you to your deaths ? 
▁ xxmaj who loves the xxmaj king , and will embrace his pardon , 
▁ xxmaj fling up his cap and say ' god save his xxmaj majesty ! ' 
▁ xxmaj who hateth him and honours not his father , 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth , that made all xxmaj france to quake , 
▁ xxmaj shake he his weapon at us and pass by . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj what , xxmaj buckingham and xxmaj clifford , are ye so brave ? 
▁ xxmaj and you , base peasants , do ye believe him ? xxmaj will you needs be 
▁ hang'd with your about your necks ? xxmaj hath my sword therefore broke 
▁ through xxmaj london gates , that you should leave me at the xxmaj white xxmaj hart 
▁ in xxmaj southwark ? i thought ye would never have given out these arms 
▁ till you had recovered your ancient freedom . xxmaj but you are all 
▁ recreants and dastards , and delight to live in slavery to the 
▁ nobility . xxmaj let them break your backs with burdens , take your 
▁ houses over your heads , ravish your wives and daughters before 
▁ your faces . xxmaj for me , i will make shift for one ; and so xxmaj god 's curse 
▁ light upon you all ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj we 'll follow xxmaj cade , we 'll follow xxmaj cade ! 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj is xxmaj cade the son of xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth , 
▁ xxmaj that thus you do exclaim you 'll go with him ? 
▁ xxmaj will he conduct you through the heart of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and make the meanest of you earls and dukes ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , he hath no home , no place to fly to ; 
▁ xxmaj nor knows he how to live but by the spoil , 
▁ xxmaj unless by robbing of your friends and us . 
▁ xxmaj were't not a shame that whilst you live at jar 
▁ xxmaj the fearful xxmaj french , whom you late vanquished , 
▁ xxmaj should make a start o'er seas and vanquish you ? 
▁ xxmaj methinks already in this civil broil 
▁ i see them lording it in xxmaj london streets , 
▁ xxmaj crying ' villiago ! ' unto all they meet . 
▁ xxmaj better ten thousand base - born xxmaj cades miscarry 
▁ xxmaj than you should stoop unto a xxmaj frenchman 's mercy . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj france , to xxmaj france , and get what you have lost ; 
▁ xxmaj spare xxmaj england , for it is your native coast . 
▁ xxmaj henry hath money ; you are strong and manly . 
▁ xxmaj god on our side , doubt not of victory . 
▁ xxup all . a xxmaj clifford ! a xxmaj clifford ! xxmaj we 'll follow the xxmaj king and xxmaj clifford . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this 
▁ multitude ? xxmaj the name of xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth hales them to an hundred 
▁ mischiefs , and makes them leave me desolate . i see them lay their 
▁ heads together to surprise me . xxmaj my sword make way for me for here 
▁ is no staying . xxmaj in despite of the devils and hell , have through 
▁ the very middest of you ! and heavens and honour be witness that 
▁ no want of resolution in me , but only my followers ' base and 
▁ ignominious treasons , makes me betake me to my heels . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj what , is he fled ? xxmaj go some , and follow him ; 
▁ xxmaj and he that brings his head unto the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj shall have a thousand crowns for his reward . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt some of them 
▁ xxmaj follow me , soldiers ; we 'll devise a mean 
▁ xxmaj to reconcile you all unto the xxmaj king . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ix . 
 xxmaj killing , worth xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj sound trumpets . xxmaj enter xxup king , xxup queen , and xxup somerset , on the terrace 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne 
▁ xxmaj and could command no more content than xxup i ? 
▁ xxmaj no sooner was i crept out of my cradle 
▁ xxmaj but i was made a king , at nine months old . 
▁ xxmaj was never subject long'd to be a xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj as i do long and wish to be a subject . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham and old xxup clifford 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj health and glad tidings to your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , xxmaj buckingham , is the traitor xxmaj cade surpris'd ? 
▁ xxmaj or is he but retir'd to make him strong ? 

▁ xxmaj enter , below , multitudes , with halters about their necks 

▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj he is fled , my lord , and all his powers do yield , 
▁ xxmaj and humbly thus , with halters on their necks , 
▁ xxmaj expect your xxmaj highness ' doom of life or death . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj then , heaven , set ope thy everlasting gates , 
▁ xxmaj to entertain my vows of thanks and praise ! 
▁ xxmaj soldiers , this day have you redeem'd your lives , 
▁ xxmaj and show'd how well you love your xxmaj prince and country . 
▁ xxmaj continue still in this so good a mind , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj henry , though he be infortunate , 
▁ xxmaj assure yourselves , will never be unkind . 
▁ xxmaj and so , with thanks and pardon to you all , 
▁ i do dismiss you to your several countries . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj please it your xxmaj grace to be advertised 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york is newly come from xxmaj ireland 
▁ xxmaj and with a puissant and a mighty power 
▁ xxmaj of gallowglasses and stout kerns 
▁ xxmaj is marching hitherward in proud array , 
▁ xxmaj and still proclaimeth , as he comes along , 
▁ xxmaj his arms are only to remove from thee 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj somerset , whom he terms a traitor . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj thus stands my state , ' twixt xxmaj cade and xxmaj york distress'd ; 
▁ xxmaj like to a ship that , having scap'd a tempest , 
▁ xxmaj is straightway calm'd , and boarded with a pirate ; 
▁ xxmaj but now is xxmaj cade driven back , his men dispers'd , 
▁ xxmaj and now is xxmaj york in arms to second him . 
▁ i pray thee , xxmaj buckingham , go and meet him 
▁ xxmaj and ask him what 's the reason of these arms . 
▁ xxmaj tell him xxmaj i 'll send xxmaj duke xxmaj edmund to the xxmaj tower- 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj somerset , we will commit thee thither 
▁ xxmaj until his army be dismiss'd from him . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll yield myself to prison willingly , 
▁ xxmaj or unto death , to do my country good . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj in any case be not too rough in terms , 
▁ xxmaj for he is fierce and can not brook hard language . 
▁ xxup buckingham . i will , my lord , and doubt not so to deal 
▁ xxmaj as all things shall redound unto your good . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj come , wife , let 's in , and learn to govern better ; 
▁ xxmaj for yet may xxmaj england curse my wretched reign . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup x. 
 xxmaj kent . xxmaj iden 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup cade 

▁ xxup cade . xxmaj fie on ambitions ! xxmaj fie on myself , that have a sword and yet am 
▁ ready to famish ! xxmaj these five days have i hid me in these woods and 
▁ durst not peep out , for all the country is laid for me ; but now 
▁ am i so hungry that , if i might have a lease of my life for a 
▁ thousand years , i could stay no longer . xxmaj wherefore , on a brick 
▁ wall have i climb'd into this garden , to see if i can eat grass 
▁ or pick a sallet another while , which is not amiss to cool a 
▁ man 's stomach this hot weather . xxmaj and i think this word ' sallet ' 
▁ was born to do me good ; for many a time , but for a sallet , my 
▁ brain - pain had been cleft with a brown bill ; and many a time , 
▁ when i have been dry , and bravely marching , it hath serv'd me 
▁ instead of a quart - pot to drink in ; and now the word ' sallet ' 
▁ must serve me to feed on . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup iden 

▁ xxup iden . xxmaj lord , who would live turmoiled in the court 
▁ xxmaj and may enjoy such quiet walks as these ? 
▁ xxmaj this small inheritance my father left me 
▁ xxmaj contenteth me , and worth a monarchy . 
▁ i seek not to wax great by others ' waning 
▁ xxmaj or gather wealth i care not with what envy ; 
▁ xxmaj sufficeth that i have maintains my state , 
▁ xxmaj and sends the poor well pleased from my gate . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj here 's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray , for 
▁ entering his fee - simple without leave . xxmaj ah , villain , thou wilt 
▁ betray me , and get a thousand crowns of the xxmaj king by carrying my 
▁ head to him ; but xxmaj i 'll make thee eat iron like an ostrich and 
▁ swallow my sword like a great pin ere thou and i part . 
▁ xxup iden . xxmaj why , rude companion , whatsoe'er thou be , 
▁ i know thee not ; why then should i betray thee ? 
▁ xxmaj is't not enough to break into my garden 
▁ xxmaj and like a thief to come to rob my grounds , 
▁ xxmaj climbing my walls in spite of me the owner , 
▁ xxmaj but thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms ? 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj brave thee ? xxmaj ay , by the best blood that ever was broach'd , and 
▁ beard thee too . xxmaj look on me well : i have eat no meat these five 
▁ days , yet come thou and thy five men and if i do not leave you 
▁ all as dead as a door - nail , i pray xxmaj god i may never eat grass 
▁ more . 
▁ xxup iden . xxmaj nay , it shall ne'er be said , while xxmaj england stands , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj alexander xxmaj iden , an esquire of xxmaj kent , 
▁ xxmaj took odds to combat a poor famish'd man . 
▁ xxmaj oppose thy steadfast - gazing eyes to mine ; 
▁ xxmaj see if thou canst outface me with thy looks ; 
▁ xxmaj set limb to limb , and thou art far the lesser ; 
▁ xxmaj thy hand is but a finger to my fist , 
▁ xxmaj thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon ; 
▁ xxmaj my foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast , 
▁ xxmaj and if mine arm be heaved in the air , 
▁ xxmaj thy grave is digg'd already in the earth . 
▁ xxmaj as for words , whose greatness answers words , 
▁ xxmaj let this my sword report what speech forbears . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj by my valour , the most complete champion that ever i heard ! 
▁ xxmaj steel , if thou turn the edge , or cut not out the burly bon'd 
▁ clown in chines of beef ere thou sleep in thy sheath , i beseech 
▁ xxmaj god on my knees thou mayst be turn'd to hobnails . [ here they 
▁ fight ; xxup cade falls ] xxup o , i am slain ! famine and no other hath slain 
▁ me . xxmaj let ten thousand devils come against me , and give me but the 
▁ ten meals i have lost , and xxmaj i 'd defy them all . xxmaj wither , garden , and 
▁ be henceforth a burying place to all that do dwell in this house , 
▁ because the unconquered soul of xxmaj cade is fled . 
▁ xxup iden . xxmaj is't xxmaj cade that i have slain , that monstrous traitor ? 
▁ xxmaj sword , i will hallow thee for this thy deed 
▁ xxmaj and hang thee o'er my tomb when i am dead . 
▁ xxmaj ne'er shall this blood be wiped from thy point , 
▁ xxmaj but thou shalt wear it as a herald 's coat 
▁ xxmaj to emblaze the honour that thy master got . 
▁ xxup cade . xxmaj iden , farewell ; and be proud of thy victory . xxmaj tell xxmaj kent from 
▁ me she hath lost her best man , and exhort all the world to be 
▁ cowards ; for xxup i , that never feared any , am vanquished by famine , 
▁ not by valour . [ dies ] 
▁ xxup iden . xxmaj how much thou wrong'st me , heaven be my judge . 
▁ xxmaj die , damned wretch , the curse of her that bare thee ! 
▁ xxmaj and as i thrust thy body in with my sword , 
▁ xxmaj so wish xxup i , i might thrust thy soul to hell . 
▁ xxmaj hence will i drag thee headlong by the heels 
▁ xxmaj unto a dunghill , which shall be thy grave , 
▁ xxmaj and there cut off thy most ungracious head , 
▁ xxmaj which i will bear in triumph to the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj fields between xxmaj dartford and xxmaj blackheath 

 xxmaj enter xxup york , and his army of xxmaj irish , with drum and colours 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj from xxmaj ireland thus comes xxmaj york to claim his right 
▁ xxmaj and pluck the crown from feeble xxmaj henry 's head : 
▁ xxmaj ring bells aloud , burn bonfires clear and bright , 
▁ xxmaj to entertain great xxmaj england 's lawful king . 
▁ xxmaj ah , sancta majestas ! who would not buy thee dear ? 
▁ xxmaj let them obey that knows not how to rule ; 
▁ xxmaj this hand was made to handle nought but gold . 
▁ i can not give due action to my words 
▁ xxmaj except a sword or sceptre balance it . 
▁ a sceptre shall it have , have i a soul 
▁ xxmaj on which xxmaj i 'll toss the flower - de - luce of xxmaj france . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham 

▁ [ aside ] xxmaj whom have we here ? xxmaj buckingham , to disturb me ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king hath sent him , sure : i must dissemble . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj york , if thou meanest well i greet thee well . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj humphrey of xxmaj buckingham , i accept thy greeting . 
▁ xxmaj art thou a messenger , or come of pleasure ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . a messenger from xxmaj henry , our dread liege , 
▁ xxmaj to know the reason of these arms in peace ; 
▁ xxmaj or why thou , being a subject as i am , 
▁ xxmaj against thy oath and true allegiance sworn , 
▁ xxmaj should raise so great a power without his leave , 
▁ xxmaj or dare to bring thy force so near the court . 
▁ xxup york . [ aside ] xxmaj scarce can i speak , my choler is so great . 
▁ xxup o , i could hew up rocks and fight with flint , 
▁ i am so angry at these abject terms ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , like xxmaj ajax xxmaj telamonius , 
▁ xxmaj on sheep or oxen could i spend my fury . 
▁ i am far better born than is the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj more like a king , more kingly in my thoughts ; 
▁ xxmaj but i must make fair weather yet awhile , 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj henry be more weak and i more strong.- 
▁ xxmaj buckingham , i prithee , pardon me 
▁ xxmaj that i have given no answer all this while ; 
▁ xxmaj my mind was troubled with deep melancholy . 
▁ xxmaj the cause why i have brought this army hither 
▁ xxmaj is to remove proud xxmaj somerset from the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj seditious to his xxmaj grace and to the state . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj that is too much presumption on thy part ; 
▁ xxmaj but if thy arms be to no other end , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king hath yielded unto thy demand : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj somerset is in the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj upon thine honour , is he prisoner ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj upon mine honour , he is prisoner . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj then , xxmaj buckingham , i do dismiss my pow'rs . 
▁ xxmaj soldiers , i thank you all ; disperse yourselves ; 
▁ xxmaj meet me to - morrow in xxmaj saint xxmaj george 's field , 
▁ xxmaj you shall have pay and everything you wish . 
▁ xxmaj and let my sovereign , virtuous xxmaj henry , 
▁ xxmaj command my eldest son , nay , all my sons , 
▁ xxmaj as pledges of my fealty and love . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send them all as willing as i live : 
▁ xxmaj lands , goods , horse , armour , anything i have , 
▁ xxmaj is his to use , so xxmaj somerset may die . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj york , i commend this kind submission . 
▁ xxmaj we twain will go into his xxmaj highness ' tent . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj buckingham , doth xxmaj york intend no harm to us , 
▁ xxmaj that thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj in all submission and humility 
▁ xxmaj york doth present himself unto your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj then what intends these forces thou dost bring ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj to heave the traitor xxmaj somerset from hence , 
▁ xxmaj and fight against that monstrous rebel xxmaj cade , 
▁ xxmaj who since i heard to be discomfited . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup iden , with cade 's head 

▁ xxup iden . xxmaj if one so rude and of so mean condition 
▁ xxmaj may pass into the presence of a king , 
▁ xxmaj lo , i present your xxmaj grace a traitor 's head , 
▁ xxmaj the head of xxmaj cade , whom i in combat slew . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj the head of xxmaj cade ! xxmaj great xxmaj god , how just art xxmaj thou ! 
▁ xxup o , let me view his visage , being dead , 
▁ xxmaj that living wrought me such exceeding trouble . 
▁ xxmaj tell me , my friend , art thou the man that slew him ? 
▁ xxup iden . i was , an't like your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how art thou call'd ? xxmaj and what is thy degree ? 
▁ xxup iden . xxmaj alexander xxmaj iden , that 's my name ; 
▁ a poor esquire of xxmaj kent that loves his king . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj so please it you , my lord , ' twere not amiss 
▁ xxmaj he were created knight for his good service . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj iden , kneel down . [ he kneels ] xxmaj rise up a knight . 
▁ xxmaj we give thee for reward a thousand marks , 
▁ xxmaj and will that thou thenceforth attend on us . 
▁ xxup iden . xxmaj may xxmaj iden live to merit such a bounty , 
▁ xxmaj and never live but true unto his liege ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup queen and xxup somerset 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj see , xxmaj buckingham ! xxmaj somerset comes with th ' xxmaj queen : 
▁ xxmaj go , bid her hide him quickly from the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj for thousand xxmaj yorks he shall not hide his head , 
▁ xxmaj but boldly stand and front him to his face . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj is xxmaj somerset at liberty ? 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj york , unloose thy long - imprisoned thoughts 
▁ xxmaj and let thy tongue be equal with thy heart . 
▁ xxmaj shall i endure the sight of xxmaj somerset ? 
▁ xxmaj false king , why hast thou broken faith with me , 
▁ xxmaj knowing how hardly i can brook abuse ? 
▁ xxmaj king did i call thee ? xxmaj no , thou art not king ; 
▁ xxmaj not fit to govern and rule multitudes , 
▁ xxmaj which dar'st not , no , nor canst not rule a traitor . 
▁ xxmaj that head of thine doth not become a crown ; 
▁ xxmaj thy hand is made to grasp a palmer 's staff , 
▁ xxmaj and not to grace an awful princely sceptre . 
▁ xxmaj that gold must round engirt these brows of mine , 
▁ xxmaj whose smile and frown , like to xxmaj achilles ' spear , 
▁ xxmaj is able with the change to kill and cure . 
▁ xxmaj here is a hand to hold a sceptre up , 
▁ xxmaj and with the same to act controlling laws . 
▁ xxmaj give place . xxmaj by heaven , thou shalt rule no more 
▁ xxmaj o'er him whom heaven created for thy ruler . 
▁ xxup somerset . o monstrous traitor ! i arrest thee , xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj of capital treason ' gainst the xxmaj king and crown . 
▁ xxmaj obey , audacious traitor ; kneel for grace . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj wouldst have me kneel ? xxmaj first let me ask of these , 
▁ xxmaj if they can brook i bow a knee to man . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , call in my sons to be my bail : xxmaj exit attendant 
▁ i know , ere thy will have me go to ward , 
▁ xxmaj they 'll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj call hither xxmaj clifford ; bid him come amain , 
▁ xxmaj to say if that the bastard boys of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj shall be the surety for their traitor father . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup buckingham 
▁ xxup york . o blood - bespotted xxmaj neapolitan , 
▁ xxmaj outcast of xxmaj naples , xxmaj england 's bloody scourge ! 
▁ xxmaj the sons of xxmaj york , thy betters in their birth , 
▁ xxmaj shall be their father 's bail ; and bane to those 
▁ xxmaj that for my surety will refuse the boys ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup edward and xxup richard xxup plantagenet 
▁
▁ xxmaj see where they come : xxmaj i 'll warrant they 'll make it good . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clifford and his xxup son 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and here comes xxmaj clifford to deny their bail . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj health and all happiness to my lord the xxmaj king ! 
▁ [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup york . i thank thee , xxmaj clifford . xxmaj say , what news with thee ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , do not fright us with an angry look . 
▁ xxmaj we are thy sovereign , xxmaj clifford , kneel again ; 
▁ xxmaj for thy mistaking so , we pardon thee . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj this is my xxmaj king , xxmaj york , i do not mistake ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou mistakes me much to think i do . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj bedlam with him ! xxmaj is the man grown mad ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ay , xxmaj clifford ; a bedlam and ambitious humour 
▁ xxmaj makes him oppose himself against his king . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj he is a traitor ; let him to the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj and chop away that factious pate of his . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj he is arrested , but will not obey ; 
▁ xxmaj his sons , he says , shall give their words for him . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj will you not , sons ? 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj ay , noble father , if our words will serve . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj and if words will not , then our weapons shall . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj why , what a brood of traitors have we here ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj look in a glass , and call thy image so : 
▁ i am thy king , and thou a false - heart traitor . 
▁ xxmaj call hither to the stake my two brave bears , 
▁ xxmaj that with the very shaking of their chains 
▁ xxmaj they may astonish these fell - lurking curs . 
▁ xxmaj bid xxmaj salisbury and xxmaj warwick come to me . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup earls xxup of xxup warwick and xxup salisbury 

▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj are these thy bears ? xxmaj we 'll bait thy bears to death , 
▁ xxmaj and manacle the berard in their chains , 
▁ xxmaj if thou dar'st bring them to the baiting - place . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj oft have i seen a hot o'er weening cur 
▁ xxmaj run back and bite , because he was withheld ; 
▁ xxmaj who , being suffer'd , with the bear 's fell paw , 
▁ xxmaj hath clapp'd his tail between his legs and cried ; 
▁ xxmaj and such a piece of service will you do , 
▁ xxmaj if you oppose yourselves to match xxmaj lord xxmaj warwick . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj hence , heap of wrath , foul indigested lump , 
▁ xxmaj as crooked in thy manners as thy shape ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj nay , we shall heat you thoroughly anon . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj take heed , lest by your heat you burn yourselves . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , xxmaj warwick , hath thy knee forgot to bow ? 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj salisbury , shame to thy silver hair , 
▁ xxmaj thou mad misleader of thy brainsick son ! 
▁ xxmaj what , wilt thou on thy death - bed play the ruffian 
▁ xxmaj and seek for sorrow with thy spectacles ? 
▁ xxup o , where is faith ? xxup o , where is loyalty ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be banish'd from the frosty head , 
▁ xxmaj where shall it find a harbour in the earth ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war 
▁ xxmaj and shame thine honourable age with blood ? 
▁ xxmaj why art thou old , and want'st experience ? 
▁ xxmaj or wherefore dost abuse it , if thou hast it ? 
▁ xxmaj for shame ! xxmaj in duty bend thy knee to me , 
▁ xxmaj that bows unto the grave with mickle age . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj my lord , i have considered with myself 
▁ xxmaj the tide of this most renowned duke , 
▁ xxmaj and in my conscience do repute his xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj the rightful heir to xxmaj england 's royal seat . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me ? 
▁ xxup salisbury . i have . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath ? 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj it is great sin to swear unto a sin ; 
▁ xxmaj but greater sin to keep a sinful oath . 
▁ xxmaj who can be bound by any solemn vow 
▁ xxmaj to do a murd'rous deed , to rob a man , 
▁ xxmaj to force a spotless virgin 's chastity , 
▁ xxmaj to reave the orphan of his patrimony , 
▁ xxmaj to wring the widow from her custom'd right , 
▁ xxmaj and have no other reason for this wrong 
▁ xxmaj but that he was bound by a solemn oath ? 
▁ xxup queen . a subtle traitor needs no sophister . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj call xxmaj buckingham , and bid him arm himself . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj call xxmaj buckingham , and all the friends thou hast , 
▁ i am resolv'd for death or dignity . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj the first i warrant thee , if dreams prove true . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj you were best to go to bed and dream again 
▁ xxmaj to keep thee from the tempest of the field . 
▁ xxup clifford . i am resolv'd to bear a greater storm 
▁ xxmaj than any thou canst conjure up to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj and that xxmaj i 'll write upon thy burgonet , 
▁ xxmaj might i but know thee by thy household badge . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj now , by my father 's badge , old xxmaj nevil 's crest , 
▁ xxmaj the rampant bear chain'd to the ragged staff ,