xxbos xxmaj this day xxmaj i 'll wear aloft my burgonet , 
▁ xxmaj as on a mountain - top the cedar shows , 
▁ xxmaj that keeps his leaves in spite of any storm , 
▁ xxmaj even to affright thee with the view thereof . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj and from thy burgonet xxmaj i 'll rend thy bear 
▁ xxmaj and tread it under foot with all contempt , 
▁ xxmaj despite the berard that protects the bear . 
▁ xxup young xxup clifford . xxmaj and so to arms , victorious father , 
▁ xxmaj to quell the rebels and their complices . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj fie ! charity , for shame ! xxmaj speak not in spite , 
▁ xxmaj for you shall sup with xxmaj jesu xxmaj christ to - night . 
▁ xxup young xxup clifford . xxmaj foul stigmatic , that 's more than thou canst tell . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj if not in heaven , you 'll surely sup in hell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj saint xxmaj albans 

 xxmaj alarums to the battle . xxmaj enter xxup warwick 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj clifford of xxmaj cumberland , ' tis xxmaj warwick calls ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou dost not hide thee from the bear , 
▁ xxmaj now , when the angry trumpet sounds alarum 
▁ xxmaj and dead men 's cries do fill the empty air , 
▁ xxmaj clifford , i say , come forth and fight with me . 
▁ xxmaj proud northern lord , xxmaj clifford of xxmaj cumberland , 
▁ xxup warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york 

▁ xxmaj how now , my noble lord ! what , all a - foot ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj the deadly - handed xxmaj clifford slew my steed ; 
▁ xxmaj but match to match i have encount'red him , 
▁ xxmaj and made a prey for carrion kites and crows 
▁ xxmaj even of the bonny beast he lov'd so well . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup old xxup clifford 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj of one or both of us the time is come . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj hold , xxmaj warwick , seek thee out some other chase , 
▁ xxmaj for i myself must hunt this deer to death . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj then , nobly , xxmaj york ; ' tis for a crown thou fight'st . 
▁ xxmaj as i intend , xxmaj clifford , to thrive to - day , 
▁ xxmaj it grieves my soul to leave thee unassail'd . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj what seest thou in me , xxmaj york ? xxmaj why dost thou pause ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj with thy brave bearing should i be in love 
▁ xxmaj but that thou art so fast mine enemy . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem 
▁ xxmaj but that ' tis shown ignobly and in treason . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj so let it help me now against thy sword , 
▁ xxmaj as i in justice and true right express it ! 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj my soul and body on the action both ! 
▁ xxup york . a dreadful lay ! xxmaj address thee instantly . 
▁ [ they fight and xxup clifford falls ] 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj la fin couronne les oeuvres . [ dies ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj thus war hath given thee peace , for thou art still . 
▁ xxmaj peace with his soul , heaven , if it be thy will ! xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup young xxup clifford 

▁ xxup young xxup clifford . xxmaj shame and confusion ! xxmaj all is on the rout ; 
▁ xxmaj fear frames disorder , and disorder wounds 
▁ xxmaj where it should guard . o war , thou son of hell , 
▁ xxmaj whom angry heavens do make their minister , 
▁ xxmaj throw in the frozen bosoms of our part 
▁ xxmaj hot coals of vengeance ! xxmaj let no soldier fly . 
▁ xxmaj he that is truly dedicate to war 
▁ xxmaj hath no self - love ; nor he that loves himself 
▁ xxmaj hath not essentially , but by circumstance , 
▁ xxmaj the name of valour . [ sees his father 's body ] 
▁ xxup o , let the vile world end 
▁ xxmaj and the premised flames of the last day 
▁ xxmaj knit earth and heaven together ! 
▁ xxmaj now let the general trumpet blow his blast , 
▁ xxmaj particularities and petty sounds 
▁ xxmaj to cease ! xxmaj wast thou ordain'd , dear father , 
▁ xxmaj to lose thy youth in peace and to achieve 
▁ xxmaj the silver livery of advised age , 
▁ xxmaj and in thy reverence and thy chair - days thus 
▁ xxmaj to die in ruffian battle ? xxmaj even at this sight 
▁ xxmaj my heart is turn'd to stone ; and while ' tis mine 
▁ xxmaj it shall be stony . xxmaj york not our old men spares ; 
▁ xxmaj no more will i their babes . xxmaj tears virginal 
▁ xxmaj shall be to me even as the dew to fire ; 
▁ xxmaj and beauty , that the tyrant oft reclaims , 
▁ xxmaj shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax . 
▁ xxmaj henceforth i will not have to do with pity : 
▁ xxmaj meet i an infant of the house of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj into as many gobbets will i cut it 
▁ xxmaj as wild xxmaj medea young xxmaj absyrtus did ; 
▁ xxmaj in cruelty will i seek out my fame . 
▁ xxmaj come , thou new ruin of old xxmaj clifford 's house ; 
▁ xxmaj as did xxmaj aeneas old xxmaj anchises bear , 
▁ xxmaj so bear i thee upon my manly shoulders ; 
▁ xxmaj but then xxmaj aeneas bare a living load , 
▁ xxmaj nothing so heavy as these woes of mine . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the body 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup richard and xxup somerset to fight . xxup somerset is killed 

▁ xxup richard . xxmaj so , lie thou there ; 
▁ xxmaj for underneath an alehouse ' paltry sign , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj castle in xxmaj saint xxmaj albans , xxmaj somerset 
▁ xxmaj hath made the wizard famous in his death . 
▁ xxmaj sword , hold thy temper ; heart , be wrathful still : 
▁ xxmaj priests pray for enemies , but princes kill . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj fight . xxmaj excursions . xxmaj enter xxup king , xxup queen , and others 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj away , my lord ! xxmaj you are slow ; for shame , away ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj can we outrun the heavens ? xxmaj good xxmaj margaret , stay . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj what are you made of ? xxmaj you 'll nor fight nor fly . 
▁ xxmaj now is it manhood , wisdom , and defence , 
▁ xxmaj to give the enemy way , and to secure us 
▁ xxmaj by what we can , which can no more but fly . 
▁ [ alarum afar off ] 
▁ xxmaj if you be ta'en , we then should see the bottom 
▁ xxmaj of all our fortunes ; but if we haply scape- 
▁ xxmaj as well we may , if not through your neglect- 
▁ xxmaj we shall to xxmaj london get , where you are lov'd , 
▁ xxmaj and where this breach now in our fortunes made 
▁ xxmaj may readily be stopp'd . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup young xxup clifford 

▁ xxup young xxup clifford . xxmaj but that my heart 's on future mischief set , 
▁ i would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly ; 
▁ xxmaj but fly you must ; uncurable discomfit 
▁ xxmaj reigns in the hearts of all our present parts . 
▁ xxmaj away , for your relief ! and we will live 
▁ xxmaj to see their day and them our fortune give . 
▁ xxmaj away , my lord , away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj fields near xxmaj saint xxmaj albans 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj retreat . xxmaj enter xxup york , xxup richard , xxup warwick , and soldiers , 
 with drum and colours 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj of xxmaj salisbury , who can report of him , 
▁ xxmaj that winter lion , who in rage forgets 
▁ xxmaj aged contusions and all brush of time 
▁ xxmaj and , like a gallant in the brow of youth , 
▁ xxmaj repairs him with occasion ? xxmaj this happy day 
▁ xxmaj is not itself , nor have we won one foot , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj salisbury be lost . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj my noble father , 
▁ xxmaj three times to - day i holp him to his horse , 
▁ xxmaj three times bestrid him , thrice i led him off , 
▁ xxmaj persuaded him from any further act ; 
▁ xxmaj but still where danger was , still there i met him ; 
▁ xxmaj and like rich hangings in a homely house , 
▁ xxmaj so was his will in his old feeble body . 
▁ xxmaj but , noble as he is , look where he comes . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup salisbury 

▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj now , by my sword , well hast thou fought to - day ! 
▁ xxmaj by th ' mass , so did we all . i thank you , xxmaj richard : 
▁ xxmaj god knows how long it is i have to live , 
▁ xxmaj and it hath pleas'd xxmaj him that three times to - day 
▁ xxmaj you have defended me from imminent death . 
▁ xxmaj well , lords , we have not got that which we have ; 
▁ ' tis not enough our foes are this time fled , 
▁ xxmaj being opposites of such repairing nature . 
▁ xxup york . i know our safety is to follow them ; 
▁ xxmaj for , as i hear , the xxmaj king is fled to xxmaj london 
▁ xxmaj to call a present court of xxmaj parliament . 
▁ xxmaj let us pursue him ere the writs go forth . 
▁ xxmaj what says xxmaj lord xxmaj warwick ? xxmaj shall we after them ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj after them ? xxmaj nay , before them , if we can . 
▁ xxmaj now , by my faith , lords , ' twas a glorious day : 
▁ xxmaj saint xxmaj albans ' battle , won by famous xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj shall be eterniz'd in all age to come . 
▁ xxmaj sound drum and trumpets and to xxmaj london all ; 
▁ xxmaj and more such days as these to us befall ! xxmaj exeunt 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1591 

 xxup the xxup third xxup part xxup of xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 
▁ xxup edward , xxup prince xxup of xxup wales , his son 
▁ xxup lewis xxup xi , xxmaj king of xxmaj france xxup duke xxup of xxup somerset 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup exeter xxup earl xxup of xxup oxford 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup northumberland xxup earl xxup of xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxup lord xxup clifford 
▁ xxup richard xxup plantagenet , xxup duke xxup of xxup york 
▁ xxup edward , xxup earl xxup of xxup march , afterwards xxup king xxup edward xxup iv , his son 
▁ xxup edmund , xxup earl xxup of xxup rutland , his son 
▁ xxup george , afterwards xxup duke xxup of xxup clarence , his son 
▁ xxup richard , afterwards xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , his son 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk xxup marquis xxup of xxup montague 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup warwick xxup earl xxup of xxup pembroke 
▁ xxup lord xxup hastings xxup lord xxup stafford 
▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup mortimer , uncle to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 
▁ xxup sir xxup hugh xxup mortimer , uncle to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 
▁ xxup henry , xxup earl xxup of xxup richmond , a youth 
▁ xxup lord xxup rivers , brother to xxmaj lady xxmaj grey 
▁ xxup sir xxup william xxup stanley xxup sir xxup john xxup montgomery 
▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup somerville xxup tutor , to xxmaj rutland 
▁ xxup mayor xxup of xxup york xxup lieutenant xxup of xxup the xxup tower 
▁ a xxup nobleman xxup two xxup keepers 
▁ a xxup huntsman 
▁ a xxup son that has killed his father 
▁ a xxup father that has killed his son 

▁ xxup queen xxup margaret 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey , afterwards xxup queen to xxmaj edward xxup iv 
▁ xxup bona , sister to the xxmaj french xxmaj queen 

▁ xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj attendants , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj watchmen , etc . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj england and xxmaj france 

 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj parliament xxmaj house 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup duke xxup of xxup york , xxup edward , xxup richard , xxup norfolk , xxup montague , xxup warwick , 
 and soldiers , with white roses in their hats 

▁ xxup warwick . i wonder how the xxmaj king escap'd our hands . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj while we pursu'd the horsemen of the north , 
▁ xxmaj he slily stole away and left his men ; 
▁ xxmaj whereat the great xxmaj lord of xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj whose warlike ears could never brook retreat , 
▁ xxmaj cheer'd up the drooping army , and himself , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj clifford , and xxmaj lord xxmaj stafford , all abreast , 
▁ xxmaj charg'd our main battle 's front , and , breaking in , 
▁ xxmaj were by the swords of common soldiers slain . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj lord xxmaj stafford 's father , xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj is either slain or wounded dangerous ; 
▁ i cleft his beaver with a downright blow . 
▁ xxmaj that this is true , father , behold his blood . 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj and , brother , here 's the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj whom i encount'red as the battles join'd . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj speak thou for me , and tell them what i did . 
▁ [ throwing down xxup somerset 's head ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj richard hath best deserv'd of all my sons . 
▁ xxmaj but is your xxmaj grace dead , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj somerset ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj such hope have all the line of xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt ! 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj thus do i hope to shake xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's head . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and so do xxup i. xxmaj victorious xxmaj prince of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj before i see thee seated in that throne 
▁ xxmaj which now the house of xxmaj lancaster usurps , 
▁ i vow by heaven these eyes shall never close . 
▁ xxmaj this is the palace of the fearful xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and this the regal seat . xxmaj possess it , xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj for this is thine , and not xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's heirs ' . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj assist me then , sweet xxmaj warwick , and i will ; 
▁ xxmaj for hither we have broken in by force . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj we 'll all assist you ; he that flies shall die . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj thanks , gentle xxmaj norfolk . xxmaj stay by me , my lords ; 
▁ xxmaj and , soldiers , stay and lodge by me this night . 
▁ [ they go up ] 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and when the xxmaj king comes , offer him no violence . 
▁ xxmaj unless he seek to thrust you out perforce . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj the xxmaj queen this day here holds her parliament , 
▁ xxmaj but little thinks we shall be of her council . 
▁ xxmaj by words or blows here let us win our right . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj arm'd as we are , let 's stay within this house . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj the bloody parliament shall this be call'd , 
▁ xxmaj unless xxmaj plantagenet , xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , be xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and bashful xxmaj henry depos'd , whose cowardice 
▁ xxmaj hath made us by - words to our enemies . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj then leave me not , my lords ; be resolute : 
▁ i mean to take possession of my right . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj neither the xxmaj king , nor he that loves him best , 
▁ xxmaj the proudest he that holds up xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj dares stir a wing if xxmaj warwick shake his bells . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll plant xxmaj plantagenet , root him up who dares . 
▁ xxmaj resolve thee , xxmaj richard ; claim the xxmaj english crown . 
▁ [ york occupies the throne ] 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry , xxup clifford , xxup northumberland , 
▁ xxup westmoreland , xxup exeter , and others , with red roses in 
▁ their hats 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my lords , look where the sturdy rebel sits , 
▁ xxmaj even in the chair of state ! xxmaj belike he means , 
▁ xxmaj back'd by the power of xxmaj warwick , that false peer , 
▁ xxmaj to aspire unto the crown and reign as king . 
▁ xxmaj earl of xxmaj northumberland , he slew thy father ; 
▁ xxmaj and thine , xxmaj lord xxmaj clifford ; and you both have vow'd revenge 
▁ xxmaj on him , his sons , his favourites , and his friends . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj if i be not , heavens be reveng'd on me ! 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj the hope thereof makes xxmaj clifford mourn in steel . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj what , shall we suffer this ? xxmaj let 's pluck him down ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart for anger burns ; i can not brook it . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj be patient , gentle xxmaj earl of xxmaj westmoreland . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj patience is for poltroons such as he ; 
▁ xxmaj he durst not sit there had your father liv'd . 
▁ xxmaj my gracious lord , here in the parliament 
▁ xxmaj let us assail the family of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj well hast thou spoken , cousin ; be it so . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ah , know you not the city favours them , 
▁ xxmaj and they have troops of soldiers at their beck ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj but when the xxmaj duke is slain they 'll quickly fly . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj far be the thought of this from xxmaj henry 's heart , 
▁ xxmaj to make a shambles of the parliament house ! 
▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj exeter , frowns , words , and threats , 
▁ xxmaj shall be the war that xxmaj henry means to use . 
▁ xxmaj thou factious xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , descend my throne 
▁ xxmaj and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet ; 
▁ i am thy sovereign . 
▁ xxup york . i am thine . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj for shame , come down ; he made thee xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup york . ' twas my inheritance , as the earldom was . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj thy father was a traitor to the crown . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj exeter , thou art a traitor to the crown 
▁ xxmaj in following this usurping xxmaj henry . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj whom should he follow but his natural king ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj true , xxmaj clifford ; and that 's xxmaj richard xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj and shall i stand , and thou sit in my throne ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj it must and shall be so ; content thyself . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj be xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster ; let him be xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj he is both xxmaj king and xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster ; 
▁ xxmaj and that the xxmaj lord of xxmaj westmoreland shall maintain . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and xxmaj warwick shall disprove it . xxmaj you forget 
▁ xxmaj that we are those which chas'd you from the field , 
▁ xxmaj and slew your fathers , and with colours spread 
▁ xxmaj march'd through the city to the palace gates . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj yes , xxmaj warwick , i remember it to my grief ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by his soul , thou and thy house shall rue it . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj plantagenet , of thee , and these thy sons , 
▁ xxmaj thy kinsmen , and thy friends , xxmaj i 'll have more lives 
▁ xxmaj than drops of blood were in my father 's veins . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj urge it no more ; lest that instead of words 
▁ i send thee , xxmaj warwick , such a messenger 
▁ xxmaj as shall revenge his death before i stir . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj poor xxmaj clifford , how i scorn his worthless threats ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj will you we show our title to the crown ? 
▁ xxmaj if not , our swords shall plead it in the field . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj what title hast thou , traitor , to the crown ? 
▁ xxmaj thy father was , as thou art , xxmaj duke of xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj thy grandfather , xxmaj roger xxmaj mortimer , xxmaj earl of xxmaj march : 
▁ i am the son of xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth , 
▁ xxmaj who made the xxmaj dauphin and the xxmaj french to stoop , 
▁ xxmaj and seiz'd upon their towns and provinces . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj talk not of xxmaj france , sith thou hast lost it all . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj the xxmaj lord xxmaj protector lost it , and not xxup i : 
▁ xxmaj when i was crown'd , i was but nine months old . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj you are old enough now , and yet methinks you lose . 
▁ xxmaj father , tear the crown from the usurper 's head . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj sweet father , do so ; set it on your head . 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj good brother , as thou lov'st and honourest arms , 
▁ xxmaj let 's fight it out and not stand cavilling thus . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj sound drums and trumpets , and the xxmaj king will fly . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj sons , peace ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj peace thou ! and give xxmaj king xxmaj henry leave to speak . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj plantagenet shall speak first . xxmaj hear him , lords ; 
▁ xxmaj and be you silent and attentive too , 
▁ xxmaj for he that interrupts him shall not live . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj think'st thou that i will leave my kingly throne , 
▁ xxmaj wherein my grandsire and my father sat ? 
▁ xxmaj no ; first shall war unpeople this my realm ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , and their colours , often borne in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and now in xxmaj england to our heart 's great sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj shall be my winding - sheet . xxmaj why faint you , lords ? 
▁ xxmaj my title 's good , and better far than his . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj prove it , xxmaj henry , and thou shalt be xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj henry the xxmaj fourth by conquest got the crown . 
▁ xxup york . ' twas by rebellion against his king . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . [ aside ] i know not what to say ; my title 's weak.- 
▁ xxmaj tell me , may not a king adopt an heir ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj an if he may , then am i lawful xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj richard , in the view of many lords , 
▁ xxmaj resign'd the crown to xxmaj henry the xxmaj fourth , 
▁ xxmaj whose heir my father was , and i am his . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj he rose against him , being his sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj and made him to resign his crown perforce . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj suppose , my lords , he did it unconstrain'd , 
▁ xxmaj think you ' twere prejudicial to his crown ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj no ; for he could not so resign his crown 
▁ xxmaj but that the next heir should succeed and reign . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj art thou against us , xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj his is the right , and therefore pardon me . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj why whisper you , my lords , and answer not ? 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj my conscience tells me he is lawful xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . [ aside ] xxmaj all will revolt from me , and turn to him . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj plantagenet , for all the claim thou lay'st , 
▁ xxmaj think not that xxmaj henry shall be so depos'd . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj depos'd he shall be , in despite of all . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj thou art deceiv'd . ' tis not thy southern power 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj essex , xxmaj norfolk , xxmaj suffolk , nor of xxmaj kent , 
▁ xxmaj which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud , 
▁ xxmaj can set the xxmaj duke up in despite of me . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj king xxmaj henry , be thy title right or wrong , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj clifford vows to fight in thy defence . 
▁ xxmaj may that ground gape , and swallow me alive , 
▁ xxmaj where i shall kneel to him that slew my father ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o xxmaj clifford , how thy words revive my heart ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj henry of xxmaj lancaster , resign thy crown . 
▁ xxmaj what mutter you , or what conspire you , lords ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj do right unto this princely xxmaj duke of xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj or i will fill the house with armed men , 
▁ xxmaj and over the chair of state , where now he sits , 
▁ xxmaj write up his title with usurping blood . 
▁ [ he stamps with his foot and the 
▁ soldiers show themselves ] 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwick , hear but one word : 
▁ xxmaj let me for this my life - time reign as king . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt reign in quiet while thou liv'st . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i am content . xxmaj richard xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj enjoy the kingdom after my decease . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj what wrong is this unto the xxmaj prince your son ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what good is this to xxmaj england and himself ! 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj base , fearful , and despairing xxmaj henry ! 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj how hast thou injur'd both thyself and or us ! 
▁ xxup westmoreland . i can not stay to hear these articles . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj come , cousin , let us tell the xxmaj queen these news . 
▁ xxup westmoreland . xxmaj farewell , faint - hearted and degenerate king , 
▁ xxmaj in whose cold blood no spark of honour bides . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj be thou a prey unto the house of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj and die in bands for this unmanly deed ! 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj in dreadful war mayst thou be overcome , 
▁ xxmaj or live in peace abandon'd and despis'd ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup northumberland , xxup clifford , 
▁ and xxup westmoreland 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj turn this way , xxmaj henry , and regard them not . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj they seek revenge , and therefore will not yield . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ah , xxmaj exeter ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj why should you sigh , my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj not for myself , xxmaj lord xxmaj warwick , but my son , 
▁ xxmaj whom i unnaturally shall disinherit . 
▁ xxmaj but be it as it may . [ to xxup york ] i here entail 
▁ xxmaj the crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever ; 
▁ xxmaj conditionally , that here thou take an oath 
▁ xxmaj to cease this civil war , and , whilst i live , 
▁ xxmaj to honour me as thy king and sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj and neither by treason nor hostility 
▁ xxmaj to seek to put me down and reign thyself . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj this oath i willingly take , and will perform . 
▁ [ coming from the throne ] 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj long live xxmaj king xxmaj henry ! xxmaj plantagenet , embrace him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj and long live thou , and these thy forward sons ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj now xxmaj york and xxmaj lancaster are reconcil'd . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj accurs'd be he that seeks to make them foes ! 
▁ [ sennet . xxmaj here they come down ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj farewell , my gracious lord ; xxmaj i 'll to my castle . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll keep xxmaj london with my soldiers . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj and i to xxmaj norfolk with my followers . 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj and i unto the sea , from whence i came . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt the xxup yorkists 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj and xxup i , with grief and sorrow , to the court . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup margaret and the xxup prince xxup of xxup wales 

▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj queen , whose looks bewray her anger . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll steal away . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj exeter , so will xxup i. 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj nay , go not from me ; i will follow thee . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj be patient , gentle queen , and i will stay . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj who can be patient in such extremes ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , wretched man ! xxmaj would i had died a maid , 
▁ xxmaj and never seen thee , never borne thee son , 
▁ xxmaj seeing thou hast prov'd so unnatural a father ! 
▁ xxmaj hath he deserv'd to lose his birthright thus ? 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou but lov'd him half so well as xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj or felt that pain which i did for him once , 
▁ xxmaj or nourish'd him as i did with my blood , 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart - blood there 
▁ xxmaj rather than have made that savage duke thine heir , 
▁ xxmaj and disinherited thine only son . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj father , you can not disinherit me . 
▁ xxmaj if you be xxmaj king , why should not i succeed ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj margaret ; pardon me , sweet son . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick and the xxmaj duke enforc'd me . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj enforc'd thee ! xxmaj art thou xxmaj king and wilt be 
▁ forc'd ? 
▁ i shame to hear thee speak . xxmaj ah , timorous wretch ! 
▁ xxmaj thou hast undone thyself , thy son , and me ; 
▁ xxmaj and giv'n unto the house of xxmaj york such head 
▁ xxmaj as thou shalt reign but by their sufferance . 
▁ xxmaj to entail him and his heirs unto the crown , 
▁ xxmaj what is it but to make thy sepulchre 
▁ xxmaj and creep into it far before thy time ? 
▁ xxmaj warwick is xxmaj chancellor and the lord of xxmaj calais ; 
▁ xxmaj stern xxmaj falconbridge commands the narrow seas ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke is made xxmaj protector of the realm ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet shalt thou be safe ? xxmaj such safety finds 
▁ xxmaj the trembling lamb environed with wolves . 
▁ xxmaj had i been there , which am a silly woman , 
▁ xxmaj the soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes 
▁ xxmaj before i would have granted to that act . 
▁ xxmaj but thou prefer'st thy life before thine honour ; 
▁ xxmaj and seeing thou dost , i here divorce myself , 
▁ xxmaj both from thy table , xxmaj henry , and thy bed , 
▁ xxmaj until that act of parliament be repeal'd 
▁ xxmaj whereby my son is disinherited . 
▁ xxmaj the northern lords that have forsworn thy colours 
▁ xxmaj will follow mine , if once they see them spread ; 
▁ xxmaj and spread they shall be , to thy foul disgrace 
▁ xxmaj and utter ruin of the house of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj thus do i leave thee . xxmaj come , son , let 's away ; 
▁ xxmaj our army is ready ; come , we 'll after them . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj stay , gentle xxmaj margaret , and hear me speak . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj thou hast spoke too much already ; get thee gone . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj gentle son xxmaj edward , thou wilt stay with me ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ay , to be murder'd by his enemies . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj when i return with victory from the field 
▁ xxmaj i 'll see your xxmaj grace ; till then xxmaj i 'll follow her . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj come , son , away ; we may not linger thus . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup queen xxup margaret and the xxup prince 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj poor queen ! xxmaj how love to me and to her son 
▁ xxmaj hath made her break out into terms of rage ! 
▁ xxmaj reveng'd may she be on that hateful xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj whose haughty spirit , winged with desire , 
▁ xxmaj will cost my crown , and like an empty eagle 
▁ xxmaj tire on the flesh of me and of my son ! 
▁ xxmaj the loss of those three lords torments my heart . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll write unto them , and entreat them fair ; 
▁ xxmaj come , cousin , you shall be the messenger . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj and xxup i , i hope , shall reconcile them all . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj sandal xxmaj castle , near xxmaj wakefield , in xxmaj yorkshire 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup edward , xxup richard , and xxup montague 

▁ xxup richard . xxmaj brother , though i be youngest , give me leave . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj no , i can better play the orator . 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj but i have reasons strong and forcible . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup york 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj why , how now , sons and brother ! at a strife ? 
▁ xxmaj what is your quarrel ? xxmaj how began it first ? 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj no quarrel , but a slight contention . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj about what ? 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj about that which concerns your xxmaj grace and us- 
▁ xxmaj the crown of xxmaj england , father , which is yours . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj mine , boy ? xxmaj not till xxmaj king xxmaj henry be dead . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj your right depends not on his life or death . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj now you are heir , therefore enjoy it now . 
▁ xxmaj by giving the house of xxmaj lancaster leave to breathe , 
▁ xxmaj it will outrun you , father , in the end . 
▁ xxup york . i took an oath that he should quietly reign . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj but for a kingdom any oath may be broken : 
▁ i would break a thousand oaths to reign one year . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj no ; xxmaj god forbid your xxmaj grace should be forsworn . 
▁ xxup york . i shall be , if i claim by open war . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj i 'll prove the contrary , if you 'll hear me speak . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj thou canst not , son ; it is impossible . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj an oath is of no moment , being not took 
▁ xxmaj before a true and lawful magistrate 
▁ xxmaj that hath authority over him that swears . 
▁ xxmaj henry had none , but did usurp the place ; 
▁ xxmaj then , seeing ' twas he that made you to depose , 
▁ xxmaj your oath , my lord , is vain and frivolous . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , to arms . xxmaj and , father , do but think 
▁ xxmaj how sweet a thing it is to wear a crown , 
▁ xxmaj within whose circuit is xxmaj elysium 
▁ xxmaj and all that poets feign of bliss and joy . 
▁ xxmaj why do we linger thus ? i can not rest 
▁ xxmaj until the white rose that i wear be dy'd 
▁ xxmaj even in the lukewarm blood of xxmaj henry 's heart . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj richard , enough ; i will be xxmaj king , or die . 
▁ xxmaj brother , thou shalt to xxmaj london presently 
▁ xxmaj and whet on xxmaj warwick to this enterprise . 
▁ xxmaj thou , xxmaj richard , shalt to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk 
▁ xxmaj and tell him privily of our intent . 
▁ xxmaj you , xxmaj edward , shall unto my xxmaj lord xxmaj cobham , 
▁ xxmaj with whom the xxmaj kentishmen will willingly rise ; 
▁ xxmaj in them i trust , for they are soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj witty , courteous , liberal , full of spirit . 
▁ xxmaj while you are thus employ'd , what resteth more 
▁ xxmaj but that i seek occasion how to rise , 
▁ xxmaj and yet the xxmaj king not privy to my drift , 
▁ xxmaj nor any of the house of xxmaj lancaster ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxmaj but , stay . xxmaj what news ? xxmaj why com'st thou in such post ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj queen with all the northern earls and lords 
▁ xxmaj intend here to besiege you in your castle . 
▁ xxmaj she is hard by with twenty thousand men ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore fortify your hold , my lord . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj ay , with my sword . xxmaj what ! think'st thou that we fear them ? 
▁ xxmaj edward and xxmaj richard , you shall stay with me ; 
▁ xxmaj my brother xxmaj montague shall post to xxmaj london . 
▁ xxmaj let noble xxmaj warwick , xxmaj cobham , and the rest , 
▁ xxmaj whom we have left protectors of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj with pow'rful policy strengthen themselves 
▁ xxmaj and trust not simple xxmaj henry nor his oaths . 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj brother , i go ; xxmaj i 'll win them , fear it not . 
▁ xxmaj and thus most humbly i do take my leave . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john and xxup sir xxup hugh xxup mortimer 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj sir john and xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh xxmaj mortimer , mine uncles ! 
▁ xxmaj you are come to xxmaj sandal in a happy hour ; 
▁ xxmaj the army of the xxmaj queen mean to besiege us . 
▁ xxup sir xxup john . xxmaj she shall not need ; we 'll meet her in the field . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj what , with five thousand men ? 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj ay , with five hundred , father , for a need . 
▁ a woman 's general ; what should we fear ? 
▁ [ a march afar off ] 
▁ xxup edward . i hear their drums . xxmaj let 's set our men in order , 
▁ xxmaj and issue forth and bid them battle straight . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj five men to twenty ! xxmaj though the odds be great , 
▁ i doubt not , uncle , of our victory . 
▁ xxmaj many a battle have i won in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj when as the enemy hath been ten to one ; 
▁ xxmaj why should i not now have the like success ? xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj field of battle between xxmaj sandal xxmaj castle and xxmaj wakefield 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup rutland and his xxup tutor 

▁ xxup rutland . xxmaj ah , whither shall i fly to scape their hands ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , tutor , look where bloody xxmaj clifford comes ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clifford and soldiers 

▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj chaplain , away ! xxmaj thy priesthood saves thy life . 
▁ xxmaj as for the brat of this accursed duke , 
▁ xxmaj whose father slew my father , he shall die . 
▁ xxup tutor . xxmaj and xxup i , my lord , will bear him company . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj soldiers , away with him ! 
▁ xxup tutor . xxmaj ah , xxmaj clifford , murder not this innocent child , 
▁ xxmaj lest thou be hated both of xxmaj god and man . 
▁ xxmaj exit , forced off by soldiers 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj how now , is he dead already ? xxmaj or is it fear 
▁ xxmaj that makes him close his eyes ? xxmaj i 'll open them . 
▁ xxup rutland . xxmaj so looks the pent - up lion o'er the wretch 
▁ xxmaj that trembles under his devouring paws ; 
▁ xxmaj and so he walks , insulting o'er his prey , 
▁ xxmaj and so he comes , to rend his limbs asunder . 
▁ xxmaj ah , gentle xxmaj clifford , kill me with thy sword , 
▁ xxmaj and not with such a cruel threat'ning look ! 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj clifford , hear me speak before i die . 
▁ i am too mean a subject for thy wrath ; 
▁ xxmaj be thou reveng'd on men , and let me live . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj in vain thou speak'st , poor boy ; my father 's blood 
▁ xxmaj hath stopp'd the passage where thy words should enter . 
▁ xxup rutland . xxmaj then let my father 's blood open it again : 
▁ xxmaj he is a man , and , xxmaj clifford , cope with him . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj had i thy brethren here , their lives and thine 
▁ xxmaj were not revenge sufficient for me ; 
▁ xxmaj no , if i digg'd up thy forefathers ' graves 
▁ xxmaj and hung their rotten coffins up in chains , 
▁ xxmaj it could not slake mine ire nor ease my heart . 
▁ xxmaj the sight of any of the house of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj is as a fury to torment my soul ; 
▁ xxmaj and till i root out their accursed line 
▁ xxmaj and leave not one alive , i live in hell . 
▁ xxmaj therefore- 
▁ xxup rutland . xxup o , let me pray before i take my death ! 
▁ xxmaj to thee i pray : sweet xxmaj clifford , pity me . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj such pity as my rapier 's point affords . 
▁ xxup rutland . i never did thee harm ; why wilt thou slay me ? 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj thy father hath . 
▁ xxup rutland . xxmaj but ' twas ere i was born . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast one son ; for his sake pity me , 
▁ xxmaj lest in revenge thereof , sith xxmaj god is just , 
▁ xxmaj he be as miserably slain as xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj ah , let me live in prison all my days ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i give occasion of offence 
▁ xxmaj then let me die , for now thou hast no cause . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj no cause ! 
▁ xxmaj thy father slew my father ; therefore , die . [ stabs him ] 
▁ xxup rutland . xxmaj di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae ! [ dies ] 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj plantagenet , i come , xxmaj plantagenet ; 
▁ xxmaj and this thy son 's blood cleaving to my blade 
▁ xxmaj shall rust upon my weapon , till thy blood , 
▁ xxmaj congeal'd with this , do make me wipe off both . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup york 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj the army of the xxmaj queen hath got the field . 
▁ xxmaj my uncles both are slain in rescuing me ; 
▁ xxmaj and all my followers to the eager foe 
▁ xxmaj turn back and fly , like ships before the wind , 
▁ xxmaj or lambs pursu'd by hunger - starved wolves . 
▁ xxmaj my sons- xxmaj god knows what hath bechanced them ; 
▁ xxmaj but this i know- they have demean'd themselves 
▁ xxmaj like men born to renown by life or death . 
▁ xxmaj three times did xxmaj richard make a lane to me , 
▁ xxmaj and thrice cried ' courage , father ! fight it out . ' 
▁ xxmaj and full as oft came xxmaj edward to my side 
▁ xxmaj with purple falchion , painted to the hilt 
▁ xxmaj in blood of those that had encount'red him . 
▁ xxmaj and when the hardiest warriors did retire , 
▁ xxmaj richard cried ' charge , and give no foot of ground ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and cried ' a crown , or else a glorious tomb ! 
▁ a sceptre , or an earthly sepulchre ! ' 
▁ xxmaj with this we charg'd again ; but out alas ! 
▁ xxmaj we bodg'd again ; as i have seen a swan 
▁ xxmaj with bootless labour swim against the tide 
▁ xxmaj and spend her strength with over - matching waves . 
▁ [ a short alarum within ] 
▁ xxmaj ah , hark ! xxmaj the fatal followers do pursue , 
▁ xxmaj and i am faint and can not fly their fury ; 
▁ xxmaj and were i strong , i would not shun their fury . 
▁ xxmaj the sands are numb'red that make up my life ; 
▁ xxmaj here must i stay , and here my life must end . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup margaret , xxup clifford , xxup northumberland , 
▁ the xxup prince xxup of xxup wales , and soldiers 

▁ xxmaj come , bloody xxmaj clifford , rough xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ i dare your quenchless fury to more rage ; 
▁ i am your butt , and i abide your shot . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj yield to our mercy , proud xxmaj plantagenet . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj ay , to such mercy as his ruthless arm 
▁ xxmaj with downright payment show'd unto my father . 
▁ xxmaj now xxmaj phaethon hath tumbled from his car , 
▁ xxmaj and made an evening at the noontide prick . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj my ashes , as the phoenix , may bring forth 
▁ a bird that will revenge upon you all ; 
▁ xxmaj and in that hope i throw mine eyes to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj scorning whate'er you can afflict me with . 
▁ xxmaj why come you not ? xxmaj what ! multitudes , and fear ? 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj so cowards fight when they can fly no further ; 
▁ xxmaj so doves do peck the falcon 's piercing talons ; 
▁ xxmaj so desperate thieves , all hopeless of their lives , 
▁ xxmaj breathe out invectives ' gainst the officers . 
▁ xxup york . o xxmaj clifford , but bethink thee once again , 
▁ xxmaj and in thy thought o'errun my former time ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if thou canst for blushing , view this face , 
▁ xxmaj and bite thy tongue that slanders him with cowardice 
▁ xxmaj whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this ! 
▁ xxup clifford . i will not bandy with thee word for word , 
▁ xxmaj but buckler with thee blows , twice two for one . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj hold , valiant xxmaj clifford ; for a thousand causes 
▁ i would prolong awhile the traitor 's life . 
▁ xxmaj wrath makes him deaf ; speak thou , xxmaj northumberland . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj hold , xxmaj clifford ! do not honour him so much 
▁ xxmaj to prick thy finger , though to wound his heart . 
▁ xxmaj what valour were it , when a cur doth grin , 
▁ xxmaj for one to thrust his hand between his teeth , 
▁ xxmaj when he might spurn him with his foot away ? 
▁ xxmaj it is war 's prize to take all vantages ; 
▁ xxmaj and ten to one is no impeach of valour . 
▁ [ they lay hands on xxup york , who struggles ] 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj ay , ay , so strives the woodcock with the gin . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj so doth the cony struggle in the net . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj so triumph thieves upon their conquer'd booty ; 
▁ xxmaj so true men yield , with robbers so o'er - match'd . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj what would your xxmaj grace have done unto him now ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj brave warriors , xxmaj clifford and xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj come , make him stand upon this molehill here 
▁ xxmaj that raught at mountains with outstretched arms , 
▁ xxmaj yet parted but the shadow with his hand . 
▁ xxmaj what , was it you that would be xxmaj england 's king ? 
▁ xxmaj was't you that revell'd in our parliament 
▁ xxmaj and made a preachment of your high descent ? 
▁ xxmaj where are your mess of sons to back you now ? 
▁ xxmaj the wanton xxmaj edward and the lusty xxmaj george ? 
▁ xxmaj and where 's that valiant crook - back prodigy , 
▁ xxmaj dicky your boy , that with his grumbling voice 
▁ xxmaj was wo nt to cheer his dad in mutinies ? 
▁ xxmaj or , with the rest , where is your darling xxmaj rutland ? 
▁ xxmaj look , xxmaj york : i stain'd this napkin with the blood 
▁ xxmaj that valiant xxmaj clifford with his rapier 's point 
▁ xxmaj made issue from the bosom of the boy ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thine eyes can water for his death , 
▁ i give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal . 
▁ xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj york ! but that i hate thee deadly , 
▁ i should lament thy miserable state . 
▁ i prithee grieve to make me merry , xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj what , hath thy fiery heart so parch'd thine entrails 
▁ xxmaj that not a tear can fall for xxmaj rutland 's death ? 
▁ xxmaj why art thou patient , man ? xxmaj thou shouldst be mad ; 
▁ xxmaj and i to make thee mad do mock thee thus . 
▁ xxmaj stamp , rave , and fret , that i may sing and dance . 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst be fee'd , i see , to make me sport ; 
▁ xxmaj york can not speak unless he wear a crown . 
▁ a crown for xxmaj york!-and , lords , bow low to him . 
▁ xxmaj hold you his hands whilst i do set it on . 
▁ [ putting a paper crown on his head ] 
▁ xxmaj ay , marry , sir , now looks he like a king ! 
▁ xxmaj ay , this is he that took xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's chair , 
▁ xxmaj and this is he was his adopted heir . 
▁ xxmaj but how is it that great xxmaj plantagenet 
▁ xxmaj is crown'd so soon and broke his solemn oath ? 
▁ xxmaj as i bethink me , you should not be xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj till our xxmaj king xxmaj henry had shook hands with death . 
▁ xxmaj and will you pale your head in xxmaj henry 's glory , 
▁ xxmaj and rob his temples of the diadem , 
▁ xxmaj now in his life , against your holy oath ? 
▁ xxup o , ' tis a fault too too 
▁ xxmaj off with the crown and with the crown his head ; 
▁ xxmaj and , whilst we breathe , take time to do him dead . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj that is my office , for my father 's sake . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj nay , stay ; let 's hear the orisons he makes . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj she - wolf of xxmaj france , but worse than wolves of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj whose tongue more poisons than the adder 's tooth ! 
▁ xxmaj how ill - beseeming is it in thy sex 
▁ xxmaj to triumph like an xxmaj amazonian trull 
▁ xxmaj upon their woes whom fortune captivates ! 
▁ xxmaj but that thy face is visard - like , unchanging , 
▁ xxmaj made impudent with use of evil deeds , 
▁ i would assay , proud queen , to make thee blush . 
▁ xxmaj to tell thee whence thou cam'st , of whom deriv'd , 
▁ xxmaj were shame enough to shame thee , wert thou not shameless . 
▁ xxmaj thy father bears the type of xxmaj king of xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj of both the xxmaj sicils and xxmaj jerusalem , 
▁ xxmaj yet not so wealthy as an xxmaj english yeoman . 
▁ xxmaj hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult ? 
▁ xxmaj it needs not , nor it boots thee not , proud queen ; 
▁ xxmaj unless the adage must be verified , 
▁ xxmaj that beggars mounted run their horse to death . 
▁ ' tis beauty that doth oft make women proud ; 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj god xxmaj he knows , thy share thereof is small . 
▁ ' tis virtue that doth make them most admir'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the contrary doth make thee wond'red at . 
▁ ' tis government that makes them seem divine ; 
▁ xxmaj the want thereof makes thee abominable . 
▁ xxmaj thou art as opposite to every good 
▁ xxmaj as the xxmaj antipodes are unto us , 
▁ xxmaj or as the south to the septentrion . 
▁ o tiger 's heart wrapp'd in a woman 's hide ! 
▁ xxmaj how couldst thou drain the life - blood of the child , 
▁ xxmaj to bid the father wipe his eyes withal , 
▁ xxmaj and yet be seen to bear a woman 's face ? 
▁ xxmaj women are soft , mild , pitiful , and flexible : 
▁ xxmaj thou stern , obdurate , flinty , rough , remorseless . 
▁ xxmaj bid'st thou me rage ? xxmaj why , now thou hast thy wish ; 
▁ xxmaj wouldst have me weep ? xxmaj why , now thou hast thy will ; 
▁ xxmaj for raging wind blows up incessant showers , 
▁ xxmaj and when the rage allays , the rain begins . 
▁ xxmaj these tears are my sweet xxmaj rutland 's obsequies ; 
▁ xxmaj and every drop cries vengeance for his death 
▁ ' gainst thee , fell xxmaj clifford , and thee , false xxmaj frenchwoman . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj beshrew me , but his passions move me so 
▁ xxmaj that hardly can i check my eyes from tears . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj that face of his the hungry cannibals 
▁ xxmaj would not have touch'd , would not have stain'd with blood ; 
▁ xxmaj but you are more inhuman , more inexorable- 
▁ xxup o , ten times more- than tigers of xxmaj hyrcania . 
▁ xxmaj see , ruthless queen , a hapless father 's tears . 
▁ xxmaj this cloth thou dipp'dst in blood of my sweet boy , 
▁ xxmaj and i with tears do wash the blood away . 
▁ xxmaj keep thou the napkin , and go boast of this ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou tell'st the heavy story right , 
▁ xxmaj upon my soul , the hearers will shed tears ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , even my foes will shed fast - falling tears 
▁ xxmaj and say ' alas , it was a piteous deed ! ' 
▁ xxmaj there , take the crown , and with the crown my curse ; 
▁ xxmaj and in thy need such comfort come to thee 
▁ xxmaj as now i reap at thy too cruel hand ! 
▁ xxmaj hard - hearted xxmaj clifford , take me from the world ; 
▁ xxmaj my soul to heaven , my blood upon your heads ! 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj had he been slaughter - man to all my kin , 
▁ i should not for my life but weep with him , 
▁ xxmaj to see how inly sorrow gripes his soul . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj what , weeping - ripe , my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland ? 
▁ xxmaj think but upon the wrong he did us all , 
▁ xxmaj and that will quickly dry thy melting tears . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj here 's for my oath , here 's for my father 's death . 
▁ [ stabbing him ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj and here 's to right our gentle - hearted king . 
▁ [ stabbing him ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj open xxmaj thy gate of mercy , gracious xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxmaj my soul flies through these wounds to seek out xxmaj thee . 
▁ [ dies ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj off with his head , and set it on xxmaj york gates ; 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj york may overlook the town of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a plain near xxmaj mortimer 's xxmaj cross in xxmaj herefordshire 

 a march . xxmaj enter xxup edward , xxup richard , and their power 

▁ xxup edward . i wonder how our princely father scap'd , 
▁ xxmaj or whether he be scap'd away or no 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj clifford 's and xxmaj northumberland 's pursuit . 
▁ xxmaj had he been ta'en , we should have heard the news ; 
▁ xxmaj had he been slain , we should have heard the news ; 
▁ xxmaj or had he scap'd , methinks we should have heard 
▁ xxmaj the happy tidings of his good escape . 
▁ xxmaj how fares my brother ? xxmaj why is he so sad ? 
▁ xxup richard . i can not joy until i be resolv'd 
▁ xxmaj where our right valiant father is become . 
▁ i saw him in the battle range about , 
▁ xxmaj and watch'd him how he singled xxmaj clifford forth . 
▁ xxmaj methought he bore him in the thickest troop 
▁ xxmaj as doth a lion in a herd of neat ; 
▁ xxmaj or as a bear , encompass'd round with dogs , 
▁ xxmaj who having pinch'd a few and made them cry , 
▁ xxmaj the rest stand all aloof and bark at him . 
▁ xxmaj so far'd our father with his enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj so fled his enemies my warlike father . 
▁ xxmaj methinks ' tis prize enough to be his son . 
▁ xxmaj see how the morning opes her golden gates 
▁ xxmaj and takes her farewell of the glorious sun . 
▁ xxmaj how well resembles it the prime of youth , 
▁ xxmaj trimm'd like a younker prancing to his love ! 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj dazzle mine eyes , or do i see three suns ? 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj three glorious suns , each one a perfect sun ; 
▁ xxmaj not separated with the racking clouds , 
▁ xxmaj but sever'd in a pale clear - shining sky . 
▁ xxmaj see , see ! they join , embrace , and seem to kiss , 
▁ xxmaj as if they vow'd some league inviolable . 
▁ xxmaj now are they but one lamp , one light , one sun . 
▁ xxmaj in this the heaven figures some event . 
▁ xxup edward . ' tis wondrous strange , the like yet never heard of . 
▁ i think it cites us , brother , to the field , 
▁ xxmaj that we , the sons of brave xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj each one already blazing by our meeds , 
▁ xxmaj should notwithstanding join our lights together 
▁ xxmaj and overshine the earth , as this the world . 
▁ xxmaj whate'er it bodes , henceforward will i bear 
▁ xxmaj upon my target three fair shining suns . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj nay , bear three daughters- by your leave i speak it , 
▁ xxmaj you love the breeder better than the male . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger , blowing 

▁ xxmaj but what art thou , whose heavy looks foretell 
▁ xxmaj some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj ah , one that was a woeful looker - on 
▁ xxmaj when as the noble xxmaj duke of xxmaj york was slain , 
▁ xxmaj your princely father and my loving lord ! 
▁ xxup edward . xxup o , speak no more ! for i have heard too much . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj say how he died , for i will hear it all . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj environed he was with many foes , 
▁ xxmaj and stood against them as the hope of xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj greeks that would have ent'red xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj hercules himself must yield to odds ; 
▁ xxmaj and many strokes , though with a little axe , 
▁ xxmaj hews down and fells the hardest - timber'd oak .