xxbos xxmaj by many hands your father was subdu'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but only slaught'red by the ireful arm 
▁ xxmaj of unrelenting xxmaj clifford and the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj who crown'd the gracious xxmaj duke in high despite , 
▁ xxmaj laugh'd in his face ; and when with grief he wept , 
▁ xxmaj the ruthless xxmaj queen gave him to dry his cheeks 
▁ a napkin steeped in the harmless blood 
▁ xxmaj of sweet young xxmaj rutland , by rough xxmaj clifford slain ; 
▁ xxmaj and after many scorns , many foul taunts , 
▁ xxmaj they took his head , and on the gates of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj they set the same ; and there it doth remain , 
▁ xxmaj the saddest spectacle that e'er i view'd . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj sweet xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , our prop to lean upon , 
▁ xxmaj now thou art gone , we have no staff , no stay . 
▁ o xxmaj clifford , boist'rous xxmaj clifford , thou hast slain 
▁ xxmaj the flow'r of xxmaj europe for his chivalry ; 
▁ xxmaj and treacherously hast thou vanquish'd him , 
▁ xxmaj for hand to hand he would have vanquish'd thee . 
▁ xxmaj now my soul 's palace is become a prison . 
▁ xxmaj ah , would she break from hence , that this my body 
▁ xxmaj might in the ground be closed up in rest ! 
▁ xxmaj for never henceforth shall i joy again ; 
▁ xxmaj never , o never , shall i see more joy . 
▁ xxup richard . i can not weep , for all my body 's moisture 
▁ xxmaj scarce serves to quench my furnace - burning heart ; 
▁ xxmaj nor can my tongue unload my heart 's great burden , 
▁ xxmaj for self - same wind that i should speak withal 
▁ xxmaj is kindling coals that fires all my breast , 
▁ xxmaj and burns me up with flames that tears would quench . 
▁ xxmaj to weep is to make less the depth of grief . 
▁ xxmaj tears then for babes ; blows and revenge for me ! 
▁ xxmaj richard , i bear thy name ; xxmaj i 'll venge thy death , 
▁ xxmaj or die renowned by attempting it . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj his name that valiant duke hath left with thee ; 
▁ xxmaj his dukedom and his chair with me is left . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj nay , if thou be that princely eagle 's bird , 
▁ xxmaj show thy descent by gazing ' gainst the sun ; 
▁ xxmaj for chair and dukedom , throne and kingdom , say : 
▁ xxmaj either that is thine , or else thou wert not his . 

▁ xxmaj march . xxmaj enter xxup warwick , xxup montague , and their army 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj how now , fair lords ! xxmaj what fare ? xxmaj what news abroad ? 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj great xxmaj lord of xxmaj warwick , if we should recount 
▁ xxmaj our baleful news and at each word 's deliverance 
▁ xxmaj stab poinards in our flesh till all were told , 
▁ xxmaj the words would add more anguish than the wounds . 
▁ o valiant lord , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york is slain ! 
▁ xxup edward . o xxmaj warwick , xxmaj warwick ! that xxmaj plantagenet 
▁ xxmaj which held thee dearly as his soul 's redemption 
▁ xxmaj is by the stern xxmaj lord xxmaj clifford done to death . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ten days ago i drown'd these news in tears ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , to add more measure to your woes , 
▁ i come to tell you things sith then befall'n . 
▁ xxmaj after the bloody fray at xxmaj wakefield fought , 
▁ xxmaj where your brave father breath'd his latest gasp , 
▁ xxmaj tidings , as swiftly as the posts could run , 
▁ xxmaj were brought me of your loss and his depart . 
▁ xxup i , then in xxmaj london , keeper of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj muster'd my soldiers , gathered flocks of friends , 
▁ xxmaj and very well appointed , as i thought , 
▁ xxmaj march'd toward xxmaj saint xxmaj albans to intercept the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj bearing the xxmaj king in my behalf along ; 
▁ xxmaj for by my scouts i was advertised 
▁ xxmaj that she was coming with a full intent 
▁ xxmaj to dash our late decree in parliament 
▁ xxmaj touching xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's oath and your succession . 
▁ xxmaj short tale to make- we at xxmaj saint xxmaj albans met , 
▁ xxmaj our battles join'd , and both sides fiercely fought ; 
▁ xxmaj but whether ' twas the coldness of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj who look'd full gently on his warlike queen , 
▁ xxmaj that robb'd my soldiers of their heated spleen , 
▁ xxmaj or whether ' twas report of her success , 
▁ xxmaj or more than common fear of xxmaj clifford 's rigour , 
▁ xxmaj who thunders to his captives blood and death , 
▁ i can not judge ; but , to conclude with truth , 
▁ xxmaj their weapons like to lightning came and went : 
▁ xxmaj our soldiers ' , like the night - owl 's lazy flight 
▁ xxmaj or like an idle thresher with a flail , 
▁ xxmaj fell gently down , as if they struck their friends . 
▁ i cheer'd them up with justice of our cause , 
▁ xxmaj with promise of high pay and great rewards , 
▁ xxmaj but all in vain ; they had no heart to fight , 
▁ xxmaj and we in them no hope to win the day ; 
▁ xxmaj so that we fled : the xxmaj king unto the xxmaj queen ; 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj george your brother , xxmaj norfolk , and myself , 
▁ xxmaj in haste post - haste are come to join with you ; 
▁ xxmaj for in the marches here we heard you were 
▁ xxmaj making another head to fight again . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj where is the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , gentle xxmaj warwick ? 
▁ xxmaj and when came xxmaj george from xxmaj burgundy to xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj some six miles off the xxmaj duke is with the soldiers ; 
▁ xxmaj and for your brother , he was lately sent 
▁ xxmaj from your kind aunt , xxmaj duchess of xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj with aid of soldiers to this needful war . 
▁ xxup richard . ' twas odds , belike , when valiant xxmaj warwick fled . 
▁ xxmaj oft have i heard his praises in pursuit , 
▁ xxmaj but ne'er till now his scandal of retire . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj nor now my scandal , xxmaj richard , dost thou hear ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine 
▁ xxmaj can pluck the diadem from faint xxmaj henry 's head 
▁ xxmaj and wring the awful sceptre from his fist , 
▁ xxmaj were he as famous and as bold in war 
▁ xxmaj as he is fam'd for mildness , peace , and prayer . 
▁ xxup richard . i know it well , xxmaj lord xxmaj warwick ; blame me not . 
▁ ' tis love i bear thy glories makes me speak . 
▁ xxmaj but in this troublous time what 's to be done ? 
▁ xxmaj shall we go throw away our coats of steel 
▁ xxmaj and wrap our bodies in black mourning - gowns , 
▁ xxmaj numbering our ave - maries with our beads ? 
▁ xxmaj or shall we on the helmets of our foes 
▁ xxmaj tell our devotion with revengeful arms ? 
▁ xxmaj if for the last , say ' ay , ' and to it , lords . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj why , therefore xxmaj warwick came to seek you out ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore comes my brother xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj attend me , lords . xxmaj the proud insulting xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj clifford and the haught xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj and of their feather many moe proud birds , 
▁ xxmaj have wrought the easy - melting xxmaj king like wax . 
▁ xxmaj he swore consent to your succession , 
▁ xxmaj his oath enrolled in the parliament ; 
▁ xxmaj and now to xxmaj london all the crew are gone 
▁ xxmaj to frustrate both his oath and what beside 
▁ xxmaj may make against the house of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxmaj their power , i think , is thirty thousand strong . 
▁ xxmaj now if the help of xxmaj norfolk and myself , 
▁ xxmaj with all the friends that thou , brave xxmaj earl of xxmaj march , 
▁ xxmaj amongst the loving xxmaj welshmen canst procure , 
▁ xxmaj will but amount to five and twenty thousand , 
▁ xxmaj why , xxmaj via ! to xxmaj london will we march amain , 
▁ xxmaj and once again bestride our foaming steeds , 
▁ xxmaj and once again cry ' charge upon our foes ! ' 
▁ xxmaj but never once again turn back and fly . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj ay , now methinks i hear great xxmaj warwick speak . 
▁ xxmaj ne'er may he live to see a sunshine day 
▁ xxmaj that cries ' retire ! ' if xxmaj warwick bid him stay . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj lord xxmaj warwick , on thy shoulder will i lean ; 
▁ xxmaj and when thou fail'st- as xxmaj god forbid the hour!- 
▁ xxmaj must xxmaj edward fall , which peril heaven forfend . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj no longer xxmaj earl of xxmaj march , but xxmaj duke of xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj the next degree is xxmaj england 's royal throne , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj king of xxmaj england shalt thou be proclaim'd 
▁ xxmaj in every borough as we pass along ; 
▁ xxmaj and he that throws not up his cap for joy 
▁ xxmaj shall for the fault make forfeit of his head . 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj edward , valiant xxmaj richard , xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj stay we no longer , dreaming of renown , 
▁ xxmaj but sound the trumpets and about our task . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj then , xxmaj clifford , were thy heart as hard as steel , 
▁ xxmaj as thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds , 
▁ i come to pierce it or to give thee mine . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj then strike up drums . xxmaj god and xxmaj saint xxmaj george for us ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj how now ! what news ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk sends you word by me 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen is coming with a puissant host , 
▁ xxmaj and craves your company for speedy counsel . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj why , then it sorts ; brave warriors , let 's away . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj york 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry , xxup queen xxup margaret , the xxup prince xxup of xxup wales , xxup clifford , 
 xxup northumberland , with drum and trumpets 

▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj welcome , my lord , to this brave town of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj yonder 's the head of that arch - enemy 
▁ xxmaj that sought to be encompass'd with your crown . 
▁ xxmaj doth not the object cheer your heart , my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ay , as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck- 
▁ xxmaj to see this sight , it irks my very soul . 
▁ xxmaj withhold revenge , dear xxmaj god ; ' tis not my fault , 
▁ xxmaj nor wittingly have i infring'd my vow . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj my gracious liege , this too much lenity 
▁ xxmaj and harmful pity must be laid aside . 
▁ xxmaj to whom do lions cast their gentle looks ? 
▁ xxmaj not to the beast that would usurp their den . 
▁ xxmaj whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick ? 
▁ xxmaj not his that spoils her young before her face . 
▁ xxmaj who scapes the lurking serpent 's mortal sting ? 
▁ xxmaj not he that sets his foot upon her back , 
▁ xxmaj the smallest worm will turn , being trodden on , 
▁ xxmaj and doves will peck in safeguard of their brood . 
▁ xxmaj ambitious xxmaj york did level at thy crown , 
▁ xxmaj thou smiling while he knit his angry brows . 
▁ xxmaj he , but a xxmaj duke , would have his son a king , 
▁ xxmaj and raise his issue like a loving sire : 
▁ xxmaj thou , being a king , bless'd with a goodly son , 
▁ xxmaj didst yield consent to disinherit him , 
▁ xxmaj which argued thee a most unloving father . 
▁ xxmaj unreasonable creatures feed their young ; 
▁ xxmaj and though man 's face be fearful to their eyes , 
▁ xxmaj yet , in protection of their tender ones , 
▁ xxmaj who hath not seen them- even with those wings 
▁ xxmaj which sometime they have us'd with fearful flight- 
▁ xxmaj make war with him that climb'd unto their nest , 
▁ xxmaj offering their own lives in their young 's defence 
▁ xxmaj for shame , my liege , make them your precedent ! 
▁ xxmaj were it not pity that this goodly boy 
▁ xxmaj should lose his birthright by his father 's fault , 
▁ xxmaj and long hereafter say unto his child 
▁ ' what my great - grandfather and grandsire got 
▁ xxmaj my careless father fondly gave away ' ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , what a shame were this ! xxmaj look on the boy ; 
▁ xxmaj and let his manly face , which promiseth 
▁ xxmaj successful fortune , steel thy melting heart 
▁ xxmaj to hold thine own and leave thine own with him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj full well hath xxmaj clifford play'd the orator , 
▁ xxmaj inferring arguments of mighty force . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj clifford , tell me , didst thou never hear 
▁ xxmaj that things ill got had ever bad success ? 
▁ xxmaj and happy always was it for that son 
▁ xxmaj whose father for his hoarding went to hell ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave my son my virtuous deeds behind ; 
▁ xxmaj and would my father had left me no more ! 
▁ xxmaj for all the rest is held at such a rate 
▁ xxmaj as brings a thousand - fold more care to keep 
▁ xxmaj than in possession any jot of pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj ah , cousin xxmaj york ! would thy best friends did know 
▁ xxmaj how it doth grieve me that thy head is here ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj my lord , cheer up your spirits ; our foes are nigh , 
▁ xxmaj and this soft courage makes your followers faint . 
▁ xxmaj you promis'd knighthood to our forward son : 
▁ xxmaj unsheathe your sword and dub him presently . 
▁ xxmaj edward , kneel down . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj edward xxmaj plantagenet , arise a knight ; 
▁ xxmaj and learn this lesson : xxmaj draw thy sword in right . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj my gracious father , by your kingly leave , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll draw it as apparent to the crown , 
▁ xxmaj and in that quarrel use it to the death . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj why , that is spoken like a toward prince . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj royal commanders , be in readiness ; 
▁ xxmaj for with a band of thirty thousand men 
▁ xxmaj comes xxmaj warwick , backing of the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj and in the towns , as they do march along , 
▁ xxmaj proclaims him king , and many fly to him . 
▁ xxmaj darraign your battle , for they are at hand . 
▁ xxup clifford . i would your xxmaj highness would depart the field : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen hath best success when you are absent . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ay , good my lord , and leave us to our fortune . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , that 's my fortune too ; therefore xxmaj i 'll stay . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj be it with resolution , then , to fight . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj my royal father , cheer these noble lords , 
▁ xxmaj and hearten those that fight in your defence . 
▁ xxmaj unsheathe your sword , good father ; cry ' saint xxmaj george ! ' 

▁ xxmaj march . xxmaj enter xxup edward , xxup george , xxup richard , xxup warwick , 
▁ xxup norfolk , xxup montague , and soldiers 

▁ xxup edward . xxmaj now , perjur'd xxmaj henry , wilt thou kneel for grace 
▁ xxmaj and set thy diadem upon my head , 
▁ xxmaj or bide the mortal fortune of the field ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj go rate thy minions , proud insulting boy . 
▁ xxmaj becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms 
▁ xxmaj before thy sovereign and thy lawful king ? 
▁ xxup edward . i am his king , and he should bow his knee . 
▁ i was adopted heir by his consent : 
▁ xxmaj since when , his oath is broke ; for , as i hear , 
▁ xxmaj you that are xxmaj king , though he do wear the crown , 
▁ xxmaj have caus'd him by new act of parliament 
▁ xxmaj to blot out me and put his own son in . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj and reason too : 
▁ xxmaj who should succeed the father but the son ? 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj are you there , butcher ? xxup o , i can not speak ! 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj ay , crook - back , here i stand to answer thee , 
▁ xxmaj or any he , the proudest of thy sort . 
▁ xxup richard . ' twas you that kill'd young xxmaj rutland , was it not ? 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj ay , and old xxmaj york , and yet not satisfied . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , lords , give signal to the fight . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what say'st thou , xxmaj henry ? xxmaj wilt thou yield the crown ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj why , how now , long - tongu'd xxmaj warwick ! xxmaj dare you speak ? 
▁ xxmaj when you and i met at xxmaj saint xxmaj albans last 
▁ xxmaj your legs did better service than your hands . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj then ' twas my turn to fly , and now ' tis thine . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj you said so much before , and yet you fled . 
▁ xxup warwick . ' twas not your valour , xxmaj clifford , drove me thence . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj no , nor your manhood that durst make you stay . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj northumberland , i hold thee reverently . 
▁ xxmaj break off the parley ; for scarce i can refrain 
▁ xxmaj the execution of my big - swol'n heart 
▁ xxmaj upon that xxmaj clifford , that cruel child - killer . 
▁ xxup clifford . i slew thy father ; call'st thou him a child ? 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj ay , like a dastard and a treacherous coward , 
▁ xxmaj as thou didst kill our tender brother xxmaj rutland ; 
▁ xxmaj but ere sunset xxmaj i 'll make thee curse the deed . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj have done with words , my lords , and hear me speak . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj defy them then , or else hold close thy lips . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i prithee give no limits to my tongue : 
▁ i am a king , and privileg'd to speak . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj my liege , the wound that bred this meeting here 
▁ xxmaj can not be cur'd by words ; therefore be still . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj then , executioner , unsheathe thy sword . 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj him that made us all , i am resolv'd 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj clifford 's manhood lies upon his tongue . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj say , xxmaj henry , shall i have my right , or no ? 
▁ a thousand men have broke their fasts to - day 
▁ xxmaj that ne'er shall dine unless thou yield the crown . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj if thou deny , their blood upon thy head ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj york in justice puts his armour on . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj if that be right which xxmaj warwick says is right , 
▁ xxmaj there is no wrong , but every thing is right . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj whoever got thee , there thy mother stands ; 
▁ xxmaj for well i wot thou hast thy mother 's tongue . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj but thou art neither like thy sire nor dam ; 
▁ xxmaj but like a foul misshapen stigmatic , 
▁ xxmaj mark'd by the destinies to be avoided , 
▁ xxmaj as venom toads or lizards ' dreadful stings . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj iron of xxmaj naples hid with xxmaj english gilt , 
▁ xxmaj whose father bears the title of a king- 
▁ xxmaj as if a channel should be call'd the sea- 
▁ xxmaj sham'st thou not , knowing whence thou art extraught , 
▁ xxmaj to let thy tongue detect thy base - born heart ? 
▁ xxup edward . a wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns 
▁ xxmaj to make this shameless callet know herself . 
▁ xxmaj helen of xxmaj greece was fairer far than thou , 
▁ xxmaj although thy husband may be xxmaj menelaus ; 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er was xxmaj agamemmon 's brother wrong'd 
▁ xxmaj by that false woman as this king by thee . 
▁ xxmaj his father revell'd in the heart of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and tam'd the xxmaj king , and made the xxmaj dauphin stoop ; 
▁ xxmaj and had he match'd according to his state , 
▁ xxmaj he might have kept that glory to this day ; 
▁ xxmaj but when he took a beggar to his bed 
▁ xxmaj and grac'd thy poor sire with his bridal day , 
▁ xxmaj even then that sunshine brew'd a show'r for him 
▁ xxmaj that wash'd his father 's fortunes forth of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj and heap'd sedition on his crown at home . 
▁ xxmaj for what hath broach'd this tumult but thy pride ? 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou been meek , our title still had slept ; 
▁ xxmaj and we , in pity of the gentle xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj had slipp'd our claim until another age . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj but when we saw our sunshine made thy spring , 
▁ xxmaj and that thy summer bred us no increase , 
▁ xxmaj we set the axe to thy usurping root ; 
▁ xxmaj and though the edge hath something hit ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj yet know thou , since we have begun to strike , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll never leave till we have hewn thee down , 
▁ xxmaj or bath'd thy growing with our heated bloods . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj and in this resolution i defy thee ; 
▁ xxmaj not willing any longer conference , 
▁ xxmaj since thou deniest the gentle xxmaj king to speak . 
▁ xxmaj sound trumpets ; let our bloody colours wave , 
▁ xxmaj and either victory or else a grave ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj stay , xxmaj edward . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj no , wrangling woman , we 'll no longer stay ; 
▁ xxmaj these words will cost ten thousand lives this day . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a field of battle between xxmaj towton and xxmaj saxton , in xxmaj yorkshire 

 xxmaj alarum ; excursions . xxmaj enter xxup warwick 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj forspent with toil , as runners with a race , 
▁ i lay me down a little while to breathe ; 
▁ xxmaj for strokes receiv'd and many blows repaid 
▁ xxmaj have robb'd my strong - knit sinews of their strength , 
▁ xxmaj and spite of spite needs must i rest awhile . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup edward , running 

▁ xxup edward . xxmaj smile , gentle heaven , or strike , ungentle death ; 
▁ xxmaj for this world frowns , and xxmaj edward 's sun is clouded . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj how now , my lord . xxmaj what hap ? xxmaj what hope of good ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup george 

▁ xxup george . xxmaj our hap is lost , our hope but sad despair ; 
▁ xxmaj our ranks are broke , and ruin follows us . 
▁ xxmaj what counsel give you ? xxmaj whither shall we fly ? 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj bootless is flight : they follow us with wings ; 
▁ xxmaj and weak we are , and can not shun pursuit . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup richard 

▁ xxup richard . xxmaj ah , xxmaj warwick , why hast thou withdrawn thyself ? 
▁ xxmaj thy brother 's blood the thirsty earth hath drunk , 
▁ xxmaj broach'd with the steely point of xxmaj clifford 's lance ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the very pangs of death he cried , 
▁ xxmaj like to a dismal clangor heard from far , 
▁ ' warwick , revenge ! xxmaj brother , revenge my death . ' 
▁ xxmaj so , underneath the belly of their steeds , 
▁ xxmaj that stain'd their fetlocks in his smoking blood , 
▁ xxmaj the noble gentleman gave up the ghost . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj then let the earth be drunken with our blood . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll kill my horse , because i will not fly . 
▁ xxmaj why stand we like soft - hearted women here , 
▁ xxmaj wailing our losses , whiles the foe doth rage , 
▁ xxmaj and look upon , as if the tragedy 
▁ xxmaj were play'd in jest by counterfeiting actors ? 
▁ xxmaj here on my knee i vow to xxmaj god above 
▁ xxmaj i 'll never pause again , never stand still , 
▁ xxmaj till either death hath clos'd these eyes of mine 
▁ xxmaj or fortune given me measure of revenge . 
▁ xxup edward . o xxmaj warwick , i do bend my knee with thine , 
▁ xxmaj and in this vow do chain my soul to thine ! 
▁ xxmaj and ere my knee rise from the earth 's cold face 
▁ i throw my hands , mine eyes , my heart to xxmaj thee , 
▁ xxmaj thou setter - up and plucker - down of kings , 
▁ xxmaj beseeching xxmaj thee , if with xxmaj thy will it stands 
▁ xxmaj that to my foes this body must be prey , 
▁ xxmaj yet that xxmaj thy brazen gates of heaven may ope 
▁ xxmaj and give sweet passage to my sinful soul . 
▁ xxmaj now , lords , take leave until we meet again , 
▁ xxmaj where'er it be , in heaven or in earth . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj brother , give me thy hand ; and , gentle xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj let me embrace thee in my weary arms . 
▁ i that did never weep now melt with woe 
▁ xxmaj that winter should cut off our spring - time so . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj away , away ! xxmaj once more , sweet lords , farewell . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj yet let us all together to our troops , 
▁ xxmaj and give them leave to fly that will not stay , 
▁ xxmaj and call them pillars that will stand to us ; 
▁ xxmaj and if we thrive , promise them such rewards 
▁ xxmaj as victors wear at the xxmaj olympian games . 
▁ xxmaj this may plant courage in their quailing breasts , 
▁ xxmaj for yet is hope of life and victory . 
▁ xxmaj forslow no longer ; make we hence amain . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj excursions . xxmaj enter xxup richard and xxup clifford 

▁ xxup richard . xxmaj now , xxmaj clifford , i have singled thee alone . 
▁ xxmaj suppose this arm is for the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj and this for xxmaj rutland ; both bound to revenge , 
▁ xxmaj wert thou environ'd with a brazen wall . 
▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj now , xxmaj richard , i am with thee here alone . 
▁ xxmaj this is the hand that stabbed thy father xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj and this the hand that slew thy brother xxmaj rutland ; 
▁ xxmaj and here 's the heart that triumphs in their death 
▁ xxmaj and cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother 
▁ xxmaj to execute the like upon thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , have at thee ! [ they fight ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup warwick ; xxup clifford flies 

▁ xxup richard . xxmaj nay , xxmaj warwick , single out some other chase ; 
▁ xxmaj for i myself will hunt this wolf to death . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry alone 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj this battle fares like to the morning 's war , 
▁ xxmaj when dying clouds contend with growing light , 
▁ xxmaj what time the shepherd , blowing of his nails , 
▁ xxmaj can neither call it perfect day nor night . 
▁ xxmaj now sways it this way , like a mighty sea 
▁ xxmaj forc'd by the tide to combat with the wind ; 
▁ xxmaj now sways it that way , like the selfsame sea 
▁ xxmaj forc'd to retire by fury of the wind . 
▁ xxmaj sometime the flood prevails , and then the wind ; 
▁ xxmaj now one the better , then another best ; 
▁ xxmaj both tugging to be victors , breast to breast , 
▁ xxmaj yet neither conqueror nor conquered . 
▁ xxmaj so is the equal poise of this fell war . 
▁ xxmaj here on this molehill will i sit me down . 
▁ xxmaj to whom xxmaj god will , there be the victory ! 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj margaret my queen , and xxmaj clifford too , 
▁ xxmaj have chid me from the battle , swearing both 
▁ xxmaj they prosper best of all when i am thence . 
▁ xxmaj would i were dead , if xxmaj god 's good will were so ! 
▁ xxmaj for what is in this world but grief and woe ? 
▁ o xxmaj god ! methinks it were a happy life 
▁ xxmaj to be no better than a homely swain ; 
▁ xxmaj to sit upon a hill , as i do now , 
▁ xxmaj to carve out dials quaintly , point by point , 
▁ xxmaj thereby to see the minutes how they run- 
▁ xxmaj how many makes the hour full complete , 
▁ xxmaj how many hours brings about the day , 
▁ xxmaj how many days will finish up the year , 
▁ xxmaj how many years a mortal man may live . 
▁ xxmaj when this is known , then to divide the times- 
▁ xxmaj so many hours must i tend my flock ; 
▁ xxmaj so many hours must i take my rest ; 
▁ xxmaj so many hours must i contemplate ; 
▁ xxmaj so many hours must i sport myself ; 
▁ xxmaj so many days my ewes have been with young ; 
▁ xxmaj so many weeks ere the poor fools will can ; 
▁ xxmaj so many years ere i shall shear the fleece : 
▁ xxmaj so minutes , hours , days , months , and years , 
▁ xxmaj pass'd over to the end they were created , 
▁ xxmaj would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave . 
▁ xxmaj ah , what a life were this ! how sweet ! how lovely ! 
▁ xxmaj gives not the hawthorn bush a sweeter shade 
▁ xxmaj to shepherds looking on their silly sheep , 
▁ xxmaj than doth a rich embroider'd canopy 
▁ xxmaj to kings that fear their subjects ' treachery ? 
▁ o yes , it doth ; a thousand - fold it doth . 
▁ xxmaj and to conclude : the shepherd 's homely curds , 
▁ xxmaj his cold thin drink out of his leather bottle , 
▁ xxmaj his wonted sleep under a fresh tree 's shade , 
▁ xxmaj all which secure and sweetly he enjoys , 
▁ xxmaj is far beyond a prince 's delicates- 
▁ xxmaj his viands sparkling in a golden cup , 
▁ xxmaj his body couched in a curious bed , 
▁ xxmaj when care , mistrust , and treason waits on him . 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter a son that hath kill'd his xxmaj father , at 
▁ one door ; and a xxup father that hath kill'd his xxmaj son , at 
▁ another door 

▁ xxup son . xxmaj ill blows the wind that profits nobody . 
▁ xxmaj this man whom hand to hand i slew in fight 
▁ xxmaj may be possessed with some store of crowns ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , that haply take them from him now , 
▁ xxmaj may yet ere night yield both my life and them 
▁ xxmaj to some man else , as this dead man doth me . 
▁ xxmaj who 's this ? o xxmaj god ! xxmaj it is my father 's face , 
▁ xxmaj whom in this conflict i unwares have kill'd . 
▁ o heavy times , begetting such events ! 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj london by the xxmaj king was i press'd forth ; 
▁ xxmaj my father , being the xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick 's man , 
▁ xxmaj came on the part of xxmaj york , press'd by his master ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , who at his hands receiv'd my life , 
▁ xxmaj have by my hands of life bereaved him . 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj god , i knew not what i did . 
▁ xxmaj and pardon , father , for i knew not thee . 
▁ xxmaj my tears shall wipe away these bloody marks ; 
▁ xxmaj and no more words till they have flow'd their fill . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . o piteous spectacle ! o bloody times ! 
▁ xxmaj whiles lions war and battle for their dens , 
▁ xxmaj poor harmless lambs abide their enmity . 
▁ xxmaj weep , wretched man ; xxmaj i 'll aid thee tear for tear ; 
▁ xxmaj and let our hearts and eyes , like civil war , 
▁ xxmaj be blind with tears and break o'ercharg'd with grief . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup father , bearing of his xxup son 

▁ xxup father . xxmaj thou that so stoutly hath resisted me , 
▁ xxmaj give me thy gold , if thou hast any gold ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have bought it with an hundred blows . 
▁ xxmaj but let me see . xxmaj is this our foeman 's face ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , no , no , no , no , it is mine only son ! 
▁ xxmaj ah , boy , if any life be left in thee , 
▁ xxmaj throw up thine eye ! xxmaj see , see what show'rs arise , 
▁ xxmaj blown with the windy tempest of my heart 
▁ xxmaj upon thy wounds , that kills mine eye and heart ! 
▁ xxup o , pity , xxmaj god , this miserable age ! 
▁ xxmaj what stratagems , how fell , how butcherly , 
▁ xxmaj erroneous , mutinous , and unnatural , 
▁ xxmaj this deadly quarrel daily doth beget ! 
▁ o boy , thy father gave thee life too soon , 
▁ xxmaj and hath bereft thee of thy life too late ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj woe above woe ! grief more than common grief ! 
▁ o that my death would stay these ruthful deeds ! 
▁ o pity , pity , gentle heaven , pity ! 
▁ xxmaj the red rose and the white are on his face , 
▁ xxmaj the fatal colours of our striving houses : 
▁ xxmaj the one his purple blood right well resembles ; 
▁ xxmaj the other his pale cheeks , methinks , presenteth . 
▁ xxmaj wither one rose , and let the other flourish ! 
▁ xxmaj if you contend , a thousand lives must perish . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj how will my mother for a father 's death 
▁ xxmaj take on with me , and ne'er be satisfied ! 
▁ xxup father . xxmaj how will my wife for slaughter of my son 
▁ xxmaj shed seas of tears , and ne'er be satisfied ! 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj how will the country for these woeful chances 
▁ xxmaj misthink the xxmaj king , and not be satisfied ! 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj was ever son so rued a father 's death ? 
▁ xxup father . xxmaj was ever father so bemoan'd his son ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj was ever king so griev'd for subjects ' woe ? 
▁ xxmaj much is your sorrow ; mine ten times so much . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj i 'll bear thee hence , where i may weep my fill . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the body 
▁ xxup father . xxmaj these arms of mine shall be thy winding - sheet ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart , sweet boy , shall be thy sepulchre , 
▁ xxmaj for from my heart thine image ne'er shall go ; 
▁ xxmaj my sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell ; 
▁ xxmaj and so obsequious will thy father be , 
▁ xxmaj even for the loss of thee , having no more , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj priam was for all his valiant sons . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bear thee hence ; and let them fight that will , 
▁ xxmaj for i have murdered where i should not kill . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the body 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj sad - hearted men , much overgone with care , 
▁ xxmaj here sits a king more woeful than you are . 

▁ xxmaj alarums , excursions . xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup margaret , 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales , and xxup exeter 

▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj fly , father , fly ; for all your friends are fled , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj warwick rages like a chafed bull . 
▁ xxmaj away ! for death doth hold us in pursuit . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj mount you , my lord ; towards xxmaj berwick post amain . 
▁ xxmaj edward and xxmaj richard , like a brace of greyhounds 
▁ xxmaj having the fearful flying hare in sight , 
▁ xxmaj with fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath , 
▁ xxmaj and bloody steel grasp'd in their ireful hands , 
▁ xxmaj are at our backs ; and therefore hence amain . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj away ! for vengeance comes along with them . 
▁ xxmaj nay , stay not to expostulate ; make speed ; 
▁ xxmaj or else come after . xxmaj i 'll away before . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj nay , take me with thee , good sweet xxmaj exeter . 
▁ xxmaj not that i fear to stay , but love to go 
▁ xxmaj whither the xxmaj queen intends . xxmaj forward ; away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 a loud alarum . xxmaj enter xxup clifford , wounded 

▁ xxup clifford . xxmaj here burns my candle out ; ay , here it dies , 
▁ xxmaj which , whiles it lasted , gave xxmaj king xxmaj henry light . 
▁ o xxmaj lancaster , i fear thy overthrow 
▁ xxmaj more than my body 's parting with my soul ! 
▁ xxmaj my love and fear glu'd many friends to thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and , now i fall , thy tough commixture melts , 
▁ xxmaj impairing xxmaj henry , strength'ning misproud xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj the common people swarm like summer flies ; 
▁ xxmaj and whither fly the gnats but to the sun ? 
▁ xxmaj and who shines now but xxmaj henry 's enemies ? 
▁ o xxmaj phoebus , hadst thou never given consent 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj phaethon should check thy fiery steeds , 
▁ xxmaj thy burning car never had scorch'd the earth ! 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj henry , hadst thou sway'd as kings should do , 
▁ xxmaj or as thy father and his father did , 
▁ xxmaj giving no ground unto the house of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj they never then had sprung like summer flies ; 
▁ i and ten thousand in this luckless realm 
▁ xxmaj had left no mourning widows for our death ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace . 
▁ xxmaj for what doth cherish weeds but gentle air ? 
▁ xxmaj and what makes robbers bold but too much lenity ? 
▁ xxmaj bootless are plaints , and cureless are my wounds . 
▁ xxmaj no way to fly , nor strength to hold out flight . 
▁ xxmaj the foe is merciless and will not pity ; 
▁ xxmaj for at their hands i have deserv'd no pity . 
▁ xxmaj the air hath got into my deadly wounds , 
▁ xxmaj and much effuse of blood doth make me faint . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj york and xxmaj richard , xxmaj warwick and the rest ; 
▁ i stabb'd your fathers ' bosoms : split my breast . 
▁ [ he faints ] 

▁ xxmaj alarum and retreat . xxmaj enter xxup edward , xxup george , xxup richard 
▁ xxup montague , xxup warwick , and soldiers 

▁ xxup edward . xxmaj now breathe we , lords . xxmaj good fortune bids us pause 
▁ xxmaj and smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks . 
▁ xxmaj some troops pursue the bloody - minded xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj that led calm xxmaj henry , though he were a king , 
▁ xxmaj as doth a sail , fill'd with a fretting gust , 
▁ xxmaj command an argosy to stern the waves . 
▁ xxmaj but think you , lords , that xxmaj clifford fled with them ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj no , ' tis impossible he should escape ; 
▁ xxmaj for , though before his face i speak the words , 
▁ xxmaj your brother xxmaj richard mark'd him for the grave ; 
▁ xxmaj and , whereso'er he is , he 's surely dead . 
▁ [ clifford groans , and dies ] 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave ? 
▁ a deadly groan , like life and death 's departing . 
▁ xxmaj see who it is . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj and now the battle 's ended , 
▁ xxmaj if friend or foe , let him be gently used . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj revoke that doom of mercy , for ' tis xxmaj clifford ; 
▁ xxmaj who not contented that he lopp'd the branch 
▁ xxmaj in hewing xxmaj rutland when his leaves put forth , 
▁ xxmaj but set his murd'ring knife unto the root 
▁ xxmaj from whence that tender spray did sweetly spring- 
▁ i mean our princely father , xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj from off the gates of xxmaj york fetch down the head , 
▁ xxmaj your father 's head , which xxmaj clifford placed there ; 
▁ xxmaj instead whereof let this supply the room . 
▁ xxmaj measure for measure must be answered . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj bring forth that fatal screech - owl to our house , 
▁ xxmaj that nothing sung but death to us and ours . 
▁ xxmaj now death shall stop his dismal threat'ning sound , 
▁ xxmaj and his ill - boding tongue no more shall speak . 
▁ xxup warwick . i think his understanding is bereft . 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj clifford , dost thou know who speaks to thee ? 
▁ xxmaj dark cloudy death o'ershades his beams of life , 
▁ xxmaj and he nor sees nor hears us what we say . 
▁ xxup richard . xxup o , would he did ! and so , perhaps , he doth . 
▁ ' tis but his policy to counterfeit , 
▁ xxmaj because he would avoid such bitter taunts 
▁ xxmaj which in the time of death he gave our father . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj if so thou think'st , vex him with eager words . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj clifford , ask mercy and obtain no grace . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj clifford , repent in bootless penitence . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj clifford , devise excuses for thy faults . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj while we devise fell tortures for thy faults . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj thou didst love xxmaj york , and i am son to xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj thou pitied'st xxmaj rutland , i will pity thee . 
▁ xxup george . xxmaj where 's xxmaj captain xxmaj margaret , to fence you now ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj they mock thee , xxmaj clifford ; swear as thou wast wo nt . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj what , not an oath ? xxmaj nay , then the world goes hard 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj clifford can not spare his friends an oath . 
▁ i know by that he 's dead ; and by my soul , 
▁ xxmaj if this right hand would buy two hours ' life , 
▁ xxmaj that i in all despite might rail at him , 
▁ xxmaj this hand should chop it off , and with the issuing blood 
▁ xxmaj stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst 
▁ xxmaj york and young xxmaj rutland could not satisfy . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ay , but he 's dead . xxmaj off with the traitor 's head , 
▁ xxmaj and rear it in the place your father 's stands . 
▁ xxmaj and now to xxmaj london with triumphant march , 
▁ xxmaj there to be crowned xxmaj england 's royal xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj from whence shall xxmaj warwick cut the sea to xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and ask the xxmaj lady xxmaj bona for thy queen . 
▁ xxmaj so shalt thou sinew both these lands together ; 
▁ xxmaj and , having xxmaj france thy friend , thou shalt not dread 
▁ xxmaj the scatt'red foe that hopes to rise again ; 
▁ xxmaj for though they can not greatly sting to hurt , 
▁ xxmaj yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears . 
▁ xxmaj first will i see the coronation ; 
▁ xxmaj and then to xxmaj brittany xxmaj i 'll cross the sea 
▁ xxmaj to effect this marriage , so it please my lord . 
▁ xxup edward . xxmaj even as thou wilt , sweet xxmaj warwick , let it be ; 
▁ xxmaj for in thy shoulder do i build my seat , 
▁ xxmaj and never will i undertake the thing 
▁ xxmaj wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting . 
▁ xxmaj richard , i will create thee xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj george , of xxmaj clarence ; xxmaj warwick , as ourself , 
▁ xxmaj shall do and undo as him pleaseth best . 
▁ xxup richard . xxmaj let me be xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence , xxmaj george of xxmaj gloucester ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj gloucester 's dukedom is too ominous . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj tut , that 's a foolish observation . 
▁ xxmaj richard , be xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester . xxmaj now to xxmaj london 
▁ xxmaj to see these honours in possession . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a chase in the north of xxmaj england 

 xxmaj enter two xxup keepers , with cross - bows in their hands 

▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj under this thick - grown brake we 'll shroud ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj for through this laund anon the deer will come ; 
▁ xxmaj and in this covert will we make our stand , 
▁ xxmaj culling the principal of all the deer . 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj i 'll stay above the hill , so both may shoot . 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj that can not be ; the noise of thy cross - bow 
▁ xxmaj will scare the herd , and so my shoot is lost . 
▁ xxmaj here stand we both , and aim we at the best ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for the time shall not seem tedious , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell thee what befell me on a day 
▁ xxmaj in this self - place where now we mean to stand . 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj here comes a man ; let 's stay till he be past . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry , disguised , with a prayer - book 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj from xxmaj scotland am i stol'n , even of pure love , 
▁ xxmaj to greet mine own land with my wishful sight . 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj harry , xxmaj harry , ' tis no land of thine ; 
▁ xxmaj thy place is fill'd , thy sceptre wrung from thee , 
▁ xxmaj thy balm wash'd off wherewith thou wast anointed . 
▁ xxmaj no bending knee will call thee xxmaj caesar now , 
▁ xxmaj no humble suitors press to speak for right , 
▁ xxmaj no , not a man comes for redress of thee ; 
▁ xxmaj for how can i help them and not myself ? 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj ay , here 's a deer whose skin 's a keeper 's fee . 
▁ xxmaj this is the quondam xxmaj king ; let 's seize upon him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj let me embrace thee , sour adversity , 
▁ xxmaj for wise men say it is the wisest course . 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj why linger we ? let us lay hands upon him . 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj forbear awhile ; we 'll hear a little more . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my xxmaj queen and son are gone to xxmaj france for aid ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as i hear , the great commanding xxmaj warwick 
▁ xxmaj is thither gone to crave the xxmaj french xxmaj king 's sister 
▁ xxmaj to wife for xxmaj edward . xxmaj if this news be true , 
▁ xxmaj poor queen and son , your labour is but lost ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj warwick is a subtle orator , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj lewis a prince soon won with moving words . 
▁ xxmaj by this account , then , xxmaj margaret may win him ; 
▁ xxmaj for she 's a woman to be pitied much . 
▁ xxmaj her sighs will make a batt'ry in his breast ; 
▁ xxmaj her tears will pierce into a marble heart ; 
▁ xxmaj the tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj nero will be tainted with remorse 
▁ xxmaj to hear and see her plaints , her brinish tears . 
▁ xxmaj ay , but she 's come to beg : xxmaj warwick , to give . 
▁ xxmaj she , on his left side , craving aid for xxmaj henry : 
▁ xxmaj he , on his right , asking a wife for xxmaj edward . 
▁ xxmaj she weeps , and says her xxmaj henry is depos'd : 
▁ xxmaj he smiles , and says his xxmaj edward is install'd ; 
▁ xxmaj that she , poor wretch , for grief can speak no more ; 
▁ xxmaj whiles xxmaj warwick tells his title , smooths the wrong , 
▁ xxmaj inferreth arguments of mighty strength , 
▁ xxmaj and in conclusion wins the xxmaj king from her 
▁ xxmaj with promise of his sister , and what else , 
▁ xxmaj to strengthen and support xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's place . 
▁ o xxmaj margaret , thus ' twill be ; and thou , poor soul , 
▁ xxmaj art then forsaken , as thou went'st forlorn ! 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj say , what art thou that talk'st of kings and queens ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj more than i seem , and less than i was born to : 
▁ a man at least , for less i should not be ; 
▁ xxmaj and men may talk of kings , and why not xxup i ? 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj ay , but thou talk'st as if thou wert a king . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , so i am- in mind ; and that 's enough . 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj but , if thou be a king , where is thy crown ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my crown is in my heart , not on my head ; 
▁ xxmaj not deck'd with diamonds and xxmaj indian stones , 
▁ xxmaj not to be seen . xxmaj my crown is call'd content ; 
▁ a crown it is that seldom kings enjoy . 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj well , if you be a king crown'd with content , 
▁ xxmaj your crown content and you must be contented 
▁ xxmaj to go along with us ; for as we think , 
▁ xxmaj you are the king xxmaj king xxmaj edward hath depos'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and we his subjects , sworn in all allegiance , 
▁ xxmaj will apprehend you as his enemy . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj but did you never swear , and break an oath ? 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj no , never such an oath ; nor will not now . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj where did you dwell when i was xxmaj king of xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup second xxup keeper . xxmaj here in this country , where we now remain . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . i was anointed king at nine months old ; 
▁ xxmaj my father and my grandfather were kings ; 
▁ xxmaj and you were sworn true subjects unto me ; 
▁ xxmaj and tell me , then , have you not broke your oaths ? 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj no ; 
▁ xxmaj for we were subjects but while you were king . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj why , am i dead ? xxmaj do i not breathe a man ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , simple men , you know not what you swear ! 
▁ xxmaj look , as i blow this feather from my face , 
▁ xxmaj and as the air blows it to me again , 
▁ xxmaj obeying with my wind when i do blow , 
▁ xxmaj and yielding to another when it blows , 
▁ xxmaj commanded always by the greater gust , 
▁ xxmaj such is the lightness of you common men . 
▁ xxmaj but do not break your oaths ; for of that sin 
▁ xxmaj my mild entreaty shall not make you guilty . 
▁ xxmaj go where you will , the xxmaj king shall be commanded ; 
▁ xxmaj and be you kings : command , and xxmaj i 'll obey . 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj we are true subjects to the xxmaj king , xxmaj king xxmaj edward . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj so would you be again to xxmaj henry , 
▁ xxmaj if he were seated as xxmaj king xxmaj edward is . 
▁ xxup first xxup keeper . xxmaj we charge you , in xxmaj god 's name and the xxmaj king 's , 
▁ xxmaj to go with us unto the officers . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj in xxmaj god 's name , lead ; your xxmaj king 's name be obey'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and what xxmaj god will , that let your xxmaj king perform ; 
▁ xxmaj and what he will , i humbly yield unto . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , xxup gloucester , xxup clarence , and xxup lady xxup grey 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj brother of xxmaj gloucester , at xxmaj saint xxmaj albans ' field 
▁ xxmaj this lady 's husband , xxmaj sir xxmaj richard xxmaj grey , was slain , 
▁ xxmaj his land then seiz'd on by the conqueror . 
▁ xxmaj her suit is now to repossess those lands ; 
▁ xxmaj which we in justice can not well deny , 
▁ xxmaj because in quarrel of the house of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj the worthy gentleman did lose his life . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj your xxmaj highness shall do well to grant her suit ; 
▁ xxmaj it were dishonour to deny it her . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj it were no less ; but yet xxmaj i 'll make a pause . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup clarence ] xxmaj yea , is it so ? 
▁ i see the lady hath a thing to grant , 
▁ xxmaj before the xxmaj king will grant her humble suit . 
▁ xxup clarence . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] xxmaj he knows the game ; how true he 
▁ keeps the wind ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup clarence ] xxmaj silence ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj widow , we will consider of your suit ; 
▁ xxmaj and come some other time to know our mind . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj right gracious lord , i can not brook delay . 
▁ xxmaj may it please your xxmaj highness to resolve me now ; 
▁ xxmaj and what your pleasure is shall satisfy me . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj ay , widow ? xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll warrant you all your 
▁ lands , 
▁ xxmaj an if what pleases him shall pleasure you . 
▁ xxmaj fight closer or , good faith , you 'll catch a blow . 
▁ xxup clarence . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] i fear her not , unless she chance 
▁ to fall . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup clarence ] xxmaj god forbid that , for he 'll take 
▁ vantages . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj how many children hast thou , widow , tell me . 
▁ xxup clarence . [ aside to xxup gloucester ] i think he means to beg a child of 
▁ her . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside to xxup clarence ] xxmaj nay , then whip me ; he 'll rather 
▁ give her two . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj three , my most gracious lord . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj you shall have four if you 'll be rul'd by him . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . ' twere pity they should lose their father 's lands . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj be pitiful , dread lord , and grant it , then . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj lords , give us leave ; xxmaj i 'll try this widow 's wit . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj ay , good leave have you ; for you will have 
▁ leave 
▁ xxmaj till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch . 
▁ [ gloucester and xxup clarence withdraw ] 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now tell me , madam , do you love your children ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj ay , full as dearly as i love myself . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj and would you not do much to do them good ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj to do them good i would sustain some harm . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj then get your husband 's lands , to do them good . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj therefore i came unto your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj i 'll tell you how these lands are to be got . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj so shall you bind me to your xxmaj highness ' service . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj what service wilt thou do me if i give them ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj what you command that rests in me to do . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj but you will take exceptions to my boon . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj no , gracious lord , except i can not do it . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj ay , but thou canst do what i mean to ask . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj why , then i will do what your xxmaj grace commands . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he plies her hard ; and much rain wears the marble . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj as red as fire ! xxmaj nay , then her wax must melt . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj why stops my lord ? xxmaj shall i not hear my task ? 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj an easy task ; ' tis but to love a king . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj that 's soon perform'd , because i am a subject . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why , then , thy husband 's lands i freely give thee . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . i take my leave with many thousand thanks . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the match is made ; she seals it with a curtsy . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj but stay thee- ' tis the fruits of love i mean . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj the fruits of love i mean , my loving liege . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj ay , but , i fear me , in another sense . 
▁ xxmaj what love , thinkst thou , i sue so much to get ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj my love till death , my humble thanks , my prayers ; 
▁ xxmaj that love which virtue begs and virtue grants . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj no , by my troth , i did not mean such love . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj why , then you mean not as i thought you did . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj but now you partly may perceive my mind . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj my mind will never grant what i perceive 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness aims at , if i aim aright . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj to tell thee plain , i aim to lie with thee . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj to tell you plain , i had rather lie in prison . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why , then thou shalt not have thy husband 's lands . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj why , then mine honesty shall be my dower ; 
▁ xxmaj for by that loss i will not purchase them . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj therein thou wrong'st thy children mightily . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj herein your xxmaj highness wrongs both them and me . 
▁ xxmaj but , mighty lord , this merry inclination 
▁ xxmaj accords not with the sadness of my suit . 
▁ xxmaj please you dismiss me , either with ay or no . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj ay , if thou wilt say ay to my request ; 
▁ xxmaj no , if thou dost say no to my demand . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj then , no , my lord . xxmaj my suit is at an end . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the widow likes him not ; she knits her brows . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj he is the bluntest wooer in xxmaj christendom . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . [ aside ] xxmaj her looks doth argue her replete with modesty ; 
▁ xxmaj her words doth show her wit incomparable ; 
▁ xxmaj all her perfections challenge sovereignty . 
▁ xxmaj one way or other , she is for a king ; 
▁ xxmaj and she shall be my love , or else my queen . 
▁ xxmaj say that xxmaj king xxmaj edward take thee for his queen ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . ' tis better said than done , my gracious lord . 
▁ i am a subject fit to jest withal , 
▁ xxmaj but far unfit to be a sovereign . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj sweet widow , by my state i swear to thee 
▁ i speak no more than what my soul intends ; 
▁ xxmaj and that is to enjoy thee for my love . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . xxmaj and that is more than i will yield unto . 
▁ i know i am too mean to be your queen , 
▁ xxmaj and yet too good to be your concubine . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj you cavil , widow ; i did mean my queen . 
▁ xxup lady xxup grey . ' twill grieve your xxmaj grace my sons should call you father . 
▁ xxup king edward.no more than when my daughters call thee mother . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a widow , and thou hast some children ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by xxmaj god 's xxmaj mother , xxup i , being but a bachelor , 
▁ xxmaj have other some . xxmaj why , ' tis a happy thing 
▁ xxmaj to be the father unto many sons .