xxbos xxmaj answer no more , for thou shalt be my queen . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the ghostly father now hath done his shrift . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj when he was made a shriver , ' twas for shrift . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj brothers , you muse what chat we two have had . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the widow likes it not , for she looks very sad . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj you 'd think it strange if i should marry her . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj to who , my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why , xxmaj clarence , to myself . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj that would be ten days ' wonder at the least . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj that 's a day longer than a wonder lasts . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj by so much is the wonder in extremes . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj well , jest on , brothers ; i can tell you both 
▁ xxmaj her suit is granted for her husband 's lands . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup nobleman 

▁ xxup nobleman . xxmaj my gracious lord , xxmaj henry your foe is taken 
▁ xxmaj and brought your prisoner to your palace gate . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj see that he be convey'd unto the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxmaj and go we , brothers , to the man that took him 
▁ xxmaj to question of his apprehension . 
▁ xxmaj widow , go you along . xxmaj lords , use her honourably . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup gloucester 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , xxmaj edward will use women honourably . 
▁ xxmaj would he were wasted , marrow , bones , and all , 
▁ xxmaj that from his loins no hopeful branch may spring 
▁ xxmaj to cross me from the golden time i look for ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet , between my soul 's desire and me- 
▁ xxmaj the lustful xxmaj edward 's title buried- 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj clarence , xxmaj henry , and his son young xxmaj edward , 
▁ xxmaj and all the unlook'd for issue of their bodies , 
▁ xxmaj to take their rooms ere i can place myself . 
▁ a cold premeditation for my purpose ! 
▁ xxmaj why , then i do but dream on sovereignty ; 
▁ xxmaj like one that stands upon a promontory 
▁ xxmaj and spies a far - off shore where he would tread , 
▁ xxmaj wishing his foot were equal with his eye ; 
▁ xxmaj and chides the sea that sunders him from thence , 
▁ xxmaj saying he 'll lade it dry to have his way- 
▁ xxmaj so do i wish the crown , being so far off ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i chide the means that keeps me from it ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i say xxmaj i 'll cut the causes off , 
▁ xxmaj flattering me with impossibilities . 
▁ xxmaj my eye 's too quick , my heart o'erweens too much , 
▁ xxmaj unless my hand and strength could equal them . 
▁ xxmaj well , say there is no kingdom then for xxmaj richard ; 
▁ xxmaj what other pleasure can the world afford ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make my heaven in a lady 's lap , 
▁ xxmaj and deck my body in gay ornaments , 
▁ xxmaj and witch sweet ladies with my words and looks . 
▁ o miserable thought ! and more unlikely 
▁ xxmaj than to accomplish twenty golden crowns . 
▁ xxmaj why , love forswore me in my mother 's womb ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for i should not deal in her soft laws , 
▁ xxmaj she did corrupt frail nature with some bribe 
▁ xxmaj to shrink mine arm up like a wither'd shrub 
▁ xxmaj to make an envious mountain on my back , 
▁ xxmaj where sits deformity to mock my body ; 
▁ xxmaj to shape my legs of an unequal size ; 
▁ xxmaj to disproportion me in every part , 
▁ xxmaj like to a chaos , or an unlick'd bear - whelp 
▁ xxmaj that carries no impression like the dam . 
▁ xxmaj and am xxup i , then , a man to be belov'd ? 
▁ o monstrous fault to harbour such a thought ! 
▁ xxmaj then , since this earth affords no joy to me 
▁ xxmaj but to command , to check , to o'erbear such 
▁ xxmaj as are of better person than myself , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make my heaven to dream upon the crown , 
▁ xxmaj and whiles i live t ' account this world but hell , 
▁ xxmaj until my misshap'd trunk that bear this head 
▁ xxmaj be round impaled with a glorious crown . 
▁ xxmaj and yet i know not how to get the crown , 
▁ xxmaj for many lives stand between me and home ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i- like one lost in a thorny wood 
▁ xxmaj that rents the thorns and is rent with the thorns , 
▁ xxmaj seeking a way and straying from the way 
▁ xxmaj not knowing how to find the open air , 
▁ xxmaj but toiling desperately to find it out- 
▁ xxmaj torment myself to catch the xxmaj english crown ; 
▁ xxmaj and from that torment i will free myself 
▁ xxmaj or hew my way out with a bloody axe . 
▁ xxmaj why , i can smile , and murder whiles i smile , 
▁ xxmaj and cry ' content ! ' to that which grieves my heart , 
▁ xxmaj and wet my cheeks with artificial tears , 
▁ xxmaj and frame my face to all occasions . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll drown more sailors than the mermaid shall ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll slay more gazers than the basilisk ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll play the orator as well as xxmaj nestor , 
▁ xxmaj deceive more slily than xxmaj ulysses could , 
▁ xxmaj and , like a xxmaj sinon , take another xxmaj troy . 
▁ i can add colours to the chameleon , 
▁ xxmaj change shapes with xxmaj protheus for advantages , 
▁ xxmaj and set the murderous xxmaj machiavel to school . 
▁ xxmaj can i do this , and can not get a crown ? 
▁ xxmaj tut , were it farther off , xxmaj i 'll pluck it down . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj france . xxmaj the xxup king 's palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup lewis the xxmaj french xxmaj king , his sister xxup bona , 
 his xxmaj admiral call'd xxup bourbon ; xxup prince xxup edward , xxup queen xxup margaret , 
 and the xxup earl of xxup oxford . xxup lewis sits , and riseth up again 

▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj fair xxmaj queen of xxmaj england , worthy xxmaj margaret , 
▁ xxmaj sit down with us . xxmaj it ill befits thy state 
▁ xxmaj and birth that thou shouldst stand while xxmaj lewis doth sit . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj no , mighty xxmaj king of xxmaj france . xxmaj now xxmaj margaret 
▁ xxmaj must strike her sail and learn a while to serve 
▁ xxmaj where kings command . i was , i must confess , 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj albion 's xxmaj queen in former golden days ; 
▁ xxmaj but now mischance hath trod my title down 
▁ xxmaj and with dishonour laid me on the ground , 
▁ xxmaj where i must take like seat unto my fortune , 
▁ xxmaj and to my humble seat conform myself . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj why , say , fair xxmaj queen , whence springs this deep despair ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj from such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears 
▁ xxmaj and stops my tongue , while heart is drown'd in cares . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj whate'er it be , be thou still like thyself , 
▁ xxmaj and sit thee by our side . [ seats her by him ] xxmaj yield not thy neck 
▁ xxmaj to fortune 's yoke , but let thy dauntless mind 
▁ xxmaj still ride in triumph over all mischance . 
▁ xxmaj be plain , xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret , and tell thy grief ; 
▁ xxmaj it shall be eas'd , if xxmaj france can yield relief . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts 
▁ xxmaj and give my tongue - tied sorrows leave to speak . 
▁ xxmaj now therefore be it known to noble xxmaj lewis 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj henry , sole possessor of my love , 
▁ xxmaj is , of a king , become a banish'd man , 
▁ xxmaj and forc'd to live in xxmaj scotland a forlorn ; 
▁ xxmaj while proud ambitious xxmaj edward xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj usurps the regal title and the seat 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj england 's true - anointed lawful xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj this is the cause that xxup i , poor xxmaj margaret , 
▁ xxmaj with this my son , xxmaj prince xxmaj edward , xxmaj henry 's heir , 
▁ xxmaj am come to crave thy just and lawful aid ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou fail us , all our hope is done . 
▁ xxmaj scotland hath will to help , but can not help ; 
▁ xxmaj our people and our peers are both misled , 
▁ xxmaj our treasure seiz'd , our soldiers put to flight , 
▁ xxmaj and , as thou seest , ourselves in heavy plight . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj renowned xxmaj queen , with patience calm the storm , 
▁ xxmaj while we bethink a means to break it off . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj the more we stay , the stronger grows our foe . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj the more i stay , the more xxmaj i 'll succour thee . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxup o , but impatience waiteth on true sorrow . 
▁ xxmaj and see where comes the breeder of my sorrow ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup warwick 

▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj what 's he approacheth boldly to our presence ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj our xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick , xxmaj edward 's greatest friend . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj welcome , brave xxmaj warwick ! xxmaj what brings thee to xxmaj france ? 
▁ [ he descends . xxmaj she ariseth ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ay , now begins a second storm to rise ; 
▁ xxmaj for this is he that moves both wind and tide . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj from worthy xxmaj edward , xxmaj king of xxmaj albion , 
▁ xxmaj my lord and sovereign , and thy vowed friend , 
▁ i come , in kindness and unfeigned love , 
▁ xxmaj first to do greetings to thy royal person , 
▁ xxmaj and then to crave a league of amity , 
▁ xxmaj and lastly to confirm that amity 
▁ xxmaj with nuptial knot , if thou vouchsafe to grant 
▁ xxmaj that virtuous xxmaj lady xxmaj bona , thy fair sister , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj england 's xxmaj king in lawful marriage . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . [ aside ] xxmaj if that go forward , xxmaj henry 's hope is done . 
▁ xxup warwick . [ to xxup bona ] xxmaj and , gracious madam , in our king 's behalf , 
▁ i am commanded , with your leave and favour , 
▁ xxmaj humbly to kiss your hand , and with my tongue 
▁ xxmaj to tell the passion of my sovereign 's heart ; 
▁ xxmaj where fame , late ent'ring at his heedful ears , 
▁ xxmaj hath plac'd thy beauty 's image and thy virtue . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj king xxmaj lewis and xxmaj lady xxmaj bona , hear me speak 
▁ xxmaj before you answer xxmaj warwick . xxmaj his demand 
▁ xxmaj springs not from xxmaj edward 's well - meant honest love , 
▁ xxmaj but from deceit bred by necessity ; 
▁ xxmaj for how can tyrants safely govern home 
▁ xxmaj unless abroad they purchase great alliance ? 
▁ xxmaj to prove him tyrant this reason may suffice , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj henry liveth still ; but were he dead , 
▁ xxmaj yet here xxmaj prince xxmaj edward stands , xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's son . 
▁ xxmaj look therefore , xxmaj lewis , that by this league and marriage 
▁ xxmaj thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour ; 
▁ xxmaj for though usurpers sway the rule a while 
▁ xxmaj yet heav'ns are just , and time suppresseth wrongs . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj injurious xxmaj margaret ! 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj and why not xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj because thy father xxmaj henry did usurp ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou no more art prince than she is queen . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj then xxmaj warwick disannuls great xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , 
▁ xxmaj which did subdue the greatest part of xxmaj spain ; 
▁ xxmaj and , after xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , xxmaj henry the xxmaj fourth , 
▁ xxmaj whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest ; 
▁ xxmaj and , after that wise prince , xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth , 
▁ xxmaj who by his prowess conquered all xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj from these our xxmaj henry lineally descends . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj oxford , how haps it in this smooth discourse 
▁ xxmaj you told not how xxmaj henry the xxmaj sixth hath lost 
▁ xxmaj all that which xxmaj henry the xxmaj fifth had gotten ? 
▁ xxmaj methinks these peers of xxmaj france should smile at that . 
▁ xxmaj but for the rest : you tell a pedigree 
▁ xxmaj of threescore and two years- a silly time 
▁ xxmaj to make prescription for a kingdom 's worth . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj why , xxmaj warwick , canst thou speak against thy liege , 
▁ xxmaj whom thou obeyed'st thirty and six years , 
▁ xxmaj and not betray thy treason with a blush ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj can xxmaj oxford that did ever fence the right 
▁ xxmaj now buckler falsehood with a pedigree ? 
▁ xxmaj for shame ! xxmaj leave xxmaj henry , and call xxmaj edward king . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj call him my king by whose injurious doom 
▁ xxmaj my elder brother , the xxmaj lord xxmaj aubrey xxmaj vere , 
▁ xxmaj was done to death ; and more than so , my father , 
▁ xxmaj even in the downfall of his mellow'd years , 
▁ xxmaj when nature brought him to the door of death ? 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj warwick , no ; while life upholds this arm , 
▁ xxmaj this arm upholds the house of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and i the house of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret , xxmaj prince xxmaj edward , and xxmaj oxford , 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe at our request to stand aside 
▁ xxmaj while i use further conference with xxmaj warwick . 
▁ [ they stand aloof ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj heavens grant that xxmaj warwick 's words bewitch him not ! 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj now , xxmaj warwick , tell me , even upon thy conscience , 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj edward your true king ? for i were loath 
▁ xxmaj to link with him that were not lawful chosen . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj thereon i pawn my credit and mine honour . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj but is he gracious in the people 's eye ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj the more that xxmaj henry was unfortunate . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj then further : all dissembling set aside , 
▁ xxmaj tell me for truth the measure of his love 
▁ xxmaj unto our sister xxmaj bona . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj such it seems 
▁ xxmaj as may beseem a monarch like himself . 
▁ xxmaj myself have often heard him say and swear 
▁ xxmaj that this his love was an eternal plant 
▁ xxmaj whereof the root was fix'd in virtue 's ground , 
▁ xxmaj the leaves and fruit maintain'd with beauty 's sun , 
▁ xxmaj exempt from envy , but not from disdain , 
▁ xxmaj unless the xxmaj lady xxmaj bona quit his pain . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj now , sister , let us hear your firm resolve . 
▁ xxup bona . xxmaj your grant or your denial shall be mine . 
▁ [ to xxup warwick ] xxmaj yet i confess that often ere this day , 
▁ xxmaj when i have heard your king 's desert recounted , 
▁ xxmaj mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj then , xxmaj warwick , thus : our sister shall be xxmaj edward 's . 
▁ xxmaj and now forthwith shall articles be drawn 
▁ xxmaj touching the jointure that your king must make , 
▁ xxmaj which with her dowry shall be counterpois'd . 
▁ xxmaj draw near , xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret , and be a witness 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj bona shall be wife to the xxmaj english king . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj to xxmaj edward , but not to the xxmaj english king . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj deceitful xxmaj warwick , it was thy device 
▁ xxmaj by this alliance to make void my suit . 
▁ xxmaj before thy coming , xxmaj lewis was xxmaj henry 's friend . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj and still is friend to him and xxmaj margaret . 
▁ xxmaj but if your title to the crown be weak , 
▁ xxmaj as may appear by xxmaj edward 's good success , 
▁ xxmaj then ' tis but reason that i be releas'd 
▁ xxmaj from giving aid which late i promised . 
▁ xxmaj yet shall you have all kindness at my hand 
▁ xxmaj that your estate requires and mine can yield . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj henry now lives in xxmaj scotland at his case , 
▁ xxmaj where having nothing , nothing can he lose . 
▁ xxmaj and as for you yourself , our quondam queen , 
▁ xxmaj you have a father able to maintain you , 
▁ xxmaj and better ' twere you troubled him than xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj peace , impudent and shameless xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj proud setter up and puller down of kings ! 
▁ i will not hence till with my talk and tears , 
▁ xxmaj both full of truth , i make xxmaj king xxmaj lewis behold 
▁ xxmaj thy sly conveyance and thy lord 's false love ; 
▁ xxmaj for both of you are birds of self - same feather . 
▁ [ post blowing a horn within ] 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj warwick , this is some post to us or thee . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup post 

▁ xxup post . xxmaj my lord ambassador , these letters are for you , 
▁ xxmaj sent from your brother , xxmaj marquis xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj these from our xxmaj king unto your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj and , madam , these for you ; from whom i know not . 
▁ [ they all read their letters ] 
▁ xxup oxford . i like it well that our fair xxmaj queen and mistress 
▁ xxmaj smiles at her news , while xxmaj warwick frowns at his . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj nay , mark how xxmaj lewis stamps as he were nettled . 
▁ i hope all 's for the best . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj warwick , what are thy news ? xxmaj and yours , fair xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj mine such as fill my heart with unhop'd joys . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj mine , full of sorrow and heart 's discontent . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj what , has your king married the xxmaj lady xxmaj grey ? 
▁ xxmaj and now , to soothe your forgery and his , 
▁ xxmaj sends me a paper to persuade me patience ? 
▁ xxmaj is this th ' alliance that he seeks with xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxmaj dare he presume to scorn us in this manner ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . i told your xxmaj majesty as much before . 
▁ xxmaj this proveth xxmaj edward 's love and xxmaj warwick 's honesty . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj king xxmaj lewis , i here protest in sight of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and by the hope i have of heavenly bliss , 
▁ xxmaj that i am clear from this misdeed of xxmaj edward's- 
▁ xxmaj no more my king , for he dishonours me , 
▁ xxmaj but most himself , if he could see his shame . 
▁ xxmaj did i forget that by the house of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj my father came untimely to his death ? 
▁ xxmaj did i let pass th ' abuse done to my niece ? 
▁ xxmaj did i impale him with the regal crown ? 
▁ xxmaj did i put xxmaj henry from his native right ? 
▁ xxmaj and am i guerdon'd at the last with shame ? 
▁ xxmaj shame on himself ! for my desert is honour ; 
▁ xxmaj and to repair my honour lost for him 
▁ i here renounce him and return to xxmaj henry . 
▁ xxmaj my noble xxmaj queen , let former grudges pass , 
▁ xxmaj and henceforth i am thy true servitor . 
▁ i will revenge his wrong to xxmaj lady xxmaj bona , 
▁ xxmaj and replant xxmaj henry in his former state . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj warwick , these words have turn'd my hate to love ; 
▁ xxmaj and i forgive and quite forget old faults , 
▁ xxmaj and joy that thou becom'st xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's friend . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj so much his friend , ay , his unfeigned friend , 
▁ xxmaj that if xxmaj king xxmaj lewis vouchsafe to furnish us 
▁ xxmaj with some few bands of chosen soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll undertake to land them on our coast 
▁ xxmaj and force the tyrant from his seat by war . 
▁ ' tis not his new - made bride shall succour him ; 
▁ xxmaj and as for xxmaj clarence , as my letters tell me , 
▁ xxmaj he 's very likely now to fall from him 
▁ xxmaj for matching more for wanton lust than honour 
▁ xxmaj or than for strength and safety of our country . 
▁ xxup bona . xxmaj dear brother , how shall xxmaj bona be reveng'd 
▁ xxmaj but by thy help to this distressed queen ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj renowned xxmaj prince , how shall poor xxmaj henry live 
▁ xxmaj unless thou rescue him from foul despair ? 
▁ xxup bona . xxmaj my quarrel and this xxmaj english queen 's are one . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and mine , fair xxmaj lady xxmaj bona , joins with yours . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj and mine with hers , and thine , and xxmaj margaret 's . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , at last , i firmly am resolv'd 
▁ xxmaj you shall have aid . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj let me give humble thanks for all at once . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj then , xxmaj england 's messenger , return in post 
▁ xxmaj and tell false xxmaj edward , thy supposed king , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj lewis of xxmaj france is sending over masquers 
▁ xxmaj to revel it with him and his new bride . 
▁ xxmaj thou seest what 's past ; go fear thy king withal . 
▁ xxup bona . xxmaj tell him , in hope he 'll prove a widower shortly , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll wear the willow - garland for his sake . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj tell him my mourning weeds are laid aside , 
▁ xxmaj and i am ready to put armour on . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj tell him from me that he hath done me wrong , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore xxmaj i 'll uncrown him ere't be long . 
▁ xxmaj there 's thy reward ; be gone . xxmaj exit xxup post 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj but , xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj thou and xxmaj oxford , with five thousand men , 
▁ xxmaj shall cross the seas and bid false xxmaj edward battle : 
▁ xxmaj and , as occasion serves , this noble xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj prince shall follow with a fresh supply . 
▁ xxmaj yet , ere thou go , but answer me one doubt : 
▁ xxmaj what pledge have we of thy firm loyalty ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj this shall assure my constant loyalty : 
▁ xxmaj that if our xxmaj queen and this young xxmaj prince agree , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll join mine eldest daughter and my joy 
▁ xxmaj to him forthwith in holy wedlock bands . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj yes , i agree , and thank you for your motion . 
▁ xxmaj son xxmaj edward , she is fair and virtuous , 
▁ xxmaj therefore delay not- give thy hand to xxmaj warwick ; 
▁ xxmaj and with thy hand thy faith irrevocable 
▁ xxmaj that only xxmaj warwick 's daughter shall be thine . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj yes , i accept her , for she well deserves it ; 
▁ xxmaj and here , to pledge my vow , i give my hand . 
▁ [ he gives his hand to xxup warwick ] 
▁ xxup lewis . stay we now ? xxmaj these soldiers shall be levied ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou , xxmaj lord xxmaj bourbon , our xxmaj high xxmaj admiral , 
▁ xxmaj shall waft them over with our royal fleet . 
▁ i long till xxmaj edward fall by war 's mischance 
▁ xxmaj for mocking marriage with a dame of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup warwick 
▁ xxup warwick . i came from xxmaj edward as ambassador , 
▁ xxmaj but i return his sworn and mortal foe . 
▁ xxmaj matter of marriage was the charge he gave me , 
▁ xxmaj but dreadful war shall answer his demand . 
▁ xxmaj had he none else to make a stale but me ? 
▁ xxmaj then none but i shall turn his jest to sorrow . 
▁ i was the chief that rais'd him to the crown , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be chief to bring him down again ; 
▁ xxmaj not that i pity xxmaj henry 's misery , 
▁ xxmaj but seek revenge on xxmaj edward 's mockery . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup gloucester , xxup clarence , xxup somerset , and xxup montague 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now tell me , brother xxmaj clarence , what think you 
▁ xxmaj of this new marriage with the xxmaj lady xxmaj grey ? 
▁ xxmaj hath not our brother made a worthy choice ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj alas , you know ' tis far from hence to xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxmaj how could he stay till xxmaj warwick made return ? 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj my lords , forbear this talk ; here comes the xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , attended ; xxup lady 
▁ xxup grey , as xxmaj queen ; xxup pembroke , xxup stafford , xxup hastings , 
▁ and others . xxmaj four stand on one side , and four on the other 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and his well - chosen bride . 
▁ xxup clarence . i mind to tell him plainly what i think . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now , brother of xxmaj clarence , how like you our choice 
▁ xxmaj that you stand pensive as half malcontent ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj as well as xxmaj lewis of xxmaj france or the xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj which are so weak of courage and in judgment 
▁ xxmaj that they 'll take no offence at our abuse . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj suppose they take offence without a cause ; 
▁ xxmaj they are but xxmaj lewis and xxmaj warwick : i am xxmaj edward , 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj king and xxmaj warwick 's and must have my will . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and shall have your will , because our xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj yea , brother xxmaj richard , are you offended too ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj god forbid that i should wish them sever'd 
▁ xxmaj whom xxmaj god hath join'd together ; ay , and ' twere pity 
▁ xxmaj to sunder them that yoke so well together . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj setting your scorns and your mislike aside , 
▁ xxmaj tell me some reason why the xxmaj lady xxmaj grey 
▁ xxmaj should not become my wife and xxmaj england 's xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj and you too , xxmaj somerset and xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj speak freely what you think . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj then this is mine opinion : that xxmaj king xxmaj lewis 
▁ xxmaj becomes your enemy for mocking him 
▁ xxmaj about the marriage of the xxmaj lady xxmaj bona . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and xxmaj warwick , doing what you gave in charge , 
▁ xxmaj is now dishonoured by this new marriage . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj what if both xxmaj lewis and xxmaj warwick be appeas'd 
▁ xxmaj by such invention as i can devise ? 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj yet to have join'd with xxmaj france in such alliance 
▁ xxmaj would more have strength'ned this our commonwealth 
▁ ' gainst foreign storms than any home - bred marriage . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj why , knows not xxmaj montague that of itself 
▁ xxmaj england is safe , if true within itself ? 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj but the safer when ' tis back'd with xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup hastings . ' tis better using xxmaj france than trusting xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj let us be back'd with xxmaj god , and with the seas 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj he hath giv'n for fence impregnable , 
▁ xxmaj and with their helps only defend ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj in them and in ourselves our safety lies . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj for this one speech xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings well deserves 
▁ xxmaj to have the heir of the xxmaj lord xxmaj hungerford . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj ay , what of that ? it was my will and grant ; 
▁ xxmaj and for this once my will shall stand for law . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and yet methinks your xxmaj grace hath not done well 
▁ xxmaj to give the heir and daughter of xxmaj lord xxmaj scales 
▁ xxmaj unto the brother of your loving bride . 
▁ xxmaj she better would have fitted me or xxmaj clarence ; 
▁ xxmaj but in your bride you bury brotherhood . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj or else you would not have bestow'd the heir 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj lord xxmaj bonville on your new wife 's son , 
▁ xxmaj and leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj clarence ! xxmaj is it for a wife 
▁ xxmaj that thou art malcontent ? i will provide thee . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj in choosing for yourself you show'd your judgment , 
▁ xxmaj which being shallow , you shall give me leave 
▁ xxmaj to play the broker in mine own behalf ; 
▁ xxmaj and to that end i shortly mind to leave you . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj leave me or tarry , xxmaj edward will be xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and not be tied unto his brother 's will . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj my lords , before it pleas'd his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj to raise my state to title of a queen , 
▁ xxmaj do me but right , and you must all confess 
▁ xxmaj that i was not ignoble of descent : 
▁ xxmaj and meaner than myself have had like fortune . 
▁ xxmaj but as this title honours me and mine , 
▁ xxmaj so your dislikes , to whom i would be pleasing , 
▁ xxmaj doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj my love , forbear to fawn upon their frowns . 
▁ xxmaj what danger or what sorrow can befall thee , 
▁ xxmaj so long as xxmaj edward is thy constant friend 
▁ xxmaj and their true sovereign whom they must obey ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , whom they shall obey , and love thee too , 
▁ xxmaj unless they seek for hatred at my hands ; 
▁ xxmaj which if they do , yet will i keep thee safe , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] i hear , yet say not much , but think the more . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup post 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now , messenger , what letters or what news 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my sovereign liege , no letters , and few words , 
▁ xxmaj but such as xxup i , without your special pardon , 
▁ xxmaj dare not relate . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj go to , we pardon thee ; therefore , in brief , 
▁ xxmaj tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them . 
▁ xxmaj what answer makes xxmaj king xxmaj lewis unto our letters ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj at my depart , these were his very words : 
▁ ' go tell false xxmaj edward , the supposed king , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj lewis of xxmaj france is sending over masquers 
▁ xxmaj to revel it with him and his new bride . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxup is xxmaj lewis so brave ? xxmaj belike he thinks me xxmaj henry . 
▁ xxmaj but what said xxmaj lady xxmaj bona to my marriage ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj these were her words , utt'red with mild disdain : 
▁ ' tell him , in hope he 'll prove a widower shortly , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll wear the willow - garland for his sake . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . i blame not her : she could say little less ; 
▁ xxmaj she had the wrong . xxmaj but what said xxmaj henry 's queen ? 
▁ xxmaj for i have heard that she was there in place . 
▁ xxup messenger . ' tell him ' quoth she ' my mourning weeds are done , 
▁ xxmaj and i am ready to put armour on . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj belike she minds to play the xxmaj amazon . 
▁ xxmaj but what said xxmaj warwick to these injuries ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj he , more incens'd against your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj than all the rest , discharg'd me with these words : 
▁ ' tell him from me that he hath done me wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore xxmaj i 'll uncrown him ere't be long . ' 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj ha ! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words ? 
▁ xxmaj well , i will arm me , being thus forewarn'd . 
▁ xxmaj they shall have wars and pay for their presumption . 
▁ xxmaj but say , is xxmaj warwick friends with xxmaj margaret ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj ay , gracious sovereign ; they are so link'd in friendship 
▁ xxmaj that young xxmaj prince xxmaj edward marries xxmaj warwick 's daughter . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj belike the elder ; xxmaj clarence will have the younger . 
▁ xxmaj now , brother king , farewell , and sit you fast , 
▁ xxmaj for i will hence to xxmaj warwick 's other daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj that , though i want a kingdom , yet in marriage 
▁ i may not prove inferior to yourself . 
▁ xxmaj you that love me and xxmaj warwick , follow me . 
▁ xxmaj exit , and xxup somerset follows 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts aim at a further matter ; i 
▁ xxmaj stay not for the love of xxmaj edward but the crown . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj clarence and xxmaj somerset both gone to xxmaj warwick ! 
▁ xxmaj yet am i arm'd against the worst can happen ; 
▁ xxmaj and haste is needful in this desp'rate case . 
▁ xxmaj pembroke and xxmaj stafford , you in our behalf 
▁ xxmaj go levy men and make prepare for war ; 
▁ xxmaj they are already , or quickly will be landed . 
▁ xxmaj myself in person will straight follow you . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup pembroke and xxup stafford 
▁ xxmaj but ere i go , xxmaj hastings and xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj resolve my doubt . xxmaj you twain , of all the rest , 
▁ xxmaj are near to xxmaj warwick by blood and by alliance . 
▁ xxmaj tell me if you love xxmaj warwick more than me ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be so , then both depart to him : 
▁ i rather wish you foes than hollow friends . 
▁ xxmaj but if you mind to hold your true obedience , 
▁ xxmaj give me assurance with some friendly vow , 
▁ xxmaj that i may never have you in suspect . 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj so xxmaj god help xxmaj montague as he proves true ! 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj and xxmaj hastings as he favours xxmaj edward 's cause ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now , brother xxmaj richard , will you stand by us ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , in despite of all that shall withstand you . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why , so ! then am i sure of victory . 
▁ xxmaj now therefore let us hence , and lose no hour 
▁ xxmaj till we meet xxmaj warwick with his foreign pow'r . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a plain in xxmaj warwickshire 

 xxmaj enter xxup warwick and xxup oxford , with xxmaj french soldiers 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj trust me , my lord , all hitherto goes well ; 
▁ xxmaj the common people by numbers swarm to us . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clarence and xxup somerset 

▁ xxmaj but see where xxmaj somerset and xxmaj clarence comes . 
▁ xxmaj speak suddenly , my lords- are we all friends ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj fear not that , my lord . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj then , gentle xxmaj clarence , welcome unto xxmaj warwick ; 
▁ xxmaj and welcome , xxmaj somerset . i hold it cowardice 
▁ xxmaj to rest mistrustful where a noble heart 
▁ xxmaj hath pawn'd an open hand in sign of love ; 
▁ xxmaj else might i think that xxmaj clarence , xxmaj edward 's brother , 
▁ xxmaj were but a feigned friend to our proceedings . 
▁ xxmaj but welcome , sweet xxmaj clarence ; my daughter shall be thine . 
▁ xxmaj and now what rests but , in night 's coverture , 
▁ xxmaj thy brother being carelessly encamp'd , 
▁ xxmaj his soldiers lurking in the towns about , 
▁ xxmaj and but attended by a simple guard , 
▁ xxmaj we may surprise and take him at our pleasure ? 
▁ xxmaj our scouts have found the adventure very easy ; 
▁ xxmaj that as xxmaj ulysses and stout xxmaj diomede 
▁ xxmaj with sleight and manhood stole to xxmaj rhesus ' tents , 
▁ xxmaj and brought from thence the xxmaj thracian fatal steeds , 
▁ xxmaj so we , well cover'd with the night 's black mantle , 
▁ xxmaj at unawares may beat down xxmaj edward 's guard 
▁ xxmaj and seize himself- i say not ' slaughter him , ' 
▁ xxmaj for i intend but only to surprise him . 
▁ xxmaj you that will follow me to this attempt , 
▁ xxmaj applaud the name of xxmaj henry with your leader . 
▁ [ they all cry ' henry ! ' ] 
▁ xxmaj why then , let 's on our way in silent sort . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj warwick and his friends , xxmaj god and xxmaj saint xxmaj george ! xxmaj exeunt 



 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj edward 's camp , near xxmaj warwick 

 xxmaj enter three xxup watchmen , to guard the xxup king 's tent 

▁ xxup first xxup watchman . xxmaj come on , my masters , each man take his stand ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king by this is set him down to sleep . 
▁ xxup second xxup watchman . xxmaj what , will he not to bed ? 
▁ xxup first xxup watchman . xxmaj why , no ; for he hath made a solemn vow 
▁ xxmaj never to lie and take his natural rest 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj warwick or himself be quite suppress'd . 
▁ xxup second xxup watchman . xxmaj to - morrow then , belike , shall be the day , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj warwick be so near as men report . 
▁ xxup third xxup watchman . xxmaj but say , i pray , what nobleman is that 
▁ xxmaj that with the xxmaj king here resteth in his tent ? 
▁ xxup first xxup watchman . ' tis the xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , the xxmaj king 's chiefest friend . 
▁ xxup third xxup watchman . xxup o , is it xxmaj so ? xxmaj but why commands the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj that his chief followers lodge in towns about him , 
▁ xxmaj while he himself keeps in the cold field ? 
▁ xxup second xxup watchman . ' tis the more honour , because more dangerous . 
▁ xxup third xxup watchman . xxmaj ay , but give me worship and quietness ; 
▁ i like it better than dangerous honour . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj warwick knew in what estate he stands , 
▁ ' tis to be doubted he would waken him . 
▁ xxup first xxup watchman . xxmaj unless our halberds did shut up his passage . 
▁ xxup second xxup watchman . xxmaj ay , wherefore else guard we his royal tent 
▁ xxmaj but to defend his person from night - foes ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup warwick , xxup clarence , xxup oxford , xxup somerset , 
▁ and xxmaj french soldiers , silent all 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj this is his tent ; and see where stand his guard . 
▁ xxmaj courage , my masters ! xxmaj honour now or never ! 
▁ xxmaj but follow me , and xxmaj edward shall be ours . 
▁ xxup first xxup watchman . xxmaj who goes there ? 
▁ xxup second xxup watchman . xxmaj stay , or thou diest . 

▁ xxup warwick and the rest cry all ' warwick ! xxmaj warwick ! ' and 
▁ set upon the guard , who fly , crying ' arm ! xxmaj arm ! ' xxup warwick 
▁ and the rest following them 

▁ xxmaj the drum playing and trumpet sounding , re - enter xxup warwick 
▁ and the rest , bringing the xxup king out in his gown , 
▁ sitting in a chair . xxup gloucester and xxup hastings fly over the stage 

▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj what are they that fly there ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj richard and xxmaj hastings . xxmaj let them go ; here is the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj the xxmaj duke ! xxmaj why , xxmaj warwick , when we parted , 
▁ xxmaj thou call'dst me xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ay , but the case is alter'd . 
▁ xxmaj when you disgrac'd me in my embassade , 
▁ xxmaj then i degraded you from being xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and come now to create you xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj alas , how should you govern any kingdom 
▁ xxmaj that know not how to use ambassadors , 
▁ xxmaj nor how to be contented with one wife , 
▁ xxmaj nor how to use your brothers brotherly , 
▁ xxmaj nor how to study for the people 's welfare , 
▁ xxmaj nor how to shroud yourself from enemies ? 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj yea , brother of xxmaj clarence , art thou here too ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , then i see that xxmaj edward needs must down . 
▁ xxmaj yet , xxmaj warwick , in despite of all mischance , 
▁ xxmaj of thee thyself and all thy complices , 
▁ xxmaj edward will always bear himself as xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj though fortune 's malice overthrow my state , 
▁ xxmaj my mind exceeds the compass of her wheel . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj then , for his mind , be xxmaj edward xxmaj england 's king ; 
▁ [ takes off his crown ] 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj henry now shall wear the xxmaj english crown 
▁ xxmaj and be true xxmaj king indeed ; thou but the shadow . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj somerset , at my request , 
▁ xxmaj see that forthwith xxmaj duke xxmaj edward be convey'd 
▁ xxmaj unto my brother , xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj when i have fought with xxmaj pembroke and his fellows , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow you and tell what answer 
▁ xxmaj lewis and the xxmaj lady xxmaj bona send to him . 
▁ xxmaj now for a while farewell , good xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj what fates impose , that men must needs abide ; 
▁ xxmaj it boots not to resist both wind and tide . 
▁ [ they lead him out forcibly ] 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj what now remains , my lords , for us to do 
▁ xxmaj but march to xxmaj london with our soldiers ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ay , that 's the first thing that we have to do ; 
▁ xxmaj to free xxmaj king xxmaj henry from imprisonment , 
▁ xxmaj and see him seated in the regal throne . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup elizabeth and xxup rivers 

▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj madam , what makes you in this sudden change ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj why , brother xxmaj rivers , are you yet to learn 
▁ xxmaj what late misfortune is befall'n xxmaj king xxmaj edward ? 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj what , loss of some pitch'd battle against xxmaj warwick ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj no , but the loss of his own royal person . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj then is my sovereign slain ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ay , almost slain , for he is taken prisoner ; 
▁ xxmaj either betray'd by falsehood of his guard 
▁ xxmaj or by his foe surpris'd at unawares ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as i further have to understand , 
▁ xxmaj is new committed to the xxmaj bishop of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj fell xxmaj warwick 's brother , and by that our foe . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj these news , i must confess , are full of grief ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , gracious madam , bear it as you may : 
▁ xxmaj warwick may lose that now hath won the day . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj till then , fair hope must hinder life 's decay . 
▁ xxmaj and i the rather wean me from despair 
▁ xxmaj for love of xxmaj edward 's offspring in my womb . 
▁ xxmaj this is it that makes me bridle passion 
▁ xxmaj and bear with mildness my misfortune 's cross ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , ay , for this i draw in many a tear 
▁ xxmaj and stop the rising of blood - sucking sighs , 
▁ xxmaj lest with my sighs or tears i blast or drown 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's fruit , true heir to th ' xxmaj english crown . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj but , madam , where is xxmaj warwick then become ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . i am inform'd that he comes towards xxmaj london 
▁ xxmaj to set the crown once more on xxmaj henry 's head . 
▁ xxmaj guess thou the rest : xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's friends must down . 
▁ xxmaj but to prevent the tyrant 's violence- 
▁ xxmaj for trust not him that hath once broken faith- 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hence forthwith unto the sanctuary 
▁ xxmaj to save at least the heir of xxmaj edward 's right . 
▁ xxmaj there shall i rest secure from force and fraud . 
▁ xxmaj come , therefore , let us fly while we may fly : 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj warwick take us , we are sure to die . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 a park near xxmaj middleham xxmaj castle in xxmaj yorkshire 

 xxmaj enter xxup gloucester , xxup lord xxup hastings , xxup sir xxup william xxup stanley , and others 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now , my xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings and xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj stanley , 
▁ xxmaj leave off to wonder why i drew you hither 
▁ xxmaj into this chiefest thicket of the park . 
▁ xxmaj thus stands the case : you know our xxmaj king , my brother , 
▁ xxmaj is prisoner to the xxmaj bishop here , at whose hands 
▁ xxmaj he hath good usage and great liberty ; 
▁ xxmaj and often but attended with weak guard 
▁ xxmaj comes hunting this way to disport himself . 
▁ i have advertis'd him by secret means 
▁ xxmaj that if about this hour he make this way , 
▁ xxmaj under the colour of his usual game , 
▁ xxmaj he shall here find his friends , with horse and men , 
▁ xxmaj to set him free from his captivity . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward and a xxup huntsman with him 
▁
▁ xxup huntsman . xxmaj this way , my lord ; for this way lies the game . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj nay , this way , man . xxmaj see where the huntsmen stand . 
▁ xxmaj now , brother of xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , and the rest , 
▁ xxmaj stand you thus close to steal the xxmaj bishop 's deer ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj brother , the time and case requireth haste ; 
▁ xxmaj your horse stands ready at the park corner . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj but whither shall we then ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj to xxmaj lynn , my lord ; and shipt from thence to xxmaj flanders . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well guess'd , believe me ; for that was my meaning . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj stanley , i will requite thy forwardness . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj but wherefore stay we ? ' tis no time to talk . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj huntsman , what say'st thou ? xxmaj wilt thou go along ? 
▁ xxup huntsman . xxmaj better do so than tarry and be hang'd . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj come then , away ; let 's ha ' no more ado . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj bishop , farewell . xxmaj shield thee from xxmaj warwick 's frown , 
▁ xxmaj and pray that i may repossess the crown . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry , xxup clarence , xxup warwick , xxup somerset , young xxup henry , 
 xxup earl xxup of xxup richmond , xxup oxford , xxup montague , xxup lieutenant xxup of xxup the xxup tower , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj master xxmaj lieutenant , now that xxmaj god and friends 
▁ xxmaj have shaken xxmaj edward from the regal seat 
▁ xxmaj and turn'd my captive state to liberty , 
▁ xxmaj my fear to hope , my sorrows unto joys , 
▁ xxmaj at our enlargement what are thy due fees ? 
▁ xxup lieutenant . xxmaj subjects may challenge nothing of their sov'reigns ; 
▁ xxmaj but if an humble prayer may prevail , 
▁ i then crave pardon of your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj for what , xxmaj lieutenant ? xxmaj for well using me ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , be thou sure xxmaj i 'll well requite thy kindness , 
▁ xxmaj for that it made my imprisonment a pleasure ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , such a pleasure as incaged birds 
▁ xxmaj conceive when , after many moody thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj at last by notes of household harmony 
▁ xxmaj they quite forget their loss of liberty . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj warwick , after xxmaj god , thou set'st me free , 
▁ xxmaj and chiefly therefore i thank xxmaj god and thee ; 
▁ xxmaj he was the author , thou the instrument . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , that i may conquer fortune 's spite 
▁ xxmaj by living low where fortune can not hurt me , 
▁ xxmaj and that the people of this blessed land 
▁ xxmaj may not be punish'd with my thwarting stars , 
▁ xxmaj warwick , although my head still wear the crown , 
▁ i here resign my government to thee , 
▁ xxmaj for thou art fortunate in all thy deeds . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj your xxmaj grace hath still been fam'd for virtuous , 
▁ xxmaj and now may seem as wise as virtuous 
▁ xxmaj by spying and avoiding fortune 's malice , 
▁ xxmaj for few men rightly temper with the stars ; 
▁ xxmaj yet in this one thing let me blame your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj for choosing me when xxmaj clarence is in place . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj no , xxmaj warwick , thou art worthy of the sway , 
▁ xxmaj to whom the heav'ns in thy nativity 
▁ xxmaj adjudg'd an olive branch and laurel crown , 
▁ xxmaj as likely to be blest in peace and war ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore i yield thee my free consent . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and i choose xxmaj clarence only for xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj warwick and xxmaj clarence , give me both your hands . 
▁ xxmaj now join your hands , and with your hands your hearts , 
▁ xxmaj that no dissension hinder government . 
▁ i make you both xxmaj protectors of this land , 
▁ xxmaj while i myself will lead a private life 
▁ xxmaj and in devotion spend my latter days , 
▁ xxmaj to sin 's rebuke and my xxmaj creator 's praise . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what answers xxmaj clarence to his sovereign 's will ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj that he consents , if xxmaj warwick yield consent , 
▁ xxmaj for on thy fortune i repose myself . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj why , then , though loath , yet must i be content . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll yoke together , like a double shadow 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj henry 's body , and supply his place ; 
▁ i mean , in bearing weight of government , 
▁ xxmaj while he enjoys the honour and his ease . 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj clarence , now then it is more than needful 
▁ xxmaj forthwith that xxmaj edward be pronounc'd a traitor , 
▁ xxmaj and all his lands and goods confiscated . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj what else ? xxmaj and that succession be determin'd . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ay , therein xxmaj clarence shall not want his part . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj but , with the first of all your chief affairs , 
▁ xxmaj let me entreat- for i command no more- 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj margaret your xxmaj queen and my son xxmaj edward 
▁ xxmaj be sent for to return from xxmaj france with speed ; 
▁ xxmaj for till i see them here , by doubtful fear 
▁ xxmaj my joy of liberty is half eclips'd . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj it shall be done , my sovereign , with all speed . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj somerset , what youth is that , 
▁ xxmaj of whom you seem to have so tender care ? 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj my liege , it is young xxmaj henry , xxmaj earl of xxmaj richmond . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj england 's hope . 
▁ [ lays his hand on his head ] 
▁ xxmaj if secret powers 
▁ xxmaj suggest but truth to my divining thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj this pretty lad will prove our country 's bliss . 
▁ xxmaj his looks are full of peaceful majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj his head by nature fram'd to wear a crown , 
▁ xxmaj his hand to wield a sceptre ; and himself 
▁ xxmaj likely in time to bless a regal throne . 
▁ xxmaj make much of him , my lords ; for this is he 
▁ xxmaj must help you more than you are hurt by me . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup post 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what news , my friend ? 
▁ xxup post . xxmaj that xxmaj edward is escaped from your brother 
▁ xxmaj and fled , as he hears since , to xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj unsavoury news ! xxmaj but how made he escape ? 
▁ xxup post . xxmaj he was convey'd by xxmaj richard xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , who attended him 
▁ xxmaj in secret ambush on the forest side 
▁ xxmaj and from the xxmaj bishop 's huntsmen rescu'd him ; 
▁ xxmaj for hunting was his daily exercise . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj my brother was too careless of his charge . 
▁ xxmaj but let us hence , my sovereign , to provide 
▁ a salve for any sore that may betide . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup somerset , xxup richmond , and xxup oxford 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj my lord , i like not of this flight of xxmaj edward 's ; 
▁ xxmaj for doubtless xxmaj burgundy will yield him help , 
▁ xxmaj and we shall have more wars befor't be long . 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj henry 's late presaging prophecy 
▁ xxmaj did glad my heart with hope of this young xxmaj richmond , 
▁ xxmaj so doth my heart misgive me , in these conflicts , 
▁ xxmaj what may befall him to his harm and ours . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , xxmaj lord xxmaj oxford , to prevent the worst , 
▁ xxmaj forthwith we 'll send him hence to xxmaj brittany , 
▁ xxmaj till storms be past of civil enmity . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj ay , for if xxmaj edward repossess the crown , 
▁ ' tis like that xxmaj richmond with the rest shall down . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj it shall be so ; he shall to xxmaj brittany . 
▁ xxmaj come therefore , let 's about it speedily . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj york 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , xxup gloucester , xxup hastings , and soldiers 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now , brother xxmaj richard , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , and the rest , 
▁ xxmaj yet thus far fortune maketh us amends , 
▁ xxmaj and says that once more i shall interchange 
▁ xxmaj my waned state for xxmaj henry 's regal crown . 
▁ xxmaj well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas , 
▁ xxmaj and brought desired help from xxmaj burgundy ; 
▁ xxmaj what then remains , we being thus arriv'd 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj ravenspurgh haven before the gates of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj but that we enter , as into our dukedom ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the gates made fast ! xxmaj brother , i like not this ; 
▁ xxmaj for many men that stumble at the threshold 
▁ xxmaj are well foretold that danger lurks within . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj tush , man , abodements must not now affright us . 
▁ xxmaj by fair or foul means we must enter in , 
▁ xxmaj for hither will our friends repair to us . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj my liege , xxmaj i 'll knock once more to summon them . 

▁ xxmaj enter , on the walls , the xxup mayor xxup of xxup york and 
▁ his xxup brethren 

▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj my lords , we were forewarned of your coming 
▁ xxmaj and shut the gates for safety of ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj for now we owe allegiance unto xxmaj henry . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj but , xxmaj master xxmaj mayor , if xxmaj henry be your xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj edward at the least is xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj true , my good lord ; i know you for no less . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why , and i challenge nothing but my dukedom , 
▁ xxmaj as being well content with that alone . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj but when the fox hath once got in his nose , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll soon find means to make the body follow . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj why , xxmaj master xxmaj mayor , why stand you in a doubt ? 
▁ xxmaj open the gates ; we are xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's friends . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj ay , say you so ? xxmaj the gates shall then be open'd . 
▁ [ he descends ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . a wise stout captain , and soon persuaded ! 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj the good old man would fain that all were well , 
▁ xxmaj so ' twere not long of him ; but being ent'red , 
▁ i doubt not , xxup i , but we shall soon persuade 
▁ xxmaj both him and all his brothers unto reason . 

▁ xxmaj enter , below , the xxup mayor and two xxup aldermen 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj so , xxmaj master xxmaj mayor . xxmaj these gates must not be shut 
▁ xxmaj but in the night or in the time of war . 
▁ xxmaj what ! fear not , man , but yield me up the keys ; 
▁ [ takes his keys ] 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj edward will defend the town and thee , 
▁ xxmaj and all those friends that deign to follow me . 

▁ xxmaj march . xxmaj enter xxup montgomery with drum and soldiers 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj brother , this is xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj montgomery , 
▁ xxmaj our trusty friend , unless i be deceiv'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj sir john ! xxmaj but why come you in arms ? 
▁ xxup montgomery . xxmaj to help xxmaj king xxmaj edward in his time of storm , 
▁ xxmaj as every loyal subject ought to do . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj thanks , good xxmaj montgomery ; but we now forget 
▁ xxmaj our title to the crown , and only claim 
▁ xxmaj our dukedom till xxmaj god please to send the rest . 
▁ xxup montgomery . xxmaj then fare you well , for i will hence again . 
▁ i came to serve a king and not a duke . 
▁ xxmaj drummer , strike up , and let us march away . 
▁ [ the drum begins to march ] 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj nay , stay , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , a while , and we 'll debate 
▁ xxmaj by what safe means the crown may be recover'd . 
▁ xxup montgomery . xxmaj what talk you of debating ? xxmaj in few words : 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll not here proclaim yourself our xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave you to your fortune and be gone 
▁ xxmaj to keep them back that come to succour you . 
▁ xxmaj why shall we fight , if you pretend no title ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , brother , wherefore stand you on nice points ? 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj when we grow stronger , then we 'll make our claim ; 
▁ xxmaj till then ' tis wisdom to conceal our meaning . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj away with scrupulous wit ! xxmaj now arms must rule . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns . 
▁ xxmaj brother , we will proclaim you out of hand ; 
▁ xxmaj the bruit thereof will bring you many friends . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj then be it as you will ; for ' tis my right , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj henry but usurps the diadem . 
▁ xxup montgomery . xxmaj ay , now my sovereign speaketh like himself ; 
▁ xxmaj and now will i be xxmaj edward 's champion . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj sound trumpet ; xxmaj edward shall be here proclaim'd . 
▁ xxmaj come , fellow soldier , make thou proclamation . 
▁ [ gives him a paper . xxmaj flourish ] 
▁ xxup soldier . [ reads ] ' edward the xxmaj fourth , by the grace of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj king of xxmaj england and xxmaj france , and xxmaj lord of xxmaj ireland , & c. ' 
▁ xxup montgomery . xxmaj and whoso'er gainsays xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's right , 
▁ xxmaj by this i challenge him to single fight . 
▁ [ throws down gauntlet ] 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj long live xxmaj edward the xxmaj fourth ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj thanks , brave xxmaj montgomery , and thanks unto you all ; 
▁ xxmaj if fortune serve me , xxmaj i 'll requite this kindness . 
▁ xxmaj now for this night let 's harbour here in xxmaj york ;