xxbos xxmaj and when the morning sun shall raise his car 
▁ xxmaj above the border of this horizon , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll forward towards xxmaj warwick and his mates ; 
▁ xxmaj for well i wot that xxmaj henry is no soldier . 
▁ xxmaj ah , froward xxmaj clarence , how evil it beseems the 
▁ xxmaj to flatter xxmaj henry and forsake thy brother ! 
▁ xxmaj yet , as we may , we 'll meet both thee and xxmaj warwick . 
▁ xxmaj come on , brave soldiers ; doubt not of the day , 
▁ xxmaj and , that once gotten , doubt not of large pay . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry , xxup warwick , xxup montague , xxup clarence , xxup oxford , and xxup exeter 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj what counsel , lords ? xxmaj edward from xxmaj belgia , 
▁ xxmaj with hasty xxmaj germans and blunt xxmaj hollanders , 
▁ xxmaj hath pass'd in safety through the narrow seas 
▁ xxmaj and with his troops doth march amain to xxmaj london ; 
▁ xxmaj and many giddy people flock to him . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj let 's levy men and beat him back again . 
▁ xxup clarence . a little fire is quickly trodden out , 
▁ xxmaj which , being suffer'd , rivers can not quench . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj in xxmaj warwickshire i have true - hearted friends , 
▁ xxmaj not mutinous in peace , yet bold in war ; 
▁ xxmaj those will i muster up , and thou , son xxmaj clarence , 
▁ xxmaj shalt stir up in xxmaj suffolk , xxmaj norfolk , and in xxmaj kent , 
▁ xxmaj the knights and gentlemen to come with thee . 
▁ xxmaj thou , brother xxmaj montague , in xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj northampton , and in xxmaj leicestershire , shalt find 
▁ xxmaj men well inclin'd to hear what thou command'st . 
▁ xxmaj and thou , brave xxmaj oxford , wondrous well belov'd , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends . 
▁ xxmaj my sovereign , with the loving citizens , 
▁ xxmaj like to his island girt in with the ocean 
▁ xxmaj or modest xxmaj dian circled with her nymphs , 
▁ xxmaj shall rest in xxmaj london till we come to him . 
▁ xxmaj fair lords , take leave and stand not to reply . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my sovereign . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj farewell , my xxmaj hector and my xxmaj troy 's true hope . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj in sign of truth , i kiss your xxmaj highness ' hand . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj well - minded xxmaj clarence , be thou fortunate ! 
▁ xxup montague . xxmaj comfort , my lord ; and so i take my leave . 
▁ xxup oxford . [ kissing the xxup king 's band ] xxmaj and thus i seal my truth and bid 
▁ adieu . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj sweet xxmaj oxford , and my loving xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj and all at once , once more a happy farewell . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj farewell , sweet lords ; let 's meet at xxmaj coventry . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup king and xxup exeter 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj here at the palace will i rest a while . 
▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj exeter , what thinks your lordship ? 
▁ xxmaj methinks the power that xxmaj edward hath in field 
▁ xxmaj should not be able to encounter mine . 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj the doubt is that he will seduce the rest . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj that 's not my fear ; my meed hath got me fame : 
▁ i have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands , 
▁ xxmaj nor posted off their suits with slow delays ; 
▁ xxmaj my pity hath been balm to heal their wounds , 
▁ xxmaj my mildness hath allay'd their swelling griefs , 
▁ xxmaj my mercy dried their water - flowing tears ; 
▁ i have not been desirous of their wealth , 
▁ xxmaj nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies , 
▁ xxmaj nor forward of revenge , though they much err'd . 
▁ xxmaj then why should they love xxmaj edward more than me ? 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj exeter , these graces challenge grace ; 
▁ xxmaj and , when the lion fawns upon the lamb , 
▁ xxmaj the lamb will never cease to follow him . 
▁ [ shout within ' a xxmaj lancaster ! a xxmaj lancaster ! ' ] 
▁ xxup exeter . xxmaj hark , hark , my lord ! xxmaj what shouts are these ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , xxup gloucester , and soldiers 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj seize on the shame - fac'd xxmaj henry , bear him hence ; 
▁ xxmaj and once again proclaim us xxmaj king of xxmaj england . 
▁ xxmaj you are the fount that makes small brooks to flow . 
▁ xxmaj now stops thy spring ; my sea shall suck them dry , 
▁ xxmaj and swell so much the higher by their ebb . 
▁ xxmaj hence with him to the xxmaj tower : let him not speak . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt some with xxup king xxup henry 
▁ xxmaj and , lords , towards xxmaj coventry bend we our course , 
▁ xxmaj where peremptory xxmaj warwick now remains . 
▁ xxmaj the sun shines hot ; and , if we use delay , 
▁ xxmaj cold biting winter mars our hop'd - for hay . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj away betimes , before his forces join , 
▁ xxmaj and take the great - grown traitor unawares . 
▁ xxmaj brave warriors , march amain towards xxmaj coventry . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj coventry 

 xxmaj enter xxup warwick , the xxup mayor xxup of xxup coventry , two xxup messengers , 
 and others upon the walls 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj where is the post that came from valiant xxmaj oxford ? 
▁ xxmaj how far hence is thy lord , mine honest fellow ? 
▁ xxup first xxup messenger . xxmaj by this at xxmaj dunsmore , marching hitherward . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj how far off is our brother xxmaj montague ? 
▁ xxmaj where is the post that came from xxmaj montague ? 
▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj by this at xxmaj daintry , with a puissant troop . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john xxup somerville 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj say , xxmaj somerville , what says my loving son ? 
▁ xxmaj and by thy guess how nigh is xxmaj clarence now ? 
▁ xxup somerville . xxmaj at xxmaj southam i did leave him with his forces , 
▁ xxmaj and do expect him here some two hours hence . 
▁ [ drum heard ] 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj then xxmaj clarence is at hand ; i hear his drum . 
▁ xxup somerville . xxmaj it is not his , my lord ; here xxmaj southam lies . 
▁ xxmaj the drum your xxmaj honour hears marcheth from xxmaj warwick . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj who should that be ? xxmaj belike unlook'd for friends . 
▁ xxup somerville . xxmaj they are at hand , and you shall quickly know . 

▁ xxmaj march . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , xxup gloucester , 
▁ and soldiers 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj go , trumpet , to the walls , and sound a parle . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj see how the surly xxmaj warwick mans the wall . 
▁ xxup warwick . o unbid spite ! xxmaj is sportful xxmaj edward come ? 
▁ xxmaj where slept our scouts or how are they seduc'd 
▁ xxmaj that we could hear no news of his repair ? 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now , xxmaj warwick , wilt thou ope the city gates , 
▁ xxmaj speak gentle words , and humbly bend thy knee , 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj edward xxmaj king , and at his hands beg mercy ? 
▁ xxmaj and he shall pardon thee these outrages . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj nay , rather , wilt thou draw thy forces hence , 
▁ xxmaj confess who set thee up and pluck'd thee down , 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj warwick patron , and be penitent ? 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt still remain the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i thought , at least , he would have said the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj or did he make the jest against his will ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj is not a dukedom , sir , a goodly gift ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , by my faith , for a poor earl to give . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do thee service for so good a gift . 
▁ xxup warwick . ' twas i that gave the kingdom to thy brother . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why then ' tis mine , if but by xxmaj warwick 's gift . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj thou art no xxmaj atlas for so great a weight ; 
▁ xxmaj and , weakling , xxmaj warwick takes his gift again ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj henry is my xxmaj king , xxmaj warwick his subject . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj but xxmaj warwick 's king is xxmaj edward 's prisoner . 
▁ xxmaj and , gallant xxmaj warwick , do but answer this : 
▁ xxmaj what is the body when the head is off ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj alas , that xxmaj warwick had no more forecast , 
▁ xxmaj but , whiles he thought to steal the single ten , 
▁ xxmaj the king was slily finger'd from the deck ! 
▁ xxmaj you left poor xxmaj henry at the xxmaj bishop 's palace , 
▁ xxmaj and ten to one you 'll meet him in the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . ' tis even so ; yet you are xxmaj warwick still . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj come , xxmaj warwick , take the time ; kneel down , kneel down . 
▁ xxmaj nay , when ? xxmaj strike now , or else the iron cools . 
▁ xxup warwick . i had rather chop this hand off at a blow , 
▁ xxmaj and with the other fling it at thy face , 
▁ xxmaj than bear so low a sail to strike to thee . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj sail how thou canst , have wind and tide thy friend , 
▁ xxmaj this hand , fast wound about thy coal - black hair , 
▁ xxmaj shall , whiles thy head is warm and new cut off , 
▁ xxmaj write in the dust this sentence with thy blood : 
▁ ' wind - changing xxmaj warwick now can change no more . ' 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oxford , with drum and colours 

▁ xxup warwick . o cheerful colours ! xxmaj see where xxmaj oxford comes . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj oxford , xxmaj oxford , for xxmaj lancaster ! 
▁ [ he and his forces enter the city ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the gates are open , let us enter too . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj so other foes may set upon our backs . 
▁ xxmaj stand we in good array , for they no doubt 
▁ xxmaj will issue out again and bid us battle ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , the city being but of small defence , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll quietly rouse the traitors in the same . 
▁ xxup warwick . xxup o , welcome , xxmaj oxford ! for we want thy help . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup montague , with drum and colours 

▁ xxup montague . xxmaj montague , xxmaj montague , for xxmaj lancaster ! 
▁ [ he and his forces enter the city ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason 
▁ xxmaj even with the dearest blood your bodies bear . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj the harder match'd , the greater victory . 
▁ xxmaj my mind presageth happy gain and conquest . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup somerset , with drum and colours 

▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj somerset , xxmaj somerset , for xxmaj lancaster ! 
▁ [ he and his forces enter the city ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj two of thy name , both xxmaj dukes of xxmaj somerset , 
▁ xxmaj have sold their lives unto the house of xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt be the third , if this sword hold . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup clarence , with drum and colours 

▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj and lo where xxmaj george of xxmaj clarence sweeps along , 
▁ xxmaj of force enough to bid his brother battle ; 
▁ xxmaj with whom an upright zeal to right prevails 
▁ xxmaj more than the nature of a brother 's love . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj clarence , xxmaj clarence , for xxmaj lancaster ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj et tu xxmaj brute- wilt thou stab xxmaj caesar too ? 
▁ a parley , sirrah , to xxmaj george of xxmaj clarence . 
▁ [ sound a parley . xxup richard and xxup clarence whisper ] 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj come , xxmaj clarence , come . xxmaj thou wilt if xxmaj warwick call . 
▁ xxup clarence . [ taking the red rose from his hat and throwing 
▁ it at xxup warwick ] 
▁ xxmaj father of xxmaj warwick , know you what this means ? 
▁ xxmaj look here , i throw my infamy at thee . 
▁ i will not ruinate my father 's house , 
▁ xxmaj who gave his blood to lime the stones together , 
▁ xxmaj and set up xxmaj lancaster . xxmaj why , trowest thou , xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj clarence is so harsh , so blunt , unnatural , 
▁ xxmaj to bend the fatal instruments of war 
▁ xxmaj against his brother and his lawful xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath . 
▁ xxmaj to keep that oath were more impiety 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj jephtha when he sacrific'd his daughter . 
▁ i am so sorry for my trespass made 
▁ xxmaj that , to deserve well at my brother 's hands , 
▁ i here proclaim myself thy mortal foe ; 
▁ xxmaj with resolution whereso'er i meet thee- 
▁ xxmaj as i will meet thee , if thou stir abroad- 
▁ xxmaj to plague thee for thy foul misleading me . 
▁ xxmaj and so , proud - hearted xxmaj warwick , i defy thee , 
▁ xxmaj and to my brother turn my blushing cheeks . 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj edward , i will make amends ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj richard , do not frown upon my faults , 
▁ xxmaj for i will henceforth be no more unconstant . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now welcome more , and ten times more belov'd , 
▁ xxmaj than if thou never hadst deserv'd our hate . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj welcome , good xxmaj clarence ; this is brother - like . 
▁ xxup warwick . o passing traitor , perjur'd and unjust ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj what , xxmaj warwick , wilt thou leave die town and fight ? 
▁ xxmaj or shall we beat the stones about thine ears ? 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj alas , i am not coop'd here for defence ! 
▁ i will away towards xxmaj barnet presently 
▁ xxmaj and bid thee battle , xxmaj edward , if thou dar'st . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj yes , xxmaj warwick , xxmaj edward dares and leads the way . 
▁ xxmaj lords , to the field ; xxmaj saint xxmaj george and victory ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup yorkists 
▁ [ march . xxup warwick and his company follow ] 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a field of battle near xxmaj barnet 

 xxmaj alarum and excursions . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , bringing forth xxup warwick , wounded 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj so , lie thou there . xxmaj die thou , and die our fear ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj warwick was a bug that fear'd us all . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj montague , sit fast ; i seek for thee , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj warwick 's bones may keep thine company . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj ah , who is nigh ? xxmaj come to me , friend or foe , 
▁ xxmaj and tell me who is victor , xxmaj york or xxmaj warwick ? 
▁ xxmaj why ask i that ? xxmaj my mangled body shows , 
▁ xxmaj my blood , my want of strength , my sick heart shows , 
▁ xxmaj that i must yield my body to the earth 
▁ xxmaj and , by my fall , the conquest to my foe . 
▁ xxmaj thus yields the cedar to the axe 's edge , 
▁ xxmaj whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle , 
▁ xxmaj under whose shade the ramping lion slept , 
▁ xxmaj whose top - branch overpeer'd xxmaj jove 's spreading tree 
▁ xxmaj and kept low shrubs from winter 's pow'rful wind . 
▁ xxmaj these eyes , that now are dimm'd with death 's black veil , 
▁ xxmaj have been as piercing as the mid - day sun 
▁ xxmaj to search the secret treasons of the world ; 
▁ xxmaj the wrinkles in my brows , now fill'd with blood , 
▁ xxmaj were lik'ned oft to kingly sepulchres ; 
▁ xxmaj for who liv'd xxmaj king , but i could dig his grave ? 
▁ xxmaj and who durst smile when xxmaj warwick bent his brow ? 
▁ xxmaj lo now my glory smear'd in dust and blood ! 
▁ xxmaj my parks , my walks , my manors , that i had , 
▁ xxmaj even now forsake me ; and of all my lands 
▁ xxmaj is nothing left me but my body 's length . 
▁ what is pomp , rule , reign , but earth and dust ? 
▁ xxmaj and live we how we can , yet die we must . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oxford and xxup somerset 

▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj ah , xxmaj warwick , xxmaj warwick ! wert thou as we are , 
▁ xxmaj we might recover all our loss again . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen from xxmaj france hath brought a puissant power ; 
▁ xxmaj even now we heard the news . xxmaj ah , couldst thou fly ! 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj why then , i would not fly . xxmaj ah , xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj if thou be there , sweet brother , take my hand , 
▁ xxmaj and with thy lips keep in my soul a while ! 
▁ xxmaj thou lov'st me not ; for , brother , if thou didst , 
▁ xxmaj thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood 
▁ xxmaj that glues my lips and will not let me speak . 
▁ xxmaj come quickly , xxmaj montague , or i am dead . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj ah , xxmaj warwick ! xxmaj montague hath breath'd his last ; 
▁ xxmaj and to the latest gasp cried out for xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj and said ' commend me to my valiant brother . ' 
▁ xxmaj and more he would have said ; and more he spoke , 
▁ xxmaj which sounded like a clamour in a vault , 
▁ xxmaj that mought not be distinguish'd ; but at last , 
▁ i well might hear , delivered with a groan , 
▁ ' o farewell , xxmaj warwick ! ' 
▁ xxup warwick . xxmaj sweet rest his soul ! xxmaj fly , lords , and save yourselves : 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj warwick bids you all farewell , to meet in heaven . 
▁ [ dies ] 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj away , away , to meet the xxmaj queen 's great power ! 
▁ [ here they bear away his body ] 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king in triumph ; with xxup gloucester , xxup clarence , and the rest 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj thus far our fortune keeps an upward course , 
▁ xxmaj and we are grac'd with wreaths of victory . 
▁ xxmaj but in the midst of this bright - shining day 
▁ i spy a black , suspicious , threat'ning cloud 
▁ xxmaj that will encounter with our glorious sun 
▁ xxmaj ere he attain his easeful western bed- 
▁ i mean , my lords , those powers that the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj hath rais'd in xxmaj gallia have arriv'd our coast 
▁ xxmaj and , as we hear , march on to fight with us . 
▁ xxup clarence . a little gale will soon disperse that cloud 
▁ xxmaj and blow it to the source from whence it came ; 
▁ xxmaj thy very beams will dry those vapours up , 
▁ xxmaj for every cloud engenders not a storm . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the xxmaj queen is valued thirty thousand strong , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj somerset , with xxmaj oxford , fled to her . 
▁ xxmaj if she have time to breathe , be well assur'd 
▁ xxmaj her faction will be full as strong as ours . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . are advertis'd by our loving friends 
▁ xxmaj that they do hold their course toward xxmaj tewksbury ; 
▁ xxmaj we , having now the best at xxmaj barnet field , 
▁ xxmaj will thither straight , for willingness rids way ; 
▁ xxmaj and as we march our strength will be augmented 
▁ xxmaj in every county as we go along . 
▁ xxmaj strike up the drum ; cry ' courage ! ' and away . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj plains wear xxmaj tewksbury 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj march . xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup margaret , xxup prince xxup edward , xxup somerset , xxup oxford , 
 and xxup soldiers 

▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj great lords , wise men ne'er sit and wail their 
▁ loss , 
▁ xxmaj but cheerly seek how to redress their harms . 
▁ xxmaj what though the mast be now blown overboard , 
▁ xxmaj the cable broke , the holding - anchor lost , 
▁ xxmaj and half our sailors swallow'd in the flood ; 
▁ xxmaj yet lives our pilot still . xxmaj is't meet that he 
▁ xxmaj should leave the helm and , like a fearful lad , 
▁ xxmaj with tearful eyes add water to the sea 
▁ xxmaj and give more strength to that which hath too much ; 
▁ xxmaj whiles , in his moan , the ship splits on the rock , 
▁ xxmaj which industry and courage might have sav'd ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , what a shame ! ah , what a fault were this ! 
▁ xxmaj say xxmaj warwick was our anchor ; what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj montague our top - mast ; what of him ? 
▁ xxmaj our slaught'red friends the tackles ; what of these ? 
▁ xxmaj why , is not xxmaj oxford here another anchor ? 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj somerset another goodly mast ? 
▁ xxmaj the friends of xxmaj france our shrouds and tacklings ? 
▁ xxmaj and , though unskilful , why not xxmaj ned and i 
▁ xxmaj for once allow'd the skilful pilot 's charge ? 
▁ xxmaj we will not from the helm to sit and weep , 
▁ xxmaj but keep our course , though the rough wind say no , 
▁ xxmaj from shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck , 
▁ xxmaj as good to chide the waves as speak them fair . 
▁ xxmaj and what is xxmaj edward but a ruthless sea ? 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj clarence but a quicksand of deceit ? 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj richard but a ragged fatal rock ? 
▁ xxmaj all these the enemies to our poor bark . 
▁ xxmaj say you can swim ; alas , ' tis but a while ! 
▁ xxmaj tread on the sand ; why , there you quickly sink . 
▁ xxmaj bestride the rock ; the tide will wash you off , 
▁ xxmaj or else you famish- that 's a threefold death . 
▁ xxmaj this speak xxup i , lords , to let you understand , 
▁ xxmaj if case some one of you would fly from us , 
▁ xxmaj that there 's no hop'd - for mercy with the brothers 
▁ xxmaj more than with ruthless waves , with sands , and rocks . 
▁ xxmaj why , courage then ! xxmaj what can not be avoided 
▁ ' twere childish weakness to lament or fear . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj methinks a woman of this valiant spirit 
▁ xxmaj should , if a coward hear her speak these words , 
▁ xxmaj infuse his breast with magnanimity 
▁ xxmaj and make him naked foil a man - at - arms . 
▁ i speak not this as doubting any here ; 
▁ xxmaj for did i but suspect a fearful man , 
▁ xxmaj he should have leave to go away betimes , 
▁ xxmaj lest in our need he might infect another 
▁ xxmaj and make him of the like spirit to himself . 
▁ xxmaj if any such be here- as xxmaj god forbid!- 
▁ xxmaj let him depart before we need his help . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj women and children of so high a courage , 
▁ xxmaj and warriors faint ! xxmaj why , ' twere perpetual shame . 
▁ o brave young xxmaj prince ! thy famous grandfather 
▁ xxmaj doth live again in thee . xxmaj long mayst thou xxmaj eve 
▁ xxmaj to bear his image and renew his glories ! 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj and he that will not fight for such a hope , 
▁ xxmaj go home to bed and , like the owl by day , 
▁ xxmaj if he arise , be mock'd and wond'red at . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj thanks , gentle xxmaj somerset ; sweet xxmaj oxford , thanks . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj and take his thanks that yet hath nothing else . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj prepare you , lords , for xxmaj edward is at hand 
▁ xxmaj ready to fight ; therefore be resolute . 
▁ xxup oxford . i thought no less . xxmaj it is his policy 
▁ xxmaj to haste thus fast , to find us unprovided . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj but he 's deceiv'd ; we are in readiness . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj this cheers my heart , to see your forwardness . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj here pitch our battle ; hence we will not budge . 

▁ xxmaj flourish and march . xxmaj enter , at a distance , xxup king xxup edward , 
▁ xxup gloucester , xxup clarence , and soldiers 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj brave followers , yonder stands the thorny wood 
▁ xxmaj which , by the heavens ' assistance and your strength , 
▁ xxmaj must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night . 
▁ i need not add more fuel to your fire , 
▁ xxmaj for well i wot ye blaze to burn them out . 
▁ xxmaj give signal to the fight , and to it , lords . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj lords , knights , and gentlemen , what i should say 
▁ xxmaj my tears gainsay ; for every word i speak , 
▁ xxmaj ye see , i drink the water of my eye . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , no more but this : xxmaj henry , your sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj is prisoner to the foe ; his state usurp'd , 
▁ xxmaj his realm a slaughter - house , his subjects slain , 
▁ xxmaj his statutes cancell'd , and his treasure spent ; 
▁ xxmaj and yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil . 
▁ xxmaj you fight in justice . xxmaj then , in xxmaj god 's name , lords , 
▁ xxmaj be valiant , and give signal to the fight . 
▁ xxmaj alarum , retreat , excursions . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , xxup gloucester , xxup clarence , and forces , 
 xxmaj with xxup queen xxup margaret , xxup oxford , and xxup somerset , prisoners 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now here a period of tumultuous broils . 
▁ xxmaj away with xxmaj oxford to xxmaj hames xxmaj castle straight ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj somerset , off with his guilty head . 
▁ xxmaj go , bear them hence ; i will not hear them speak . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj for my part , xxmaj i 'll not trouble thee with words . 
▁ xxup somerset . xxmaj nor xxup i , but stoop with patience to my fortune . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup oxford and xxup somerset , guarded 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj so part we sadly in this troublous world , 
▁ xxmaj to meet with joy in sweet xxmaj jerusalem . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj is proclamation made that who finds xxmaj edward 
▁ xxmaj shall have a high reward , and he his life ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj it is ; and lo where youthful xxmaj edward comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter soldiers , with xxup prince xxup edward 
▁
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj bring forth the gallant ; let us hear him speak . 
▁ xxmaj what , can so young a man begin to prick ? 
▁ xxmaj edward , what satisfaction canst thou make 
▁ xxmaj for bearing arms , for stirring up my subjects , 
▁ xxmaj and all the trouble thou hast turn'd me to ? 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj speak like a subject , proud ambitious xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj suppose that i am now my father 's mouth ; 
▁ xxmaj resign thy chair , and where i stand kneel thou , 
▁ xxmaj whilst i propose the self - same words to the 
▁ xxmaj which , traitor , thou wouldst have me answer to . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ah , that thy father had been so resolv'd ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj that you might still have worn the petticoat 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er have stol'n the breech from xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj let xxmaj aesop fable in a winter 's night ; 
▁ xxmaj his currish riddle sorts not with this place . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj by heaven , brat , xxmaj i 'll plague ye for that word . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ay , thou wast born to be a plague to men . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , take away this captive scold . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . xxmaj nay , take away this scolding crookback rather . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj peace , wilful boy , or i will charm your tongue . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj untutor'd lad , thou art too malapert . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup wales . i know my duty ; you are all undutiful . 
▁ xxmaj lascivious xxmaj edward , and thou perjur'd xxmaj george , 
▁ xxmaj and thou misshapen xxmaj dick , i tell ye all 
▁ i am your better , traitors as ye are ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou usurp'st my father 's right and mine . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj take that , the likeness of this railer here . 
▁ [ stabs him ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sprawl'st thou ? xxmaj take that , to end thy agony . 
▁ [ stabs him ] 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj and there 's for twitting me with perjury . 
▁ [ stabs him ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxup o , kill me too ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj marry , and shall . [ offers to kill her ] 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj hold , xxmaj richard , hold ; for we have done to much . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why should she live to fill the world with words ? 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj what , doth she swoon ? xxmaj use means for her recovery . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj clarence , excuse me to the xxmaj king my brother . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hence to xxmaj london on a serious matter ; 
▁ xxmaj ere ye come there , be sure to hear some news . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj what ? what ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the xxmaj tower ! the xxmaj tower ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . o xxmaj ned , sweet xxmaj ned , speak to thy mother , boy ! 
▁ xxmaj canst thou not speak ? o traitors ! murderers ! 
▁ xxmaj they that stabb'd xxmaj caesar shed no blood at all , 
▁ xxmaj did not offend , nor were not worthy blame , 
▁ xxmaj if this foul deed were by to equal it . 
▁ xxmaj he was a man : this , in respect , a child ; 
▁ xxmaj and men ne'er spend their fury on a child . 
▁ xxmaj what 's worse than murderer , that i may name it ? 
▁ xxmaj no , no , my heart will burst , an if i speak- 
▁ xxmaj and i will speak , that so my heart may burst . 
▁ xxmaj butchers and villains ! bloody cannibals ! 
▁ xxmaj how sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd ! 
▁ xxmaj you have no children , butchers , if you had , 
▁ xxmaj the thought of them would have stirr'd up remorse . 
▁ xxmaj but if you ever chance to have a child , 
▁ xxmaj look in his youth to have him so cut off 
▁ xxmaj as , deathsmen , you have rid this sweet young prince ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj away with her ; go , bear her hence perforce . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj nay , never bear me hence ; dispatch me here . 
▁ xxmaj here sheathe thy sword ; xxmaj i 'll pardon thee my death . 
▁ xxmaj what , wilt thou not ? xxmaj then , xxmaj clarence , do it thou . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj by heaven , i will not do thee so much ease . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj good xxmaj clarence , do ; sweet xxmaj clarence , do thou do it . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj didst thou not hear me swear i would not do it ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ay , but thou usest to forswear thyself . 
▁ ' twas sin before , but now ' tis charity . 
▁ xxmaj what ! wilt thou not ? xxmaj where is that devil 's butcher , 
▁ xxmaj hard - favour'd xxmaj richard ? xxmaj richard , where art thou ? 
▁ xxmaj thou art not here . xxmaj murder is thy alms - deed ; 
▁ xxmaj petitioners for blood thou ne'er put'st back . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj away , i say ; i charge ye bear her hence . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj so come to you and yours as to this prince . 
▁ xxmaj exit , led out forcibly 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj where 's xxmaj richard gone ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj to xxmaj london , all in post ; and , as i guess , 
▁ xxmaj to make a bloody supper in the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj he 's sudden , if a thing comes in his head . 
▁ xxmaj now march we hence . xxmaj discharge the common sort 
▁ xxmaj with pay and thanks ; and let 's away to xxmaj london 
▁ xxmaj and see our gentle queen how well she fares . 
▁ xxmaj by this , i hope , she hath a son for me . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry and xxup gloucester with the xxup lieutenant , on the walls 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj good day , my lord . xxmaj what , at your book so hard ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ay , my good lord- my lord , i should say rather . 
▁ ' tis sin to flatter ; ' good ' was little better . 
▁ ' good xxmaj gloucester ' and ' good devil ' were alike , 
▁ xxmaj and both preposterous ; therefore , not ' good lord . ' 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sirrah , leave us to ourselves ; we must confer . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup lieutenant 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj so flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf ; 
▁ xxmaj so first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece , 
▁ xxmaj and next his throat unto the butcher 's knife . 
▁ xxmaj what scene of death hath xxmaj roscius now to act ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj suspicion always haunts the guilty mind : 
▁ xxmaj the thief doth fear each bush an officer . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj the bird that hath been limed in a bush 
▁ xxmaj with trembling wings misdoubteth every bush ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , the hapless male to one sweet bird , 
▁ xxmaj have now the fatal object in my eye 
▁ xxmaj where my poor young was lim'd , was caught , and kill'd . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , what a peevish fool was that of xxmaj crete 
▁ xxmaj that taught his son the office of a fowl ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet , for all his wings , the fool was drown'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxup i , xxmaj daedalus ; my poor boy , xxmaj icarus ; 
▁ xxmaj thy father , xxmaj minos , that denied our course ; 
▁ xxmaj the sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy , 
▁ xxmaj thy brother xxmaj edward ; and thyself , the sea 
▁ xxmaj whose envious gulf did swallow up his life . 
▁ xxmaj ah , kill me with thy weapon , not with words ! 
▁ xxmaj my breast can better brook thy dagger 's point 
▁ xxmaj than can my ears that tragic history . 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore dost thou come ? xxmaj is't for my life ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj think'st thou i am an executioner ? 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . a persecutor i am sure thou art . 
▁ xxmaj if murdering innocents be executing , 
▁ xxmaj why , then thou are an executioner . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj thy son i kill'd for his presumption . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj hadst thou been kill'd when first thou didst presume , 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst not liv'd to kill a son of mine . 
▁ xxmaj and thus i prophesy , that many a thousand 
▁ xxmaj which now mistrust no parcel of my fear , 
▁ xxmaj and many an old man 's sigh , and many a widow 's , 
▁ xxmaj and many an orphan 's water - standing eye- 
▁ xxmaj men for their sons , wives for their husbands , 
▁ xxmaj orphans for their parents ' timeless death- 
▁ xxmaj shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born . 
▁ xxmaj the owl shriek'd at thy birth- an evil sign ; 
▁ xxmaj the night - crow cried , aboding luckless time ; 
▁ xxmaj dogs howl'd , and hideous tempest shook down trees ; 
▁ xxmaj the raven rook'd her on the chimney 's top , 
▁ xxmaj and chatt'ring pies in dismal discords sung ; 
▁ xxmaj thy mother felt more than a mother 's pain , 
▁ xxmaj and yet brought forth less than a mother 's hope , 
▁ xxmaj to wit , an indigest deformed lump , 
▁ xxmaj not like the fruit of such a goodly tree . 
▁ xxmaj teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born , 
▁ xxmaj to signify thou cam'st to bite the world ; 
▁ xxmaj and if the rest be true which i have heard , 
▁ xxmaj thou cam'st- 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj i 'll hear no more . xxmaj die , prophet , in thy speech . 
▁ [ stabs him ] 
▁ xxmaj for this , amongst the rest , was i ordain'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj ay , and for much more slaughter after this . 
▁ xxup o , xxmaj god forgive my sins and pardon thee ! [ dies ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what , will the aspiring blood of xxmaj lancaster 
▁ xxmaj sink in the ground ? i thought it would have mounted . 
▁ xxmaj see how my sword weeps for the poor xxmaj king 's death . 
▁ xxup o , may such purple tears be always shed 
▁ xxmaj from those that wish the downfall of our house ! 
▁ xxmaj if any spark of life be yet remaining , 
▁ xxmaj down , down to hell ; and say i sent thee thither- 
▁ [ stabs him again ] 
▁ xxup i , that have neither pity , love , nor fear . 
▁ xxmaj indeed , ' tis true that xxmaj henry told me of ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have often heard my mother say 
▁ i came into the world with my legs forward . 
▁ xxmaj had i not reason , think ye , to make haste 
▁ xxmaj and seek their ruin that usurp'd our right ? 
▁ xxmaj the midwife wonder'd ; and the women cried 
▁ ' o , xxmaj jesus bless us , he is born with teeth ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and so i was , which plainly signified 
▁ xxmaj that i should snarl , and bite , and play the dog . 
▁ xxmaj then , since the heavens have shap'd my body so , 
▁ xxmaj let hell make crook'd my mind to answer it . 
▁ i have no brother , i am like no brother ; 
▁ xxmaj and this word ' love , ' which greybeards call divine , 
▁ xxmaj be resident in men like one another , 
▁ xxmaj and not in me ! i am myself alone . 
▁ xxmaj clarence , beware ; thou keep'st me from the light , 
▁ xxmaj but i will sort a pitchy day for thee ; 
▁ xxmaj for i will buzz abroad such prophecies 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj edward shall be fearful of his life ; 
▁ xxmaj and then to purge his fear , xxmaj i 'll be thy death . 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry and the xxmaj prince his son are gone . 
▁ xxmaj clarence , thy turn is next , and then the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj counting myself but bad till i be best . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll throw thy body in another room , 
▁ xxmaj and triumph , xxmaj henry , in thy day of doom . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the body 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward , xxup queen xxup elizabeth , xxup clarence , xxup gloucester , 
 xxup hastings , xxup nurse , with the xxmaj young xxup prince , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj once more we sit in xxmaj england 's royal throne , 
▁ xxmaj repurchas'd with the blood of enemies . 
▁ xxmaj what valiant foemen , like to autumn 's corn , 
▁ xxmaj have we mow'd down in tops of all their pride ! 
▁ xxmaj three xxmaj dukes of xxmaj somerset , threefold renown'd 
▁ xxmaj for hardy and undoubted champions ; 
▁ xxmaj two xxmaj cliffords , as the father and the son ; 
▁ xxmaj and two xxmaj northumberlands- two braver men 
▁ xxmaj ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet 's sound ; 
▁ xxmaj with them the two brave bears , xxmaj warwick and xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj that in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion 
▁ xxmaj and made the forest tremble when they roar'd . 
▁ xxmaj thus have we swept suspicion from our seat 
▁ xxmaj and made our footstool of security . 
▁ xxmaj come hither , xxmaj bess , and let me kiss my boy . 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj ned , for thee thine uncles and myself 
▁ xxmaj have in our armours watch'd the winter 's night , 
▁ xxmaj went all afoot in summer 's scalding heat , 
▁ xxmaj that thou might'st repossess the crown in peace ; 
▁ xxmaj and of our labours thou shalt reap the gain . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj i 'll blast his harvest if your head were laid ; 
▁ xxmaj for yet i am not look'd on in the world . 
▁ xxmaj this shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave ; 
▁ xxmaj and heave it shall some weight or break my back . 
▁ xxmaj work thou the way- and that shall execute . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj clarence and xxmaj gloucester , love my lovely queen ; 
▁ xxmaj and kiss your princely nephew , brothers both . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj the duty that i owe unto your xxmaj majesty 
▁ i seal upon the lips of this sweet babe . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj thanks , noble xxmaj clarence ; worthy brother , thanks . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and that i love the tree from whence thou sprang'st , 
▁ xxmaj witness the loving kiss i give the fruit . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj to say the truth , so xxmaj judas kiss'd his master 
▁ xxmaj and cried ' all hail ! ' when as he meant all harm . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now am i seated as my soul delights , 
▁ xxmaj having my country 's peace and brothers ' loves . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj what will your xxmaj grace have done with xxmaj margaret ? 
▁ xxmaj reignier , her father , to the xxmaj king of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj hath pawn'd the xxmaj sicils and xxmaj jerusalem , 
▁ xxmaj and hither have they sent it for her ransom . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj away with her , and waft her hence to xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj and now what rests but that we spend the time 
▁ xxmaj with stately triumphs , mirthful comic shows , 
▁ xxmaj such as befits the pleasure of the court ? 
▁ xxmaj sound drums and trumpets . xxmaj farewell , sour annoy ! 
▁ xxmaj for here , i hope , begins our lasting joy . xxmaj exeunt 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1611 

 xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup eighth 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 


 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup eighth 
▁ xxup cardinal xxup wolsey xxup cardinal xxup campeius 
▁ xxup capucius , xxmaj ambassador from the xxmaj emperor xxmaj charles v 
▁ xxup cranmer , xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk xxup duke xxup of xxup buckingham 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk xxup earl xxup of xxup surrey 
▁ xxup lord xxup chamberlain xxup lord xxup chancellor 
▁ xxup gardiner , xxup bishop xxup of xxup winchester 
▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup lincoln xxup lord xxup abergavenny 
▁ xxup lord xxup sandys xxup sir xxup henry xxup guildford 
▁ xxup sir xxup thomas xxup lovell xxup sir xxup anthony xxup denny 
▁ xxup sir xxup nicholas xxup vaux xxup secretaries to xxmaj wolsey 
▁ xxup cromwell , servant to xxmaj wolsey 
▁ xxup griffith , gentleman - usher to xxmaj queen xxmaj katharine 
▁ xxup three xxup gentlemen 
▁ xxup doctor xxup butts , physician to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup garter xxup king - at - arms 
▁ xxup surveyor to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxup brandon , and a xxup sergeant - at - arms 
▁ xxup doorkeeper xxmaj of the xxmaj council chamber 
▁ xxup porter , and his xxup man xxup page to xxmaj gardiner 
▁ a xxup crier 

▁ xxup queen xxup katharine , wife to xxmaj king xxmaj henry , afterwards divorced 
▁ xxup anne xxup bullen , her xxmaj maid of xxmaj honour , afterwards xxmaj queen 
▁ xxup an xxup old xxup lady , friend to xxmaj anne xxmaj bullen 
▁ xxup patience , woman to xxmaj queen xxmaj katharine 

▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor , xxmaj aldermen , xxmaj lords and xxmaj ladies in the xxmaj dumb 
▁ xxmaj shows ; xxmaj women attending upon the xxmaj queen ; xxmaj scribes , 
▁ xxmaj officers , xxmaj guards , and other xxmaj attendants ; xxmaj spirits 

▁ xxup scene : 

▁ xxmaj london ; xxmaj westminster ; xxmaj kimbolton 



▁ xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup eighth 

▁ xxup the xxup prologue . 

▁ i come no more to make you laugh ; things now 
▁ xxmaj that bear a weighty and a serious brow , 
▁ xxmaj sad , high , and working , full of state and woe , 
▁ xxmaj such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow , 
▁ xxmaj we now present . xxmaj those that can pity here 
▁ xxmaj may , if they think it well , let fall a tear : 
▁ xxmaj the subject will deserve it . xxmaj such as give 
▁ xxmaj their money out of hope they may believe 
▁ xxmaj may here find truth too . xxmaj those that come to see 
▁ xxmaj only a show or two , and so agree 
▁ xxmaj the play may pass , if they be still and willing , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll undertake may see away their shilling 
▁ xxmaj richly in two short hours . xxmaj only they 
▁ xxmaj that come to hear a merry bawdy play , 
▁ a noise of targets , or to see a fellow 
▁ xxmaj in a long motley coat guarded with yellow , 
▁ xxmaj will be deceiv'd ; for , gentle hearers , know , 
▁ xxmaj to rank our chosen truth with such a show 
▁ xxmaj as fool and fight is , beside forfeiting 
▁ xxmaj our own brains , and the opinion that we bring 
▁ xxmaj to make that only true we now intend , 
▁ xxmaj will leave us never an understanding friend . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , for goodness sake , and as you are known 
▁ xxmaj the first and happiest hearers of the town , 
▁ xxmaj be sad , as we would make ye . xxmaj think ye see 
▁ xxmaj the very persons of our noble story 
▁ xxmaj as they were living ; think you see them great , 
▁ xxmaj and follow'd with the general throng and sweat 
▁ xxmaj of thousand friends ; then , in a moment , see 
▁ xxmaj how soon this mightiness meets misery . 
▁ xxmaj and if you can be merry then , xxmaj i 'll say 
▁ a man may weep upon his wedding - day . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk at one door ; at the other , 
 the xxup duke xxup of xxup buckingham and the xxup lord xxup abergavenny 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj good morrow , and well met . xxmaj how have ye done 
▁ xxmaj since last we saw in xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . i thank your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj healthful ; and ever since a fresh admirer 
▁ xxmaj of what i saw there . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj an untimely ague 
▁ xxmaj stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber when 
▁ xxmaj those suns of glory , those two lights of men , 
▁ xxmaj met in the vale of xxmaj andren . 
▁ xxup norfolk . ' twixt xxmaj guynes and xxmaj arde- 
▁ i was then present , saw them salute on horseback ; 
▁ xxmaj beheld them , when they lighted , how they clung 
▁ xxmaj in their embracement , as they grew together ; 
▁ xxmaj which had they , what four thron'd ones could have weigh'd 
▁ xxmaj such a compounded one ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj all the whole time 
▁ i was my chamber 's prisoner . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj then you lost 
▁ xxmaj the view of earthly glory ; men might say , 
▁ xxmaj till this time pomp was single , but now married 
▁ xxmaj to one above itself . xxmaj each following day 
▁ xxmaj became the next day 's master , till the last 
▁ xxmaj made former wonders its . xxmaj to - day the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj all clinquant , all in gold , like heathen gods , 
▁ xxmaj shone down the xxmaj english ; and to - morrow they 
▁ xxmaj made xxmaj britain xxmaj india : every man that stood 
▁ xxmaj show'd like a mine . xxmaj their dwarfish pages were 
▁ xxmaj as cherubins , an gilt ; the madams too , 
▁ xxmaj not us'd to toil , did almost sweat to bear 
▁ xxmaj the pride upon them , that their very labour 
▁ xxmaj was to them as a painting . xxmaj now this masque 
▁ xxmaj was cried incomparable ; and th ' ensuing night 
▁ xxmaj made it a fool and beggar . xxmaj the two kings , 
▁ xxmaj equal in lustre , were now best , now worst , 
▁ xxmaj as presence did present them : him in eye 
▁ still him in praise ; and being present both , 
▁ ' twas said they saw but one , and no discerner 
▁ xxmaj durst wag his tongue in censure . xxmaj when these suns- 
▁ xxmaj for so they phrase 'em - by their heralds challeng'd 
▁ xxmaj the noble spirits to arms , they did perform 
▁ xxmaj beyond thought 's compass , that former fabulous story , 
▁ xxmaj being now seen possible enough , got credit , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj bevis was believ'd . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxup o , you go far ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj as i belong to worship , and affect 
▁ xxmaj in honour honesty , the tract of ev'rything 
▁ xxmaj would by a good discourser lose some life 
▁ xxmaj which action 's self was tongue to . xxmaj all was royal : 
▁ xxmaj to the disposing of it nought rebell'd ; 
▁ xxmaj order gave each thing view . xxmaj the office did 
▁ xxmaj distinctly his full function . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj who did guide- 
▁ i mean , who set the body and the limbs 
▁ xxmaj of this great sport together , as you guess ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj one , certes , that promises no element 
▁ xxmaj in such a business . 
▁ xxup buckingham . i pray you , who , my lord ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj all this was ord'red by the good discretion 
▁ xxmaj of the right reverend xxmaj cardinal of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj the devil speed him ! xxmaj no man 's pie is freed 
▁ xxmaj from his ambitious finger . xxmaj what had he 
▁ xxmaj to do in these fierce vanities ? i wonder 
▁ xxmaj that such a keech can with his very bulk 
▁ xxmaj take up the rays o ' th ' beneficial sun , 
▁ xxmaj and keep it from the earth . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj surely , sir , 
▁ xxmaj there 's in him stuff that puts him to these ends ; 
▁ xxmaj for , being not propp'd by ancestry , whose grace 
▁ xxmaj chalks successors their way , nor call'd upon 
▁ xxmaj for high feats done to th ' crown , neither allied 
▁ xxmaj to eminent assistants , but spider - like , 
▁ xxmaj out of his self - drawing web , ' a gives us note 
▁ xxmaj the force of his own merit makes his way- 
▁ a gift that heaven gives for him , which buys 
▁ a place next to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup abergavenny . i can not tell 
▁ xxmaj what heaven hath given him - let some graver eye 
▁ xxmaj pierce into that ; but i can see his pride 
▁ xxmaj peep through each part of him . xxmaj whence has he that ? 
▁ xxmaj if not from hell , the devil is a niggard 
▁ xxmaj or has given all before , and he begins 
▁ a new hell in himself . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj why the devil , 
▁ xxmaj upon this xxmaj french going out , took he upon him- 
▁ xxmaj without the privity o ' th ' xxmaj king - t ' appoint 
▁ xxmaj who should attend on him ? xxmaj he makes up the file 
▁ xxmaj of all the gentry ; for the most part such 
▁ xxmaj to whom as great a charge as little honour 
▁ xxmaj he meant to lay upon ; and his own letter , 
▁ xxmaj the honourable board of council out , 
▁ xxmaj must fetch him in he papers . 
▁ xxup abergavenny . i do know 
▁ xxmaj kinsmen of mine , three at the least , that have 
▁ xxmaj by this so sicken'd their estates that never 
▁ xxmaj they shall abound as formerly . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxup o , many 
▁ xxmaj have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em 
▁ xxmaj for this great journey . xxmaj what did this vanity 
▁ xxmaj but minister communication of 
▁ a most poor issue ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj grievingly i think 
▁ xxmaj the peace between the xxmaj french and us not values 
▁ xxmaj the cost that did conclude it . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj every man , 
▁ xxmaj after the hideous storm that follow'd , was 
▁ a thing inspir'd , and , not consulting , broke 
▁ xxmaj into a general prophecy - that this tempest , 
▁ xxmaj dashing the garment of this peace , aboded 
▁ xxmaj the sudden breach on't . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj which is budded out ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj france hath flaw'd the league , and hath attach'd 
▁ xxmaj our merchants ' goods at xxmaj bordeaux . 
▁ xxup abergavenny . xxmaj is it therefore 
▁ xxmaj th ' ambassador is silenc'd ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj marry , is't . 
▁ xxup abergavenny . a proper tide of a peace , and purchas'd 
▁ xxmaj at a superfluous rate ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj why , all this business 
▁ xxmaj our reverend xxmaj cardinal carried . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj like it your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj the state takes notice of the private difference 
▁ xxmaj betwixt you and the xxmaj cardinal . i advise you- 
▁ xxmaj and take it from a heart that wishes towards you 
▁ xxmaj honour and plenteous safety - that you read 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal 's malice and his potency 
▁ xxmaj together ; to consider further , that 
▁ xxmaj what his high hatred would effect wants not 
▁ a minister in his power . xxmaj you know his nature , 
▁ xxmaj that he 's revengeful ; and i know his sword 
▁ xxmaj hath a sharp edge - it 's long and't may be said 
▁ xxmaj it reaches far , and where ' twill not extend , 
▁ xxmaj thither he darts it . xxmaj bosom up my counsel 
▁ xxmaj you 'll find it wholesome . xxmaj lo , where comes that rock 
▁ xxmaj that i advise your shunning . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cardinal xxup wolsey , the purse borne before 
▁ him , certain of the guard , and two xxup secretaries 
▁ with papers . xxmaj the xxup cardinal in his passage fixeth his 
▁ eye on xxup buckingham , and xxup buckingham on him , 
▁ both full of disdain 

▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham 's surveyor ? xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj where 's his examination ? 
▁ xxup secretary . xxmaj here , so please you . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj is he in person ready ? 
▁ xxup secretary . xxmaj ay , please your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj well , we shall then know more , and xxmaj buckingham 
▁ shall lessen this big look . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup wolsey and his train 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj this butcher 's cur is venom - mouth'd , and i 
▁ xxmaj have not the power to muzzle him ; therefore best 
▁ xxmaj not wake him in his slumber . a beggar 's book 
▁ xxmaj outworths a noble 's blood . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj what , are you chaf'd ?