xxbos xxmaj ask xxmaj god for temp'rance ; that 's th ' appliance only 
▁ xxmaj which your disease requires . 
▁ xxup buckingham . i read in 's looks 
▁ xxmaj matter against me , and his eye revil'd 
▁ xxmaj me as his abject object . xxmaj at this instant 
▁ xxmaj he bores me with some trick . xxmaj he 's gone to th ' xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow , and outstare him . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj stay , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj and let your reason with your choler question 
▁ xxmaj what ' tis you go about . xxmaj to climb steep hills 
▁ xxmaj requires slow pace at first . xxmaj anger is like 
▁ a full hot horse , who being allow'd his way , 
▁ xxmaj self - mettle tires him . xxmaj not a man in xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj can advise me like you ; be to yourself 
▁ xxmaj as you would to your friend . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and from a mouth of honour quite cry down 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj ipswich fellow 's insolence ; or proclaim 
▁ xxmaj there 's difference in no persons . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj be advis'd : 
▁ xxmaj heat not a furnace for your foe so hot 
▁ xxmaj that it do singe yourself . xxmaj we may outrun 
▁ xxmaj by violent swiftness that which we run at , 
▁ xxmaj and lose by over - running . xxmaj know you not 
▁ xxmaj the fire that mounts the liquor till't run o'er 
▁ xxmaj in seeming to augment it wastes it ? xxmaj be advis'd . 
▁ i say again there is no xxmaj english soul 
▁ xxmaj more stronger to direct you than yourself , 
▁ xxmaj if with the sap of reason you would quench 
▁ xxmaj or but allay the fire of passion . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj sir , 
▁ i am thankful to you , and xxmaj i 'll go along 
▁ xxmaj by your prescription ; but this top - proud fellow- 
▁ xxmaj whom from the flow of gan i name not , but 
▁ xxmaj from sincere motions , by intelligence , 
▁ xxmaj and proofs as clear as founts in xxmaj july when 
▁ xxmaj we see each grain of gravel - i do know 
▁ xxmaj to be corrupt and treasonous . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj say not treasonous . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj to th ' xxmaj king xxmaj i 'll say't , and make my vouch as strong 
▁ xxmaj as shore of rock . xxmaj attend : this holy fox , 
▁ xxmaj or wolf , or both - for he is equal rav'nous 
▁ xxmaj as he is subtle , and as prone to mischief 
▁ xxmaj as able to perform't , his mind and place 
▁ xxmaj infecting one another , yea , reciprocally- 
▁ xxmaj only to show his pomp as well in xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj as here at home , suggests the xxmaj king our master 
▁ xxmaj to this last costly treaty , th ' interview 
▁ xxmaj that swallowed so much treasure and like a glass 
▁ xxmaj did break i ' th ' wrenching . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj faith , and so it did . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj pray , give me favour , sir ; this cunning cardinal 
▁ xxmaj the articles o ' th ' combination drew 
▁ xxmaj as himself pleas'd ; and they were ratified 
▁ xxmaj as he cried ' thus let be ' to as much end 
▁ xxmaj as give a crutch to th ' dead . xxmaj but our count - cardinal 
▁ xxmaj has done this , and ' tis well ; for worthy xxmaj wolsey , 
▁ xxmaj who can not err , he did it . xxmaj now this follows , 
▁ xxmaj which , as i take it , is a kind of puppy 
▁ xxmaj to th ' old dam treason : xxmaj charles the xxmaj emperor , 
▁ xxmaj under pretence to see the xxmaj queen his aunt- 
▁ xxmaj for ' twas indeed his colour , but he came 
▁ xxmaj to whisper xxmaj wolsey - here makes visitation- 
▁ xxmaj his fears were that the interview betwixt 
▁ xxmaj england and xxmaj france might through their amity 
▁ xxmaj breed him some prejudice ; for from this league 
▁ xxmaj peep'd harms that menac'd him - privily 
▁ xxmaj deals with our xxmaj cardinal ; and , as i trow- 
▁ xxmaj which i do well , for i am sure the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj paid ere he promis'd ; whereby his suit was granted 
▁ xxmaj ere it was ask'd - but when the way was made , 
▁ xxmaj and pav'd with gold , the xxmaj emperor thus desir'd , 
▁ xxmaj that he would please to alter the xxmaj king 's course , 
▁ xxmaj and break the foresaid peace . xxmaj let the xxmaj king know , 
▁ xxmaj as soon he shall by me , that thus the xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj does buy and sell his honour as he pleases , 
▁ xxmaj and for his own advantage . 
▁ xxup norfolk . i am sorry 
▁ xxmaj to hear this of him , and could wish he were 
▁ xxmaj something mistaken in't . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj no , not a syllable : 
▁ i do pronounce him in that very shape 
▁ xxmaj he shall appear in proof . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup brandon , a xxup sergeant - at - arms before him , 
▁ and two or three of the guard 

▁ xxup brandon . xxmaj your office , sergeant : execute it . 
▁ xxup sergeant . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj my lord the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham , and xxmaj earl 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj hereford , xxmaj stafford , and xxmaj northampton , i 
▁ xxmaj arrest thee of high treason , in the name 
▁ xxmaj of our most sovereign xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj lo you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj the net has fall'n upon me ! i shall perish 
▁ xxmaj under device and practice . 
▁ xxup brandon . i am sorry 
▁ xxmaj to see you ta'en from liberty , to look on 
▁ xxmaj the business present ; ' tis his xxmaj highness ' pleasure 
▁ xxmaj you shall to th ' xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj it will help nothing 
▁ xxmaj to plead mine innocence ; for that dye is on me 
▁ xxmaj which makes my whit'st part black . xxmaj the will of heav'n 
▁ xxmaj be done in this and all things ! i obey . 
▁ o my xxmaj lord xxmaj aberga'ny , fare you well ! 
▁ xxup brandon . xxmaj nay , he must bear you company . 
▁ [ to xxup abergavenny ] xxmaj the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj is pleas'd you shall to th ' xxmaj tower , till you know 
▁ xxmaj how he determines further . 
▁ xxup abergavenny . xxmaj as the xxmaj duke said , 
▁ xxmaj the will of heaven be done , and the xxmaj king 's pleasure 
▁ xxmaj by me obey'd . 
▁ xxup brandon . xxmaj here is warrant from 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king t ' attach xxmaj lord xxmaj montacute and the bodies 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj duke 's confessor , xxmaj john de la xxmaj car , 
▁ xxmaj one xxmaj gilbert xxmaj peck , his chancellor- 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj so , so ! 
▁ xxmaj these are the limbs o ' th ' plot ; no more , i hope . 
▁ xxup brandon . a monk o ' th ' xxmaj chartreux . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxup o , xxmaj nicholas xxmaj hopkins ? 
▁ xxup brandon . xxmaj he . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my surveyor is false . xxmaj the o'er - great xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj hath show'd him gold ; my life is spann'd already . 
▁ i am the shadow of poor xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj whose figure even this instant cloud puts on 
▁ xxmaj by dark'ning my clear sun . xxmaj my lord , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj council xxmaj chamber 

 xxmaj cornets . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup henry , leaning on the xxup cardinal 's shoulder , the xxup nobles , 
 and xxup sir xxup thomas xxup lovell , with others . xxmaj the xxup cardinal places himself 
 under the xxup king 's feet on his right side 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj my life itself , and the best heart of it , 
▁ xxmaj thanks you for this great care ; i stood i ' th ' level 
▁ xxmaj of a full - charg'd confederacy , and give thanks 
▁ xxmaj to you that chok'd it . xxmaj let be call'd before us 
▁ xxmaj that gentleman of xxmaj buckingham 's . xxmaj in person 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hear his confessions justify ; 
▁ xxmaj and point by point the treasons of his master 
▁ xxmaj he shall again relate . 

▁ a noise within , crying ' room for the xxmaj queen ! ' 
▁ xxmaj enter the xxup queen , usher'd by the xxup dukes xxup of xxup norfolk 
▁ and xxup suffolk ; she kneels . xxmaj the xxup king riseth 
▁ from his state , takes her up , kisses and placeth her 
▁ by him 

▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj nay , we must longer kneel : i am suitor . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj arise , and take place by us . xxmaj half your suit 
▁ xxmaj never name to us : you have half our power . 
▁ xxmaj the other moiety ere you ask is given ; 
▁ xxmaj repeat your will , and take it . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj thank your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj that you would love yourself , and in that love 
▁ xxmaj not unconsidered leave your honour nor 
▁ xxmaj the dignity of your office , is the point 
▁ xxmaj of my petition . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj lady mine , proceed . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . i am solicited , not by a few , 
▁ xxmaj and those of true condition , that your subjects 
▁ xxmaj are in great grievance : there have been commissions 
▁ xxmaj sent down among 'em which hath flaw'd the heart 
▁ xxmaj of all their loyalties ; wherein , although , 
▁ xxmaj my good xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , they vent reproaches 
▁ xxmaj most bitterly on you as putter - on 
▁ xxmaj of these exactions , yet the xxmaj king our master- 
▁ xxmaj whose honour xxmaj heaven shield from soil!-even he escapes not 
▁ xxmaj language unmannerly ; yea , such which breaks 
▁ xxmaj the sides of loyalty , and almost appears 
▁ xxmaj in loud rebellion . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj not almost appears- 
▁ xxmaj it doth appear ; for , upon these taxations , 
▁ xxmaj the clothiers all , not able to maintain 
▁ xxmaj the many to them ' longing , have put of 
▁ xxmaj the spinsters , carders , fullers , weavers , who 
▁ xxmaj unfit for other life , compell'd by hunger 
▁ xxmaj and lack of other means , in desperate manner 
▁ xxmaj daring th ' event to th ' teeth , are all in uproar , 
▁ xxmaj and danger serves among them . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj taxation ! 
▁ xxmaj wherein ? and what taxation ? xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj you that are blam'd for it alike with us , 
▁ xxmaj know you of this taxation ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj please you , sir , 
▁ i know but of a single part in aught 
▁ xxmaj pertains to th ' state , and front but in that file 
▁ xxmaj where others tell steps with me . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj no , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj you know no more than others ! xxmaj but you frame 
▁ xxmaj things that are known alike , which are not wholesome 
▁ xxmaj to those which would not know them , and yet must 
▁ xxmaj perforce be their acquaintance . xxmaj these exactions , 
▁ xxmaj whereof my sovereign would have note , they are 
▁ xxmaj most pestilent to th ' hearing ; and to bear 'em 
▁ xxmaj the back is sacrifice to th ' load . xxmaj they say 
▁ xxmaj they are devis'd by you , or else you suffer 
▁ xxmaj too hard an exclamation . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj still exaction ! 
▁ xxmaj the nature of it ? xxmaj in what kind , let 's know , 
▁ xxmaj is this exaction ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . i am much too venturous 
▁ xxmaj in tempting of your patience , but am bold'ned 
▁ xxmaj under your promis'd pardon . xxmaj the subjects ' grief 
▁ xxmaj comes through commissions , which compels from each 
▁ xxmaj the sixth part of his substance , to be levied 
▁ xxmaj without delay ; and the pretence for this 
▁ xxmaj is nam'd your wars in xxmaj france . xxmaj this makes bold mouths ; 
▁ xxmaj tongues spit their duties out , and cold hearts freeze 
▁ xxmaj allegiance in them ; their curses now 
▁ xxmaj live where their prayers did ; and it 's come to pass 
▁ xxmaj this tractable obedience is a slave 
▁ xxmaj to each incensed will . i would your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj would give it quick consideration , for 
▁ xxmaj there is no primer business . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj by my life , 
▁ xxmaj this is against our pleasure . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj and for me , 
▁ i have no further gone in this than by 
▁ a single voice ; and that not pass'd me but 
▁ xxmaj by learned approbation of the judges . xxmaj if i am 
▁ xxmaj traduc'd by ignorant tongues , which neither know 
▁ xxmaj my faculties nor person , yet will be 
▁ xxmaj the chronicles of my doing , let me say 
▁ ' tis but the fate of place , and the rough brake 
▁ xxmaj that virtue must go through . xxmaj we must not stint 
▁ xxmaj our necessary actions in the fear 
▁ xxmaj to cope malicious censurers , which ever 
▁ xxmaj as rav'nous fishes do a vessel follow 
▁ xxmaj that is new - trimm'd , but benefit no further 
▁ xxmaj than vainly longing . xxmaj what we oft do best , 
▁ xxmaj by sick interpreters , once weak ones , is 
▁ xxmaj not ours , or not allow'd ; what worst , as oft 
▁ xxmaj hitting a grosser quality , is cried up 
▁ xxmaj for our best act . xxmaj if we shall stand still , 
▁ xxmaj in fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at , 
▁ xxmaj we should take root here where we sit , or sit 
▁ xxmaj state - statues only . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj things done well 
▁ xxmaj and with a care exempt themselves from fear : 
▁ xxmaj things done without example , in their issue 
▁ xxmaj are to be fear'd . xxmaj have you a precedent 
▁ xxmaj of this commission ? i believe , not any . 
▁ xxmaj we must not rend our subjects from our laws , 
▁ xxmaj and stick them in our will . xxmaj sixth part of each ? 
▁ a trembling contribution ! xxmaj why , we take 
▁ xxmaj from every tree lop , bark , and part o ' th ' timber ; 
▁ xxmaj and though we leave it with a root , thus hack'd , 
▁ xxmaj the air will drink the sap . xxmaj to every county 
▁ xxmaj where this is question'd send our letters with 
▁ xxmaj free pardon to each man that has denied 
▁ xxmaj the force of this commission . xxmaj pray , look tot ; 
▁ i put it to your care . 
▁ xxup wolsey . [ aside to the xxup secretary ] a word with you . 
▁ xxmaj let there be letters writ to every shire 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj king 's grace and pardon . xxmaj the grieved commons 
▁ xxmaj hardly conceive of me - let it be nois'd 
▁ xxmaj that through our intercession this revokement 
▁ xxmaj and pardon comes . i shall anon advise you 
▁ xxmaj further in the proceeding . xxmaj exit xxup secretary 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup surveyor 

▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . i am sorry that the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxmaj is run in your displeasure . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj it grieves many . 
▁ xxmaj the gentleman is learn'd and a most rare speaker ; 
▁ xxmaj to nature none more bound ; his training such 
▁ xxmaj that he may furnish and instruct great teachers 
▁ xxmaj and never seek for aid out of himself . xxmaj yet see , 
▁ xxmaj when these so noble benefits shall prove 
▁ xxmaj not well dispos'd , the mind growing once corrupt , 
▁ xxmaj they turn to vicious forms , ten times more ugly 
▁ xxmaj than ever they were fair . xxmaj this man so complete , 
▁ xxmaj who was enroll'd ' mongst wonders , and when we , 
▁ xxmaj almost with ravish'd list'ning , could not find 
▁ xxmaj his hour of speech a minute - he , my lady , 
▁ xxmaj hath into monstrous habits put the graces 
▁ xxmaj that once were his , and is become as black 
▁ xxmaj as if besmear'd in hell . xxmaj sit by us ; you shall hear- 
▁ xxmaj this was his gentleman in trust - of him 
▁ xxmaj things to strike honour sad . xxmaj bid him recount 
▁ xxmaj the fore - recited practices , whereof 
▁ xxmaj we can not feel too little , hear too much . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj stand forth , and with bold spirit relate what you , 
▁ xxmaj most like a careful subject , have collected 
▁ xxmaj out of the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj speak freely . 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj first , it was usual with him - every day 
▁ xxmaj it would infect his speech - that if the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj should without issue die , he 'll carry it so 
▁ xxmaj to make the sceptre his . xxmaj these very words 
▁ xxmaj i 've heard him utter to his son - in - law , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj aberga'ny , to whom by oath he menac'd 
▁ xxmaj revenge upon the xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj please your xxmaj highness , note 
▁ xxmaj this dangerous conception in this point : 
▁ xxmaj not friended by his wish , to your high person 
▁ xxmaj his will is most malignant , and it stretches 
▁ xxmaj beyond you to your friends . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj my learn'd xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj deliver all with charity . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj speak on . 
▁ xxmaj how grounded he his title to the crown 
▁ xxmaj upon our fail ? xxmaj to this point hast thou heard him 
▁ xxmaj at any time speak aught ? 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj he was brought to this 
▁ xxmaj by a vain prophecy of xxmaj nicholas xxmaj henton . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what was that xxmaj henton ? 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj sir , a xxmaj chartreux friar , 
▁ xxmaj his confessor , who fed him every minute 
▁ xxmaj with words of sovereignty . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how know'st thou this ? 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj not long before your xxmaj highness sped to xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke being at the xxmaj rose , within the parish 
▁ xxmaj saint xxmaj lawrence xxmaj poultney , did of me demand 
▁ xxmaj what was the speech among the xxmaj londoners 
▁ xxmaj concerning the xxmaj french journey . i replied 
▁ xxmaj men fear'd the xxmaj french would prove perfidious , 
▁ xxmaj to the xxmaj king 's danger . xxmaj presently the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj said ' twas the fear indeed and that he doubted 
▁ ' twould prove the verity of certain words 
▁ xxmaj spoke by a holy monk ' that oft ' says he 
▁ ' hath sent to me , wishing me to permit 
▁ xxmaj john de la xxmaj car , my chaplain , a choice hour 
▁ xxmaj to hear from him a matter of some moment ; 
▁ xxmaj whom after under the confession 's seal 
▁ xxmaj he solemnly had sworn that what he spoke 
▁ xxmaj my chaplain to no creature living but 
▁ xxmaj to me should utter , with demure confidence 
▁ xxmaj this pausingly ensu'd : " neither the xxmaj king nor 's heirs , 
▁ xxmaj tell you the xxmaj duke , shall prosper ; bid him strive 
▁ xxmaj to gain the love o ' th ' commonalty ; the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj shall govern xxmaj england . " ' 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj if i know you well , 
▁ xxmaj you were the xxmaj duke 's surveyor , and lost your office 
▁ xxmaj on the complaint o ' th ' tenants . xxmaj take good heed 
▁ xxmaj you charge not in your spleen a noble person 
▁ xxmaj and spoil your nobler soul . i say , take heed ; 
▁ xxmaj yes , heartily beseech you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj let him on . 
▁ xxmaj go forward . 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj on my soul , xxmaj i 'll speak but truth . 
▁ i told my lord the xxmaj duke , by th ' devil 's illusions 
▁ xxmaj the monk might be deceiv'd , and that ' twas dangerous 
▁ for him 
▁ xxmaj to ruminate on this so far , until 
▁ xxmaj it forg'd him some design , which , being believ'd , 
▁ xxmaj it was much like to do . xxmaj he answer'd ' tush , 
▁ xxmaj it can do me no damage ' ; adding further 
▁ xxmaj that , had the xxmaj king in his last sickness fail'd , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal 's and xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell 's heads 
▁ xxmaj should have gone off . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ha ! what , so rank ? xxmaj ah ha ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's mischief in this man . xxmaj canst thou say further ? 
▁ xxup surveyor . i can , my liege . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj being at xxmaj greenwich , 
▁ xxmaj after your xxmaj highness had reprov'd the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj about xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj bulmer- 
▁ xxup king . i remember 
▁ xxmaj of such a time : being my sworn servant , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke retain'd him his . xxmaj but on : what hence ? 
▁ xxup surveyor . ' if ' quoth he ' i for this had been committed- 
▁ xxmaj as to the xxmaj tower i thought - i would have play'd 
▁ xxmaj the part my father meant to act upon 
▁ xxmaj th ' usurper xxmaj richard ; who , being at xxmaj salisbury , 
▁ xxmaj made suit to come in 's presence , which if granted , 
▁ xxmaj as he made semblance of his duty , would 
▁ xxmaj have put his knife into him . ' 
▁ xxup king . a giant traitor ! 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj now , madam , may his xxmaj highness live in freedom , 
▁ xxmaj and this man out of prison ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj god mend all ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj there 's something more would out of thee : what say'st ? 
▁ xxup surveyor . xxmaj after ' the xxmaj duke his father ' with the ' knife , ' 
▁ xxmaj he stretch'd him , and , with one hand on his dagger , 
▁ xxmaj another spread on 's breast , mounting his eyes , 
▁ xxmaj he did discharge a horrible oath , whose tenour 
▁ xxmaj was , were he evil us'd , he would outgo 
▁ xxmaj his father by as much as a performance 
▁ xxmaj does an irresolute purpose . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj there 's his period , 
▁ xxmaj to sheath his knife in us . xxmaj he is attach'd ; 
▁ xxmaj call him to present trial . xxmaj if he may 
▁ xxmaj find mercy in the law , ' tis his ; if none , 
▁ xxmaj let him not seek't of us . xxmaj by day and night ! 
▁ xxmaj he 's traitor to th ' height . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup chamberlain and xxup lord xxup sandys 

▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj is't possible the spells of xxmaj france should juggle 
▁ xxmaj men into such strange mysteries ? 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj new customs , 
▁ xxmaj though they be never so ridiculous , 
▁ xxmaj nay , let 'em be unmanly , yet are follow'd . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj as far as i see , all the good our xxmaj english 
▁ xxmaj have got by the late voyage is but merely 
▁ a fit or two o ' th ' face ; but they are shrewd ones ; 
▁ xxmaj for when they hold 'em , you would swear directly 
▁ xxmaj their very noses had been counsellors 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj pepin or xxmaj clotharius , they keep state so . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj they have all new legs , and lame ones . xxmaj one would take it , 
▁ xxmaj that never saw 'em pace before , the spavin 
▁ xxmaj or springhalt reign'd among 'em . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj death ! my lord , 
▁ xxmaj their clothes are after such a pagan cut to't , 
▁ xxmaj that sure th ' have worn out xxmaj christendom . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup thomas xxup lovell 

▁ xxmaj how now ? 
▁ xxmaj what news , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell ? 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj faith , my lord , 
▁ i hear of none but the new proclamation 
▁ xxmaj that 's clapp'd upon the court gate . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj what is't for ? 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj the reformation of our travell'd gallants , 
▁ xxmaj that fill the court with quarrels , talk , and tailors . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . i am glad ' tis there . xxmaj now i would pray our monsieurs 
▁ xxmaj to think an xxmaj english courtier may be wise , 
▁ xxmaj and never see the xxmaj louvre . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj they must either , 
▁ xxmaj for so run the conditions , leave those remnants 
▁ xxmaj of fool and feather that they got in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj with all their honourable points of ignorance 
▁ xxmaj pertaining thereunto - as fights and fireworks ; 
▁ xxmaj abusing better men than they can be , 
▁ xxmaj out of a foreign wisdom - renouncing clean 
▁ xxmaj the faith they have in tennis , and tall stockings , 
▁ xxmaj short blist'red breeches , and those types of travel 
▁ xxmaj and understand again like honest men , 
▁ xxmaj or pack to their old playfellows . xxmaj there , i take it , 
▁ xxmaj they may , cum privilegio , wear away 
▁ xxmaj the lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at . 
▁ xxup sandys . ' tis time to give 'em physic , their diseases 
▁ xxmaj are grown so catching . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj what a loss our ladies 
▁ xxmaj will have of these trim vanities ! 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj ay , marry , 
▁ xxmaj there will be woe indeed , lords : the sly whoresons 
▁ xxmaj have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies . 
▁ a xxmaj french song and a fiddle has no fellow . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj the devil fiddle 'em ! i am glad they are going , 
▁ xxmaj for sure there 's no converting 'em . xxmaj now 
▁ xxmaj an honest country lord , as i am , beaten 
▁ a long time out of play , may bring his plainsong 
▁ xxmaj and have an hour of hearing ; and , by'r xxmaj lady , 
▁ xxmaj held current music too . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj well said , xxmaj lord xxmaj sandys ; 
▁ xxmaj your colt 's tooth is not cast yet . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj no , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj nor shall not while i have a stamp . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas , 
▁ xxmaj whither were you a - going ? 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj to the xxmaj cardinal 's ; 
▁ xxmaj your lordship is a guest too . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxup o , ' tis true ; 
▁ xxmaj this night he makes a supper , and a great one , 
▁ xxmaj to many lords and ladies ; there will be 
▁ xxmaj the beauty of this kingdom , xxmaj i 'll assure you . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj that churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed , 
▁ a hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us ; 
▁ xxmaj his dews fall everywhere . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj no doubt he 's noble ; 
▁ xxmaj he had a black mouth that said other of him . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj he may , my lord ; has wherewithal . xxmaj in him 
▁ xxmaj sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine : 
▁ xxmaj men of his way should be most liberal , 
▁ xxmaj they are set here for examples . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj true , they are so ; 
▁ xxmaj but few now give so great ones . xxmaj my barge stays ; 
▁ xxmaj your lordship shall along . xxmaj come , good xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas , 
▁ xxmaj we shall be late else ; which i would not be , 
▁ xxmaj for i was spoke to , with xxmaj sir xxmaj henry xxmaj guildford , 
▁ xxmaj this night to be comptrollers . 
▁ xxup sandys . i am your lordship 's . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj presence xxmaj chamber in xxmaj york xxmaj place 

 xxmaj hautboys . a small table under a state for the xxmaj cardinal , 
 a longer table for the guests . xxmaj then enter xxup anne xxup bullen , 
 and divers other xxup ladies and xxup gentlemen , as guests , at one door ; 
 at another door enter xxup sir xxup henry xxup guildford 

▁ xxup guildford . xxmaj ladies , a general welcome from his xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj salutes ye all ; this night he dedicates 
▁ xxmaj to fair content and you . xxmaj none here , he hopes , 
▁ xxmaj in all this noble bevy , has brought with her 
▁ xxmaj one care abroad ; he would have all as merry 
▁ xxmaj as , first , good company , good wine , good welcome , 
▁ xxmaj can make good people . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup chamberlain , xxup lord xxup sandys , and xxup sir 
▁ xxup thomas xxup lovell 

▁ xxup o , my lord , y'are tardy , 
▁ xxmaj the very thought of this fair company 
▁ xxmaj clapp'd wings to me . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj you are young , xxmaj sir xxmaj harry xxmaj guildford . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell , had the xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj but half my lay thoughts in him , some of these 
▁ xxmaj should find a running banquet ere they rested 
▁ i think would better please 'em . xxmaj by my life , 
▁ xxmaj they are a sweet society of fair ones . 
▁ xxup lovell . o that your lordship were but now confessor 
▁ xxmaj to one or two of these ! 
▁ xxup sandys . i would i were ; 
▁ xxmaj they should find easy penance . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj faith , how easy ? 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj as easy as a down bed would afford it . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj sweet ladies , will it please you sit ? xxmaj sir xxmaj harry , 
▁ xxmaj place you that side ; xxmaj i 'll take the charge of this . 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj grace is ent'ring . xxmaj nay , you must not freeze : 
▁ xxmaj two women plac'd together makes cold weather . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj sandys , you are one will keep 'em waking : 
▁ xxmaj pray sit between these ladies . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj by my faith , 
▁ xxmaj and thank your lordship . xxmaj by your leave , sweet ladies . 
▁ [ seats himself between xxup anne xxup bullen and another lady ] 
▁ xxmaj if i chance to talk a little wild , forgive me ; 
▁ i had it from my father . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj was he mad , sir ? 
▁ xxup sandys . xxup o , very mad , exceeding mad , in love too . 
▁ xxmaj but he would bite none ; just as i do now , 
▁ xxmaj he would kiss you twenty with a breath . [ kisses her ] 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj well said , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj so , now y'are fairly seated . xxmaj gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj the penance lies on you if these fair ladies 
▁ xxmaj pass away frowning . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj for my little cure , 
▁ xxmaj let me alone . 

▁ xxmaj hautboys . xxmaj enter xxup cardinal xxup wolsey , attended ; and 
▁ takes his state 

▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj y'are welcome , my fair guests . xxmaj that noble lady 
▁ xxmaj or gentleman that is not freely merry 
▁ xxmaj is not my friend . xxmaj this , to confirm my welcome- 
▁ xxmaj and to you all , good health ! [ drinks ] 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj your xxmaj grace is noble . 
▁ xxmaj let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks 
▁ xxmaj and save me so much talking . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj sandys , 
▁ i am beholding to you . xxmaj cheer your neighbours . 
▁ xxmaj ladies , you are not merry . xxmaj gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj whose fault is this ? 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj the red wine first must rise 
▁ xxmaj in their fair cheeks , my lord ; then we shall have 'em 
▁ xxmaj talk us to silence . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj you are a merry gamester , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj sandys . 
▁ xxup sandys . xxmaj yes , if i make my play . 
▁ xxmaj here 's to your ladyship ; and pledge it , madam , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis to such a thing- 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj you can not show me . 
▁ xxup sandys . i told your xxmaj grace they would talk anon . 
▁ [ drum and trumpet . xxmaj chambers discharg'd ] 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj look out there , some of ye . xxmaj exit a xxup servant 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj what warlike voice , 
▁ xxmaj and to what end , is this ? xxmaj nay , ladies , fear not : 
▁ xxmaj by all the laws of war y'are privileg'd . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servant 

▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj how now ! what is't ? 
▁ xxup servant . a noble troop of strangers- 
▁ xxmaj for so they seem . xxmaj th ' have left their barge and landed , 
▁ xxmaj and hither make , as great ambassadors 
▁ xxmaj from foreign princes . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj good xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain , 
▁ xxmaj go , give 'em welcome ; you can speak the xxmaj french tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj and pray receive 'em nobly and conduct 'em 
▁ xxmaj into our presence , where this heaven of beauty 
▁ xxmaj shall shine at full upon them . xxmaj some attend him . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup chamberlain attended . xxmaj all rise , and tables remov'd 
▁ xxmaj you have now a broken banquet , but we 'll mend it . 
▁ a good digestion to you all ; and once more 
▁ i show'r a welcome on ye ; welcome all . 

▁ xxmaj hautboys . xxmaj enter the xxup king , and others , as maskers , 
▁ habited like shepherds , usher'd by the xxup lord xxup chamberlain . 
▁ xxmaj they pass directly before the xxup cardinal , 
▁ and gracefully salute him 

▁ a noble company ! xxmaj what are their pleasures ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj because they speak no xxmaj english , thus they pray'd 
▁ xxmaj to tell your xxmaj grace , that , having heard by fame 
▁ xxmaj of this so noble and so fair assembly 
▁ xxmaj this night to meet here , they could do no less , 
▁ xxmaj out of the great respect they bear to beauty , 
▁ xxmaj but leave their flocks and , under your fair conduct , 
▁ xxmaj crave leave to view these ladies and entreat 
▁ xxmaj an hour of revels with 'em . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj say , xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain , 
▁ xxmaj they have done my poor house grace ; for which i pay 'em 
▁ a thousand thanks , and pray 'em take their pleasures . 
▁ [ they choose ladies . xxmaj the xxup king chooses xxup anne xxup bullen ] 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the fairest hand i ever touch'd ! o beauty , 
▁ xxmaj till now i never knew thee ! [ music . xxmaj dance ] 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj pray tell 'em thus much from me : 
▁ xxmaj there should be one amongst 'em , by his person , 
▁ xxmaj more worthy this place than myself ; to whom , 
▁ xxmaj if i but knew him , with my love and duty 
▁ i would surrender it . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . i will , my lord . 
▁ [ he whispers to the maskers ] 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj what say they ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj such a one , they all confess , 
▁ xxmaj there is indeed ; which they would have your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj find out , and he will take it . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj let me see , then . [ comes from his state ] 
▁ xxmaj by all your good leaves , gentlemen , here xxmaj i 'll make 
▁ xxmaj my royal choice . 
▁ xxup king . [ unmasking ] xxmaj ye have found him , xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxmaj you hold a fair assembly ; you do well , lord . 
▁ xxmaj you are a churchman , or , xxmaj i 'll tell you , xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ i should judge now unhappily . 
▁ xxup wolsey . i am glad 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace is grown so pleasant . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain , 
▁ xxmaj prithee come hither : what fair lady 's that ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj an't please your xxmaj grace , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj bullen 's 
▁ daughter- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj viscount xxmaj rochford - one of her xxmaj highness ' women . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj by heaven , she is a dainty one . xxmaj sweet heart , 
▁ i were unmannerly to take you out 
▁ xxmaj and not to kiss you . a health , gentlemen ! 
▁ xxmaj let it go round . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell , is the banquet ready 
▁ xxup i ' th ' privy chamber ? 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj yes , my lord . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj your xxmaj grace , 
▁ i fear , with dancing is a little heated . 
▁ xxup king . i fear , too much . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj there 's fresher air , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj in the next chamber . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj lead in your ladies , ev'ry one . xxmaj sweet partner , 
▁ i must not yet forsake you . xxmaj let 's be merry : 
▁ xxmaj good my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , i have half a dozen healths 
▁ xxmaj to drink to these fair ladies , and a measure 
▁ xxmaj to lead 'em once again ; and then let 's dream 
▁ xxmaj who 's best in favour . xxmaj let the music knock it . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt , with trumpets 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj westminster . a street 

 xxmaj enter two xxup gentlemen , at several doors 

▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj whither away so fast ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxup o , xxmaj god save ye ! 
▁ xxmaj ev'n to the xxmaj hall , to hear what shall become 
▁ xxmaj of the great xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj i 'll save you 
▁ xxmaj that labour , sir . xxmaj all 's now done but the ceremony 
▁ xxmaj of bringing back the prisoner . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj were you there ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes , indeed , was xxup i. 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj pray , speak what has happen'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj you may guess quickly what . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj is he found guilty ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes , truly is he , and condemn'd upon't . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i am sorry for't . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj so are a number more . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj but , pray , how pass'd it ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj i 'll tell you in a little . xxmaj the great xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxmaj came to the bar ; where to his accusations 
▁ xxmaj he pleaded still not guilty , and alleged 
▁ xxmaj many sharp reasons to defeat the law . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's attorney , on the contrary , 
▁ xxmaj urg'd on the examinations , proofs , confessions , 
▁ xxmaj of divers witnesses ; which the xxmaj duke desir'd 
▁ xxmaj to have brought , viva voce , to his face ; 
▁ xxmaj at which appear'd against him his surveyor , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj gilbert xxmaj peck his chancellor , and xxmaj john xxmaj car , 
▁ xxmaj confessor to him , with that devil - monk , 
▁ xxmaj hopkins , that made this mischief . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj that was he 
▁ xxmaj that fed him with his prophecies ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj the same . 
▁ xxmaj all these accus'd him strongly , which he fain 
▁ xxmaj would have flung from him ; but indeed he could not ; 
▁ xxmaj and so his peers , upon this evidence , 
▁ xxmaj have found him guilty of high treason . xxmaj much 
▁ xxmaj he spoke , and learnedly , for life ; but all 
▁ xxmaj was either pitied in him or forgotten . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj after all this , how did he bear him - self 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj when he was brought again to th ' bar to hear 
▁ xxmaj his knell rung out , his judgment , he was stirr'd 
▁ xxmaj with such an agony he sweat extremely , 
▁ xxmaj and something spoke in choler , ill and hasty ; 
▁ xxmaj but he fell to himself again , and sweetly 
▁ xxmaj in all the rest show'd a most noble patience . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i do not think he fears death . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj sure , he does not ; 
▁ xxmaj he never was so womanish ; the cause 
▁ xxmaj he may a little grieve at . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj certainly 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal is the end of this . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . ' tis likely , 
▁ xxmaj by all conjectures : first , xxmaj kildare 's attainder , 
▁ xxmaj then deputy of xxmaj ireland , who remov'd , 
▁ xxmaj earl xxmaj surrey was sent thither , and in haste too , 
▁ xxmaj lest he should help his father . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj that trick of state 
▁ xxmaj was a deep envious one . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj at his return 
▁ xxmaj no doubt he will requite it . xxmaj this is noted , 
▁ xxmaj and generally : whoever the xxmaj king favours 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal instantly will find employment , 
▁ xxmaj and far enough from court too . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj all the commons 
▁ xxmaj hate him perniciously , and , o ' my conscience , 
▁ xxmaj wish him ten fathom deep : this xxmaj duke as much 
▁ xxmaj they love and dote on ; call him bounteous xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj the mirror of all courtesy- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham from his arraignment , tip - staves 
▁ before him ; the axe with the edge towards him ; halberds 
▁ on each side ; accompanied with xxup sir xxup thomas 
▁ xxup lovell , xxup sir xxup nicholas xxup vaux , xxup sir xxup william xxup sandys , 
▁ and common people , etc . 

▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj stay there , sir , 
▁ xxmaj and see the noble ruin'd man you speak of . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj let 's stand close , and behold him . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj all good people , 
▁ xxmaj you that thus far have come to pity me , 
▁ xxmaj hear what i say , and then go home and lose me . 
▁ i have this day receiv'd a traitor 's judgment , 
▁ xxmaj and by that name must die ; yet , heaven bear witness , 
▁ xxmaj and if i have a conscience , let it sink me 
▁ xxmaj even as the axe falls , if i be not faithful ! 
▁ xxmaj the law i bear no malice for my death : 
▁ ' t has done , upon the premises , but justice . 
▁ xxmaj but those that sought it i could wish more xxmaj christians . 
▁ xxmaj be what they will , i heartily forgive 'em ; 
▁ xxmaj yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief 
▁ xxmaj nor build their evils on the graves of great men , 
▁ xxmaj for then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em . 
▁ xxmaj for further life in this world i ne'er hope 
▁ xxmaj nor will i sue , although the xxmaj king have mercies 
▁ xxmaj more than i dare make faults . xxmaj you few that lov'd me 
▁ xxmaj and dare be bold to weep for xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj his noble friends and fellows , whom to leave 
▁ xxmaj is only bitter to him , only dying , 
▁ xxmaj go with me like good angels to my end ; 
▁ xxmaj and as the long divorce of steel falls on me 
▁ xxmaj make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice , 
▁ xxmaj and lift my soul to heaven . xxmaj lead on , a xxmaj god 's name . 
▁ xxup lovell . i do beseech your xxmaj grace , for charity , 
▁ xxmaj if ever any malice in your heart 
▁ xxmaj were hid against me , now to forgive me frankly . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell , i as free forgive you 
▁ xxmaj as i would be forgiven . i forgive all . 
▁ xxmaj there can not be those numberless offences 
▁ ' gainst me that i can not take peace with . xxmaj no black envy 
▁ xxmaj shall mark my grave . xxmaj commend me to his xxmaj grace ; 
▁ xxmaj and if he speak of xxmaj buckingham , pray tell him 
▁ xxmaj you met him half in heaven . xxmaj my vows and prayers 
▁ xxmaj yet are the xxmaj king 's , and , till my soul forsake , 
▁ xxmaj shall cry for blessings on him . xxmaj may he live 
▁ xxmaj longer than i have time to tell his years ; 
▁ xxmaj ever belov'd and loving may his rule be ; 
▁ xxmaj and when old time xxmaj shall lead him to his end , 
▁ xxmaj goodness and he fill up one monument ! 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj to th ' water side i must conduct your xxmaj grace ; 
▁ xxmaj then give my charge up to xxmaj sir xxmaj nicholas xxmaj vaux , 
▁ xxmaj who undertakes you to your end . 
▁ xxup vaux . xxmaj prepare there ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke is coming ; see the barge be ready ; 
▁ xxmaj and fit it with such furniture as suits 
▁ xxmaj the greatness of his person . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj nay , xxmaj sir xxmaj nicholas , 
▁ xxmaj let it alone ; my state now will but mock me . 
▁ xxmaj when i came hither i was xxmaj lord xxmaj high xxmaj constable 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham ; now , poor xxmaj edward xxmaj bohun . 
▁ xxmaj yet i am richer than my base accusers 
▁ xxmaj that never knew what truth meant ; i now seal it ; 
▁ xxmaj and with that blood will make 'em one day groan fort . 
▁ xxmaj my noble father , xxmaj henry of xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj who first rais'd head against usurping xxmaj richard , 
▁ xxmaj flying for succour to his servant xxmaj banister , 
▁ xxmaj being distress'd , was by that wretch betray'd 
▁ xxmaj and without trial fell ; xxmaj god 's peace be with him ! 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj seventh succeeding , truly pitying 
▁ xxmaj my father 's loss , like a most royal prince , 
▁ xxmaj restor'd me to my honours , and out of ruins 
▁ xxmaj made my name once more noble . xxmaj now his son , 
▁ xxmaj henry the xxmaj eighth , life , honour , name , and all 
▁ xxmaj that made me happy , at one stroke has taken 
▁ xxmaj for ever from the world . i had my trial , 
▁ xxmaj and must needs say a noble one ; which makes me 
▁ a little happier than my wretched father ; 
▁ xxmaj yet thus far we are one in fortunes : both 
▁ xxmaj fell by our servants , by those men we lov'd most- 
▁ a most unnatural and faithless service . 
▁ xxmaj heaven has an end in all . xxmaj yet , you that hear me , 
▁ xxmaj this from a dying man receive as certain : 
▁ xxmaj where you are liberal of your loves and counsels , 
▁ xxmaj be sure you be not loose ; for those you make friends 
▁ xxmaj and give your hearts to , when they once perceive 
▁ xxmaj the least rub in your fortunes , fall away 
▁ xxmaj like water from ye , never found again 
▁ xxmaj but where they mean to sink ye . xxmaj all good people , 
▁ xxmaj pray for me ! i must now forsake ye ; the last hour 
▁ xxmaj of my long weary life is come upon me . 
▁ xxmaj farewell ; 
▁ xxmaj and when you would say something that is sad , 
▁ xxmaj speak how i fell . i have done ; and xxmaj god forgive me ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup buckingham and train 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxup o , this is full of pity ! xxmaj sir , it calls , 
▁ i fear , too many curses on their heads 
▁ xxmaj that were the authors . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj if the xxmaj duke be guiltless , 
▁ ' tis full of woe ; yet i can give you inkling 
▁ xxmaj of an ensuing evil , if it fall , 
▁ xxmaj greater than this . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj good angels keep it from us ! 
▁ xxmaj what may it be ? xxmaj you do not doubt my faith , sir ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj this secret is so weighty , ' twill require 
▁ a strong faith to conceal it . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj let me have it ; 
▁ i do not talk much . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i am confident . 
▁ xxmaj you shall , sir . xxmaj did you not of late days hear 
▁ a buzzing of a separation 
▁ xxmaj between the xxmaj king and xxmaj katharine ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes , but it held not ; 
▁ xxmaj for when the xxmaj king once heard it , out of anger 
▁ xxmaj he sent command to the xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor straight 
▁ xxmaj to stop the rumour and allay those tongues 
▁ xxmaj that durst disperse it . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj but that slander , sir , 
▁ xxmaj is found a truth now ; for it grows again 
▁ xxmaj fresher than e'er it was , and held for certain 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king will venture at it . xxmaj either the xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj or some about him near have , out of malice 
▁ xxmaj to the good xxmaj queen , possess'd him with a scruple 
▁ xxmaj that will undo her . xxmaj to confirm this too , 
▁ xxmaj cardinal xxmaj campeius is arriv'd and lately ; 
▁ xxmaj as all think , for this business . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . ' tis the xxmaj cardinal ; 
▁ xxmaj and merely to revenge him on the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj for not bestowing on him at his asking 
▁ xxmaj the archbishopric of xxmaj toledo , this is purpos'd . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i think you have hit the mark ; but is't 
▁ not cruel 
▁ xxmaj that she should feel the smart of this ? xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj will have his will , and she must fall . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . ' tis woeful . 
▁ xxmaj we are too open here to argue this ; 
▁ xxmaj let 's think in private more . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup chamberlain reading this letter 

▁ xxup chamberlain . ' my lord , 
▁ ' the horses your lordship sent for , with all the care 
▁ had , i saw well chosen , ridden , and furnish'd . xxmaj they were 
▁ young and handsome , and of the best breed in the north . 
▁ xxmaj when they were ready to set out for xxmaj london , a man of 
▁ my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal 's , by commission , and main power , took 
▁ 'em from me , with this reason : his master would be serv'd 
▁ before a subject , if not before the xxmaj king ; which stopp'd 
▁ our mouths , sir . ' 

▁ i fear he will indeed . xxmaj well , let him have them . 
▁ xxmaj he will have all , i think . 

▁ xxmaj enter to the xxup lord xxup chamberlain the xxup dukes xxup of xxup norfolk and xxup suffolk 

▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj well met , my xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj good day to both your xxmaj graces . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj how is the xxmaj king employ'd ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . i left him private , 
▁ xxmaj full of sad thoughts and troubles . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj what 's the cause ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj it seems the marriage with his brother 's wife 
▁ xxmaj has crept too near his conscience . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj no , his conscience 
▁ xxmaj has crept too near another lady . 
▁ xxup norfolk . ' tis so ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the xxmaj cardinal 's doing ; the king - cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj that blind priest , like the eldest son of fortune , 
▁ xxmaj turns what he list . xxmaj the xxmaj king will know him one day . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj pray xxmaj god he do ! xxmaj he 'll never know himself else . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj how holily he works in all his business ! 
▁ xxmaj and with what zeal ! xxmaj for , now he has crack'd the league 
▁ xxmaj between us and the xxmaj emperor , the xxmaj queen 's great nephew , 
▁ xxmaj he dives into the xxmaj king 's soul and there scatters 
▁ xxmaj dangers , doubts , wringing of the conscience , 
▁ xxmaj fears , and despairs - and all these for his marriage ; 
▁ xxmaj and out of all these to restore the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj he counsels a divorce , a loss of her 
▁ xxmaj that like a jewel has hung twenty years 
▁ xxmaj about his neck , yet never lost her lustre ; 
▁ xxmaj of her that loves him with that excellence 
▁ xxmaj that angels love good men with ; even of her 
▁ xxmaj that , when the greatest stroke of fortune falls , 
▁ xxmaj will bless the xxmaj king - and is not this course pious ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj heaven keep me from such counsel ! ' tis most true 
▁ xxmaj these news are everywhere ; every tongue speaks 'em , 
▁ xxmaj and every true heart weeps for ' t. xxmaj all that dare 
▁ xxmaj look into these affairs see this main end- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french xxmaj king 's sister . xxmaj heaven will one day open 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's eyes , that so long have slept upon 
▁ xxmaj this bold bad man . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj and free us from his slavery . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj we had need pray , and heartily , for our deliverance ; 
▁ xxmaj or this imperious man will work us an 
▁ xxmaj from princes into pages . xxmaj all men 's honours 
▁ xxmaj lie like one lump before him , to be fashion'd 
▁ xxmaj into what pitch he please . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj for me , my lords , 
▁ i love him not , nor fear him - there 's my creed ; 
▁ xxmaj as i am made without him , so xxmaj i 'll stand , 
▁ xxmaj if the xxmaj king please ; his curses and his blessings 
▁ xxmaj touch me alike ; th ' are breath i not believe in . 
▁ i knew him , and i know him ; so i leave him 
▁ xxmaj to him that made him proud - the xxmaj pope . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj let 's in ; 
▁ xxmaj and with some other business put the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj from these sad thoughts that work too much upon him . 
▁ xxmaj my lord , you 'll bear us company ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj excuse me , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king has sent me otherwhere ; besides , 
▁ xxmaj you 'll find a most unfit time to disturb him . 
▁ xxmaj health to your lordships ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj thanks , my good xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup lord xxup chamberlain ; and the xxup king draws 
▁ the curtain and sits reading pensively 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj how sad he looks ; sure , he is much afflicted . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj who 's there , ha ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj pray xxmaj god he be not angry . 
▁ xxup king xxup henry . xxmaj who 's there , i say ? xxmaj how dare you thrust yourselves 
▁ xxmaj into my private meditations ? 
▁ xxmaj who am xxup i , ha ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . a gracious king that pardons all offences 
▁ xxmaj malice ne'er meant . xxmaj our breach of duty this way 
▁ xxmaj is business of estate , in which we come 
▁ xxmaj to know your royal pleasure . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ye are too bold . 
▁ xxmaj go to ; xxmaj i 'll make ye know your times of business . 
▁ xxmaj is this an hour for temporal affairs , ha ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup wolsey and xxup campeius with a commission 

▁ xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj my good xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal ? o my xxmaj wolsey , 
▁ xxmaj the quiet of my wounded conscience , 
▁ xxmaj thou art a cure fit for a xxmaj king . [ to xxup campeius ] xxmaj you 're 
▁ welcome , 
▁ xxmaj most learned reverend sir , into our kingdom . 
▁ xxmaj use us and it . [ to xxup wolsey ] xxmaj my good lord , have great care 
▁ i be not found a talker . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj sir , you can not . 
▁ i would your xxmaj grace would give us but an hour