xxbos xxmaj of private conference . 
▁ xxup king . [ to xxup norfolk and xxup suffolk ] xxmaj we are busy ; go . 
▁ xxup norfolk . [ aside to xxup suffolk ] xxmaj this priest has no pride in him ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside to xxup norfolk ] xxmaj not to speak of ! 
▁ i would not be so sick though for his place . 
▁ xxmaj but this can not continue . 
▁ xxup norfolk . [ aside to xxup suffolk ] xxmaj if it do , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll venture one have - at - him . 
▁ xxup suffolk . [ aside to xxup norfolk ] i another . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup norfolk and xxup suffolk 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj your xxmaj grace has given a precedent of wisdom 
▁ xxmaj above all princes , in committing freely 
▁ xxmaj your scruple to the voice of xxmaj christendom . 
▁ xxmaj who can be angry now ? xxmaj what envy reach you ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj spaniard , tied by blood and favour to her , 
▁ xxmaj must now confess , if they have any goodness , 
▁ xxmaj the trial just and noble . xxmaj all the clerks , 
▁ i mean the learned ones , in xxmaj christian kingdoms 
▁ xxmaj have their free voices . xxmaj rome the nurse of judgment , 
▁ xxmaj invited by your noble self , hath sent 
▁ xxmaj one general tongue unto us , this good man , 
▁ xxmaj this just and learned priest , xxmaj cardinal xxmaj campeius , 
▁ xxmaj whom once more i present unto your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and once more in mine arms i bid him welcome , 
▁ xxmaj and thank the holy conclave for their loves . 
▁ xxmaj they have sent me such a man i would have wish'd for . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj your xxmaj grace must needs deserve an strangers ' loves , 
▁ xxmaj you are so noble . xxmaj to your xxmaj highness ' hand 
▁ i tender my commission ; by whose virtue- 
▁ xxmaj the court of xxmaj rome commanding - you , my xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj cardinal of xxmaj york , are join'd with me their servant 
▁ xxmaj in the unpartial judging of this business . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj two equal men . xxmaj the xxmaj queen shall be acquainted 
▁ xxmaj forthwith for what you come . xxmaj where 's xxmaj gardiner ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . i know your xxmaj majesty has always lov'd her 
▁ xxmaj so dear in heart not to deny her that 
▁ a woman of less place might ask by law- 
▁ xxmaj scholars allow'd freely to argue for her . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ay , and the best she shall have ; and my favour 
▁ xxmaj to him that does best . xxmaj god forbid else . xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj prithee call xxmaj gardiner to me , my new secretary ; 
▁ i find him a fit fellow . xxmaj exit xxup wolsey 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup wolsey with xxup gardiner 

▁ xxup wolsey . [ aside to xxup gardiner ] xxmaj give me your hand : much 
▁ joy and favour to you ; 
▁ xxmaj you are the xxmaj king 's now . 
▁ xxup gardiner . [ aside to xxup wolsey ] xxmaj but to be commanded 
▁ xxmaj for ever by your xxmaj grace , whose hand has rais'd me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj gardiner . [ walks and whispers ] 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , was not one xxmaj doctor xxmaj pace 
▁ xxmaj in this man 's place before him ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj yes , he was . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj was he not held a learned man ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj yes , surely . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj believe me , there 's an ill opinion spread then , 
▁ xxmaj even of yourself , xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj how ! xxmaj of me ? 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj they will not stick to say you envied him 
▁ xxmaj and , fearing he would rise , he was so virtuous , 
▁ xxmaj kept him a foreign man still ; which so griev'd him 
▁ xxmaj that he ran mad and died . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj heav'n 's peace be with him ! 
▁ xxmaj that 's xxmaj christian care enough . xxmaj for living murmurers 
▁ xxmaj there 's places of rebuke . xxmaj he was a fool , 
▁ xxmaj for he would needs be virtuous : that good fellow , 
▁ xxmaj if i command him , follows my appointment . 
▁ i will have none so near else . xxmaj learn this , brother , 
▁ xxmaj we live not to be grip'd by meaner persons . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj deliver this with modesty to th ' xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup gardiner 
▁ xxmaj the most convenient place that i can think of 
▁ xxmaj for such receipt of learning is xxmaj blackfriars ; 
▁ xxmaj there ye shall meet about this weighty business- 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj wolsey , see it furnish'd . xxup o , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj would it not grieve an able man to leave 
▁ xxmaj so sweet a bedfellow ? xxmaj but , conscience , conscience ! 
▁ xxup o , ' tis a tender place ! and i must leave her . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup anne xxup bullen and an xxup old xxup lady 

▁ xxup anne . xxmaj not for that neither . xxmaj here 's the pang that pinches : 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj highness having liv'd so long with her , and she 
▁ xxmaj so good a lady that no tongue could ever 
▁ xxmaj pronounce dishonour of her - by my life , 
▁ xxmaj she never knew harm - doing - o , now , after 
▁ xxmaj so many courses of the sun enthroned , 
▁ xxmaj still growing in a majesty and pomp , the which 
▁ xxmaj to leave a thousand - fold more bitter than 
▁ ' tis sweet at first t ' acquire - after this process , 
▁ xxmaj to give her the avaunt , it is a pity 
▁ xxmaj would move a monster . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj hearts of most hard temper 
▁ xxmaj melt and lament for her . 
▁ xxup anne . xxup o , xxmaj god 's will ! much better 
▁ xxmaj she ne'er had known pomp ; though't be temporal , 
▁ xxmaj yet , if that quarrel , fortune , do divorce 
▁ xxmaj it from the bearer , ' tis a sufferance panging 
▁ xxmaj as soul and body 's severing . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj alas , poor lady ! 
▁ xxmaj she 's a stranger now again . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj so much the more 
▁ xxmaj must pity drop upon her . xxmaj verily , 
▁ i swear ' tis better to be lowly born 
▁ xxmaj and range with humble livers in content 
▁ xxmaj than to be perk'd up in a glist'ring grief 
▁ xxmaj and wear a golden sorrow . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj our content 
▁ xxmaj is our best having . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj by my troth and maidenhead , 
▁ i would not be a queen . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj beshrew me , i would , 
▁ xxmaj and venture maidenhead for ' t ; and so would you , 
▁ xxmaj for all this spice of your hypocrisy . 
▁ xxmaj you that have so fair parts of woman on you 
▁ xxmaj have too a woman 's heart , which ever yet 
▁ xxmaj affected eminence , wealth , sovereignty ; 
▁ xxmaj which , to say sooth , are blessings ; and which gifts , 
▁ xxmaj saving your mincing , the capacity 
▁ xxmaj of your soft cheveril conscience would receive 
▁ xxmaj if you might please to stretch it . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj nay , good troth . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj yes , troth and troth . xxmaj you would not be a queen ! 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj no , not for all the riches under heaven . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . ' tis strange : a threepence bow'd would hire me , 
▁ xxmaj old as i am , to queen it . xxmaj but , i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj what think you of a duchess ? xxmaj have you limbs 
▁ xxmaj to bear that load of title ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj no , in truth . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj then you are weakly made . xxmaj pluck off a little ; 
▁ i would not be a young count in your way 
▁ xxmaj for more than blushing comes to . xxmaj if your back 
▁ xxmaj can not vouchsafe this burden , ' tis too weak 
▁ xxmaj ever to get a boy . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj how you do talk ! 
▁ i swear again i would not be a queen 
▁ xxmaj for all the world . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj in faith , for little xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj you 'd venture an emballing . i myself 
▁ xxmaj would for xxmaj carnarvonshire , although there long'd 
▁ xxmaj no more to th ' crown but that . xxmaj lo , who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup chamberlain 

▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj good morrow , ladies . xxmaj what were't worth to know 
▁ xxmaj the secret of your conference ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj not your demand ; it values not your asking . 
▁ xxmaj our mistress ' sorrows we were pitying . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj it was a gentle business and becoming 
▁ xxmaj the action of good women ; there is hope 
▁ xxmaj all will be well . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj now , i pray xxmaj god , amen ! 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj you bear a gentle mind , and heav'nly blessings 
▁ xxmaj follow such creatures . xxmaj that you may , fair lady , 
▁ xxmaj perceive i speak sincerely and high notes 
▁ xxmaj ta'en of your many virtues , the xxmaj king 's xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj commends his good opinion of you to you , and 
▁ xxmaj does purpose honour to you no less flowing 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj marchioness of xxmaj pembroke ; to which tide 
▁ a thousand pound a year , annual support , 
▁ xxmaj out of his grace he adds . 
▁ xxup anne . i do not know 
▁ xxmaj what kind of my obedience i should tender ; 
▁ xxmaj more than my all is nothing , nor my prayers 
▁ xxmaj are not words duly hallowed , nor my wishes 
▁ xxmaj more worth than empty vanities ; yet prayers and wishes 
▁ xxmaj are all i can return . xxmaj beseech your lordship , 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience , 
▁ xxmaj as from a blushing handmaid , to his xxmaj highness ; 
▁ xxmaj whose health and royalty i pray for . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj lady , 
▁ i shall not fail t ' approve the fair conceit 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king hath of you . [ aside ] i have perus'd her well : 
▁ xxmaj beauty and honour in her are so mingled 
▁ xxmaj that they have caught the xxmaj king ; and who knows yet 
▁ xxmaj but from this lady may proceed a gem 
▁ xxmaj to lighten all this isle?-i'll to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj and say i spoke with you . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj my honour'd lord ! xxmaj exit xxup lord xxup chamberlain 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj why , this it is : see , see ! 
▁ i have been begging sixteen years in court- 
▁ xxmaj am yet a courtier beggarly - nor could 
▁ xxmaj come pat betwixt too early and too late 
▁ xxmaj for any suit of pounds ; and you , o fate ! 
▁ a very fresh - fish here - fie , fie , fie upon 
▁ xxmaj this compell'd fortune!-have your mouth fill'd up 
▁ xxmaj before you open it . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj this is strange to me . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj how tastes it ? xxmaj is it bitter ? xxmaj forty pence , no . 
▁ xxmaj there was a lady once-'tis an old story- 
▁ xxmaj that would not be a queen , that would she not , 
▁ xxmaj for all the mud in xxmaj egypt . xxmaj have you heard it ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj come , you are pleasant . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj with your theme i could 
▁ xxmaj o'ermount the lark . xxmaj the xxmaj marchioness of xxmaj pembroke ! 
▁ a thousand pounds a year for pure respect ! 
▁ xxmaj no other obligation ! xxmaj by my life , 
▁ xxmaj that promises moe thousands : honour 's train 
▁ xxmaj is longer than his foreskirt . xxmaj by this time 
▁ i know your back will bear a duchess . xxmaj say , 
▁ xxmaj are you not stronger than you were ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj good lady , 
▁ xxmaj make yourself mirth with your particular fancy , 
▁ xxmaj and leave me out on't . xxmaj would i had no being , 
▁ xxmaj if this salute my blood a jot ; it faints me 
▁ xxmaj to think what follows . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen is comfortless , and we forgetful 
▁ xxmaj in our long absence . xxmaj pray , do not deliver 
▁ xxmaj what here y ' have heard to her . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj what do you think me ? xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj london . a hall in xxmaj blackfriars 

 xxmaj trumpets , sennet , and cornets . xxmaj enter two xxup vergers , with short silver wands ; 
 next them , two xxup scribes , in the habit of doctors ; after them , 
 the xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury alone ; after him , the xxup bishops xxup of xxup lincoln , xxup ely , 
 xxup rochester , and xxup saint xxup asaph ; next them , with some small distance , 
 follows a xxup gentleman bearing the purse , with the great seal , 
 and a xxmaj cardinal 's hat ; then two xxup priests , bearing each silver cross ; 
 then a xxup gentleman xxup usher bareheaded , accompanied with a xxup sergeant - at - arms 
 bearing a silver mace ; then two xxup gentlemen bearing two great silver pillars ; 
 after them , side by side , the two xxup cardinals , xxup wolsey and xxup campeius ; 
 two xxup noblemen with the sword and mace . xxmaj then enter the xxup king and xxup queen 
 and their trains . xxmaj the xxup king takes place under the cloth of state ; 
 the two xxup cardinals sit under him as judges . xxmaj the xxup queen takes place 
 some distance from the xxup king . xxmaj the xxup bishops place themselves on each side 
 of the court , in manner of consistory ; below them the xxup scribes . 
 xxmaj the xxup lords sit next the xxup bishops . xxmaj the rest of the attendants stand 
 in convenient order about the stage 

▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj whilst our commission from xxmaj rome is read , 
▁ xxmaj let silence be commanded . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what 's the need ? 
▁ xxmaj it hath already publicly been read , 
▁ xxmaj and on all sides th ' authority allow'd ; 
▁ xxmaj you may then spare that time . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj be't so ; proceed . 
▁ xxup scribe . xxmaj say ' henry xxmaj king of xxmaj england , come into the court . ' 
▁ xxup crier . xxmaj henry xxmaj king of xxmaj england , & c. 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj here . 
▁ xxup scribe . xxmaj say ' katharine xxmaj queen of xxmaj england , come into the court . ' 
▁ xxup crier . xxmaj katharine xxmaj queen of xxmaj england , & c. 

▁ xxmaj the xxup queen makes no answer , rises out of her chair , 
▁ goes about the court , comes to the xxup king , and kneels 
▁ at his feet ; then speaks 

▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj sir , i desire you do me right and justice , 
▁ xxmaj and to bestow your pity on me ; for 
▁ i am a most poor woman and a stranger , 
▁ xxmaj born out of your dominions , having here 
▁ xxmaj no judge indifferent , nor no more assurance 
▁ xxmaj of equal friendship and proceeding . xxmaj alas , sir , 
▁ xxmaj in what have i offended you ? xxmaj what cause 
▁ xxmaj hath my behaviour given to your displeasure 
▁ xxmaj that thus you should proceed to put me of 
▁ xxmaj and take your good grace from me ? xxmaj heaven witness , 
▁ i have been to you a true and humble wife , 
▁ xxmaj at all times to your will conformable , 
▁ xxmaj ever in fear to kindle your dislike , 
▁ xxmaj yea , subject to your countenance - glad or sorry 
▁ xxmaj as i saw it inclin'd . xxmaj when was the hour 
▁ i ever contradicted your desire 
▁ xxmaj or made it not mine too ? xxmaj or which of your friends 
▁ xxmaj have i not strove to love , although i knew 
▁ xxmaj he were mine enemy ? xxmaj what friend of mine 
▁ xxmaj that had to him deriv'd your anger did 
▁ xxmaj continue in my liking ? xxmaj nay , gave notice 
▁ xxmaj he was from thence discharg'd ? xxmaj sir , call to mind 
▁ xxmaj that i have been your wife in this obedience 
▁ xxmaj upward of twenty years , and have been blest 
▁ xxmaj with many children by you . xxmaj if , in the course 
▁ xxmaj and process of this time , you can report , 
▁ xxmaj and prove it too against mine honour , aught , 
▁ xxmaj my bond to wedlock or my love and duty , 
▁ xxmaj against your sacred person , in xxmaj god 's name , 
▁ xxmaj turn me away and let the foul'st contempt 
▁ xxmaj shut door upon me , and so give me up 
▁ xxmaj to the sharp'st kind of justice . xxmaj please you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king , your father , was reputed for 
▁ a prince most prudent , of an excellent 
▁ xxmaj and unmatch'd wit and judgment ; xxmaj ferdinand , 
▁ xxmaj my father , xxmaj king of xxmaj spain , was reckon'd one 
▁ xxmaj the wisest prince that there had reign'd by many 
▁ a year before . xxmaj it is not to be question'd 
▁ xxmaj that they had gather'd a wise council to them 
▁ xxmaj of every realm , that did debate this business , 
▁ xxmaj who deem'd our marriage lawful . xxmaj wherefore i humbly 
▁ xxmaj beseech you , sir , to spare me till i may 
▁ xxmaj be by my friends in xxmaj spain advis'd , whose counsel 
▁ i will implore . xxmaj if not , i ' th ' name of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj your pleasure be fulfill'd ! 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj you have here , lady , 
▁ xxmaj and of your choice , these reverend fathers - men 
▁ xxmaj of singular integrity and learning , 
▁ xxmaj yea , the elect o ' th ' land , who are assembled 
▁ xxmaj to plead your cause . xxmaj it shall be therefore bootless 
▁ xxmaj that longer you desire the court , as well 
▁ xxmaj for your own quiet as to rectify 
▁ xxmaj what is unsettled in the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj his xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj hath spoken well and justly ; therefore , madam , 
▁ xxmaj it 's fit this royal session do proceed 
▁ xxmaj and that , without delay , their arguments 
▁ xxmaj be now produc'd and heard . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj to you i speak . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj your pleasure , madam ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj sir , 
▁ i am about to weep ; but , thinking that 
▁ xxmaj we are a queen , or long have dream'd so , certain 
▁ xxmaj the daughter of a king , my drops of tears 
▁ xxmaj i 'll turn to sparks of fire . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj be patient yet . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . i xxmaj will , when you are humble ; nay , before 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj god will punish me . i do believe , 
▁ xxmaj induc'd by potent circumstances , that 
▁ xxmaj you are mine enemy , and make my challenge 
▁ xxmaj you shall not be my judge ; for it is you 
▁ xxmaj have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me- 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj god 's dew quench ! xxmaj therefore i say again , 
▁ i utterly abhor , yea , from my soul 
▁ xxmaj refuse you for my judge , whom yet once more 
▁ i hold my most malicious foe and think not 
▁ xxmaj at all a friend to truth . 
▁ xxup wolsey . i do profess 
▁ xxmaj you speak not like yourself , who ever yet 
▁ xxmaj have stood to charity and display'd th ' effects 
▁ xxmaj of disposition gentle and of wisdom 
▁ xxmaj o'ertopping woman 's pow'r . xxmaj madam , you do me wrong : 
▁ i have no spleen against you , nor injustice 
▁ xxmaj for you or any ; how far i have proceeded , 
▁ xxmaj or how far further shall , is warranted 
▁ xxmaj by a commission from the xxmaj consistory , 
▁ xxmaj yea , the whole xxmaj consistory of xxmaj rome . xxmaj you charge me 
▁ xxmaj that i have blown this coal : i do deny it . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is present ; if it be known to him 
▁ xxmaj that i gainsay my deed , how may he wound , 
▁ xxmaj and worthily , my falsehood ! xxmaj yea , as much 
▁ xxmaj as you have done my truth . xxmaj if he know 
▁ xxmaj that i am free of your report , he knows 
▁ i am not of your wrong . xxmaj therefore in him 
▁ xxmaj it lies to cure me , and the cure is to 
▁ xxmaj remove these thoughts from you ; the which before 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj highness shall speak in , i do beseech 
▁ xxmaj you , gracious madam , to unthink your speaking 
▁ xxmaj and to say so no more . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj my lord , my lord , 
▁ i am a simple woman , much too weak 
▁ xxup t ' oppose your cunning . xxmaj y'are meek and humble - mouth'd ; 
▁ xxmaj you sign your place and calling , in full seeming , 
▁ xxmaj with meekness and humility ; but your heart 
▁ xxmaj is cramm'd with arrogancy , spleen , and pride . 
▁ xxmaj you have , by fortune and his xxmaj highness ' favours , 
▁ xxmaj gone slightly o'er low steps , and now are mounted 
▁ xxmaj where pow'rs are your retainers , and your words , 
▁ xxmaj domestics to you , serve your will as't please 
▁ xxmaj yourself pronounce their office . i must tell you 
▁ xxmaj you tender more your person 's honour than 
▁ xxmaj your high profession spiritual ; that again 
▁ i do refuse you for my judge and here , 
▁ xxmaj before you all , appeal unto the xxmaj pope , 
▁ xxmaj to bring my whole cause ' fore his xxmaj holiness 
▁ xxmaj and to be judg'd by him . 
▁ [ she curtsies to the xxup king , and offers to depart ] 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj the xxmaj queen is obstinate , 
▁ xxmaj stubborn to justice , apt to accuse it , and 
▁ xxmaj disdainful to be tried by't ; ' tis not well . 
▁ xxmaj she 's going away . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj call her again . 
▁ xxup crier . xxmaj katharine xxmaj queen of xxmaj england , come into the court . 
▁ xxup gentleman xxup usher . xxmaj madam , you are call'd back . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj what need you note it ? xxmaj pray you keep your way ; 
▁ xxmaj when you are call'd , return . xxmaj now the xxmaj lord help ! 
▁ xxmaj they vex me past my patience . xxmaj pray you pass on . 
▁ i will not tarry ; no , nor ever more 
▁ xxmaj upon this business my appearance make 
▁ xxmaj in any of their courts . xxmaj exeunt xxup queen and her attendants 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj go thy ways , xxmaj kate . 
▁ xxmaj that man i ' th ' world who shall report he has 
▁ a better wife , let him in nought be trusted 
▁ xxmaj for speaking false in that . xxmaj thou art , alone- 
▁ xxmaj if thy rare qualities , sweet gentleness , 
▁ xxmaj thy meekness saint - like , wife - like government , 
▁ xxmaj obeying in commanding , and thy parts 
▁ xxmaj sovereign and pious else , could speak thee out- 
▁ xxmaj the queen of earthly queens . xxmaj she 's noble born ; 
▁ xxmaj and like her true nobility she has 
▁ xxmaj carried herself towards me . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj most gracious sir , 
▁ xxmaj in humblest manner i require your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj that it shall please you to declare in hearing 
▁ xxmaj of all these ears - for where i am robb'd and bound , 
▁ xxmaj there must i be unloos'd , although not there 
▁ xxmaj at once and fully satisfied - whether ever i 
▁ xxmaj did broach this business to your xxmaj highness , or 
▁ xxmaj laid any scruple in your way which might 
▁ xxmaj induce you to the question on't , or ever 
▁ xxmaj have to you , but with thanks to xxmaj god for such 
▁ a royal lady , spake one the least word that might 
▁ xxmaj be to the prejudice of her present state , 
▁ xxmaj or touch of her good person ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ i do excuse you ; yea , upon mine honour , 
▁ i free you from't . xxmaj you are not to be taught 
▁ xxmaj that you have many enemies that know not 
▁ xxmaj why they are so , but , like to village curs , 
▁ xxmaj bark when their fellows do . xxmaj by some of these 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen is put in anger . xxmaj y'are excus'd . 
▁ xxmaj but will you be more justified ? xxmaj you ever 
▁ xxmaj have wish'd the sleeping of this business ; never desir'd 
▁ xxmaj it to be stirr'd ; but oft have hind'red , oft , 
▁ xxmaj the passages made toward it . xxmaj on my honour , 
▁ i speak my good xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal to this point , 
▁ xxmaj and thus far clear him . xxmaj now , what mov'd me to't , 
▁ i will be bold with time and your attention . 
▁ xxmaj then mark th ' inducement . xxmaj thus it came - give heed to't : 
▁ xxmaj my conscience first receiv'd a tenderness , 
▁ xxmaj scruple , and prick , on certain speeches utter'd 
▁ xxmaj by th ' xxmaj bishop of xxmaj bayonne , then xxmaj french ambassador , 
▁ xxmaj who had been hither sent on the debating 
▁ a marriage ' twixt the xxmaj duke of xxmaj orleans and 
▁ xxmaj our daughter xxmaj mary . xxup i ' th ' progress of this business , 
▁ xxmaj ere a determinate resolution , he- 
▁ i mean the xxmaj bishop - did require a respite 
▁ xxmaj wherein he might the xxmaj king his lord advertise 
▁ xxmaj whether our daughter were legitimate , 
▁ xxmaj respecting this our marriage with the dowager , 
▁ xxmaj sometimes our brother 's wife . xxmaj this respite shook 
▁ xxmaj the bosom of my conscience , enter'd me , 
▁ xxmaj yea , with a splitting power , and made to tremble 
▁ xxmaj the region of my breast , which forc'd such way 
▁ xxmaj that many maz'd considerings did throng 
▁ xxmaj and press'd in with this caution . xxmaj first , methought 
▁ i stood not in the smile of heaven , who had 
▁ xxmaj commanded nature that my lady 's womb , 
▁ xxmaj if it conceiv'd a male child by me , should 
▁ xxmaj do no more offices of life to't than 
▁ xxmaj the grave does to the dead ; for her male issue 
▁ xxmaj or died where they were made , or shortly after 
▁ xxmaj this world had air'd them . xxmaj hence i took a thought 
▁ xxmaj this was a judgment on me , that my kingdom , 
▁ xxmaj well worthy the best heir o ' th ' world , should not 
▁ xxmaj be gladded in't by me . xxmaj then follows that 
▁ i weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in 
▁ xxmaj by this my issue 's fail , and that gave to me 
▁ xxmaj many a groaning throe . xxmaj thus hulling in 
▁ xxmaj the wild sea of my conscience , i did steer 
▁ xxmaj toward this remedy , whereupon we are 
▁ xxmaj now present here together ; that 's to say 
▁ i meant to rectify my conscience , which 
▁ i then did feel full sick , and yet not well , 
▁ xxmaj by all the reverend fathers of the land 
▁ xxmaj and doctors learn'd . xxmaj first , i began in private 
▁ xxmaj with you , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj lincoln ; you remember 
▁ xxmaj how under my oppression i did reek , 
▁ xxmaj when i first mov'd you . 
▁ xxup lincoln . xxmaj very well , my liege . 
▁ xxup king . i have spoke long ; be pleas'd yourself to say 
▁ xxmaj how far you satisfied me . 
▁ xxup lincoln . xxmaj so please your xxmaj highness , 
▁ xxmaj the question did at first so stagger me- 
▁ xxmaj bearing a state of mighty moment in't 
▁ xxmaj and consequence of dread - that i committed 
▁ xxmaj the daring'st counsel which i had to doubt , 
▁ xxmaj and did entreat your xxmaj highness to this course 
▁ xxmaj which you are running here . 
▁ xxup king . i then mov'd you , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj canterbury , and got your leave 
▁ xxmaj to make this present summons . xxmaj unsolicited 
▁ i left no reverend person in this court , 
▁ xxmaj but by particular consent proceeded 
▁ xxmaj under your hands and seals ; therefore , go on , 
▁ xxmaj for no dislike i ' th ' world against the person 
▁ xxmaj of the good xxmaj queen , but the sharp thorny points 
▁ xxmaj of my alleged reasons , drives this forward . 
▁ xxmaj prove but our marriage lawful , by my life 
▁ xxmaj and kingly dignity , we are contented 
▁ xxmaj to wear our moral state to come with her , 
▁ xxmaj katharine our queen , before the primest creature 
▁ xxmaj that 's paragon'd o ' th ' world . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj so please your xxmaj highness , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen being absent , ' tis a needful fitness 
▁ xxmaj that we adjourn this court till further day ; 
▁ xxmaj meanwhile must be an earnest motion 
▁ xxmaj made to the xxmaj queen to call back her appeal 
▁ xxmaj she intends unto his xxmaj holiness . 
▁ xxup king . [ aside ] i may perceive 
▁ xxmaj these cardinals trifle with me . i abhor 
▁ xxmaj this dilatory sloth and tricks of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj my learn'd and well - beloved servant , xxmaj cranmer , 
▁ xxmaj prithee return . xxmaj with thy approach i know 
▁ xxmaj my comfort comes along . -break up the court ; 
▁ i say , set on . xxmaj exuent in manner as they entered 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxup queen 's apartments 

 xxmaj enter the xxup queen and her women , as at work 

▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj take thy lute , wench . xxmaj my soul grows 
▁ sad with troubles ; 
▁ xxmaj sing and disperse 'em , if thou canst . xxmaj leave working . 

▁ xxup song 

▁ xxmaj orpheus with his lute made trees , 
▁ xxmaj and the mountain tops that freeze , 
▁ xxmaj bow themselves when he did sing ; 
▁ xxmaj to his music plants and flowers 
▁ xxmaj ever sprung , as sun and showers 
▁ xxmaj there had made a lasting spring . 

▁ xxmaj every thing that heard him play , 
▁ xxmaj even the billows of the sea , 
▁ xxmaj hung their heads and then lay by . 
▁ xxmaj in sweet music is such art , 
▁ xxmaj killing care and grief of heart 
▁ xxmaj fall asleep or hearing die . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup gentleman 

▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj how now ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj an't please your xxmaj grace , the two great xxmaj cardinals 
▁ xxmaj wait in the presence . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj would they speak with me ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj they will'd me say so , madam . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj pray their xxmaj graces 
▁ xxmaj to come near . [ exit xxup gentleman ] xxmaj what can be their business 
▁ xxmaj with me , a poor weak woman , fall'n from favour ? 
▁ i do not like their coming . xxmaj now i think on't , 
▁ xxmaj they should be good men , their affairs as righteous ; 
▁ xxmaj but all hoods make not monks . 

▁ xxmaj enter the two xxup cardinals , xxup wolsey and xxup campeius 
▁
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj peace to your xxmaj highness ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj your xxmaj graces find me here part of housewife ; 
▁ i would be all , against the worst may happen . 
▁ xxmaj what are your pleasures with me , reverend lords ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj may it please you , noble madam , to withdraw 
▁ xxmaj into your private chamber , we shall give you 
▁ xxmaj the full cause of our coming . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj speak it here ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's nothing i have done yet , o ' my conscience , 
▁ xxmaj deserves a corner . xxmaj would all other women 
▁ xxmaj could speak this with as free a soul as i do ! 
▁ xxmaj my lords , i care not - so much i am happy 
▁ xxmaj above a number - if my actions 
▁ xxmaj were tried by ev'ry tongue , ev'ry eye saw 'em , 
▁ xxmaj envy and base opinion set against 'em , 
▁ i know my life so even . xxmaj if your business 
▁ xxmaj seek me out , and that way i am wife in , 
▁ xxmaj out with it boldly ; truth loves open dealing . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj tanta est erga te mentis integritas , regina serenis - sima- 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxup o , good my lord , no xxmaj latin ! 
▁ i am not such a truant since my coming , 
▁ xxmaj as not to know the language i have liv'd in ; 
▁ a strange tongue makes my cause more strange , suspicious ; 
▁ xxmaj pray speak in xxmaj english . xxmaj here are some will thank you , 
▁ xxmaj if you speak truth , for their poor mistress ' sake : 
▁ xxmaj believe me , she has had much wrong . xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj the willing'st sin i ever yet committed 
▁ xxmaj may be absolv'd in xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj noble lady , 
▁ i am sorry my integrity should breed , 
▁ xxmaj and service to his xxmaj majesty and you , 
▁ xxmaj so deep suspicion , where all faith was meant 
▁ xxmaj we come not by the way of accusation 
▁ xxmaj to taint that honour every good tongue blesses , 
▁ xxmaj nor to betray you any way to sorrow- 
▁ xxmaj you have too much , good lady ; but to know 
▁ xxmaj how you stand minded in the weighty difference 
▁ xxmaj between the xxmaj king and you , and to deliver , 
▁ xxmaj like free and honest men , our just opinions 
▁ xxmaj and comforts to your cause . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj most honour'd madam , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york , out of his noble nature , 
▁ xxmaj zeal and obedience he still bore your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj forgetting , like a good man , your late censure 
▁ xxmaj both of his truth and him - which was too far- 
▁ xxmaj offers , as i do , in a sign of peace , 
▁ xxmaj his service and his counsel . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . [ aside ] xxmaj to betray me.- 
▁ xxmaj my lords , i thank you both for your good wins ; 
▁ xxmaj ye speak like honest men - pray xxmaj god ye prove so ! 
▁ xxmaj but how to make ye suddenly an answer , 
▁ xxmaj in such a point of weight , so near mine honour , 
▁ xxmaj more near my life , i fear , with my weak wit , 
▁ xxmaj and to such men of gravity and learning , 
▁ xxmaj in truth i know not . i was set at work 
▁ xxmaj among my maids , full little , xxmaj god knows , looking 
▁ xxmaj either for such men or such business . 
▁ xxmaj for her sake that i have been - for i feel 
▁ xxmaj the last fit of my greatness - good your xxmaj graces , 
▁ xxmaj let me have time and counsel for my cause . 
▁ xxmaj alas , i am a woman , friendless , hopeless ! 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj madam , you wrong the xxmaj king 's love with these fears ; 
▁ xxmaj your hopes and friends are infinite . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj in xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj but little for my profit ; can you think , lords , 
▁ xxmaj that any xxmaj englishman dare give me counsel ? 
▁ xxmaj or be a known friend , ' gainst his xxmaj highness ' pleasure- 
▁ xxmaj though he be grown so desperate to be honest- 
▁ xxmaj and live a subject ? xxmaj nay , forsooth , my friends , 
▁ xxmaj they that must weigh out my afflictions , 
▁ xxmaj they that my trust must grow to , live not here ; 
▁ xxmaj they are , as all my other comforts , far hence , 
▁ xxmaj in mine own country , lords . 
▁ xxup campeius . i would your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj would leave your griefs , and take my counsel . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj how , sir ? 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj put your main cause into the xxmaj king 's protection ; 
▁ xxmaj he 's loving and most gracious . ' twill be much 
▁ xxmaj both for your honour better and your cause ; 
▁ xxmaj for if the trial of the law o'ertake ye 
▁ xxmaj you 'll part away disgrac'd . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj he tells you rightly . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj ye tell me what ye wish for both - my ruin . 
▁ xxmaj is this your xxmaj christian counsel ? xxmaj out upon ye ! 
▁ xxmaj heaven is above all yet : there sits a xxmaj judge 
▁ xxmaj that no king can corrupt . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj your rage mistakes us . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj the more shame for ye ; holy men i thought ye , 
▁ xxmaj upon my soul , two reverend cardinal virtues ; 
▁ xxmaj but cardinal sins and hollow hearts i fear ye . 
▁ xxmaj mend 'em , for shame , my lords . xxmaj is this your comfort ? 
▁ xxmaj the cordial that ye bring a wretched lady- 
▁ a woman lost among ye , laugh'd at , scorn'd ? 
▁ i will not wish ye half my miseries : 
▁ i have more charity ; but say i warned ye . 
▁ xxmaj take heed , for heaven 's sake take heed , lest at once 
▁ xxmaj the burden of my sorrows fall upon ye . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj madam , this is a mere distraction ; 
▁ xxmaj you turn the good we offer into envy . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj ye turn me into nothing . xxmaj woe upon ye , 
▁ xxmaj and all such false professors ! xxmaj would you have me- 
▁ xxmaj if you have any justice , any pity , 
▁ xxmaj if ye be any thing but churchmen 's habits- 
▁ xxmaj put my sick cause into his hands that hates me ? 
▁ xxmaj alas ! has banish'd me his bed already , 
▁ xxmaj his love too long ago ! i am old , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj and all the fellowship i hold now with him 
▁ xxmaj is only my obedience . xxmaj what can happen 
▁ xxmaj to me above this wretchedness ? xxmaj all your studies 
▁ xxmaj make me a curse like this . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj your fears are worse . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj have i liv'd thus long - let me speak myself , 
▁ xxmaj since virtue finds no friends - a wife , a true one ? 
▁ a woman , i dare say without vain - glory , 
▁ xxmaj never yet branded with suspicion ? 
▁ xxmaj have i with all my full affections 
▁ xxmaj still met the xxmaj king , lov'd him next heav'n , obey'd him , 
▁ xxmaj been , out of fondness , superstitious to him , 
▁ xxmaj almost forgot my prayers to content him , 
▁ xxmaj and am i thus rewarded ? ' tis not well , lords . 
▁ xxmaj bring me a constant woman to her husband , 
▁ xxmaj one that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj and to that woman , when she has done most , 
▁ xxmaj yet will i add an honour - a great patience . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj madam , you wander from the good we aim at . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj my lord , i dare not make myself so guilty , 
▁ xxmaj to give up willingly that noble title 
▁ xxmaj your master we d me to : nothing but death 
▁ xxmaj shall e'er divorce my dignities . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj pray hear me . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj would i had never trod this xxmaj english earth , 
▁ xxmaj or felt the flatteries that grow upon it ! 
▁ xxmaj ye have angels ' faces , but heaven knows your hearts . 
▁ xxmaj what will become of me now , wretched lady ? 
▁ i am the most unhappy woman living . 
▁ [ to her xxup women ] xxmaj alas , poor wenches , where are now 
▁ your fortunes ? 
▁ xxmaj shipwreck'd upon a kingdom , where no pity , 
▁ xxmaj no friends , no hope ; no kindred weep for me ; 
▁ xxmaj almost no grave allow'd me . xxmaj like the xxmaj my , 
▁ xxmaj that once was mistress of the field , and flourish'd , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hang my head and perish . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj if your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj could but be brought to know our ends are honest , 
▁ xxmaj you 'd feel more comfort . xxmaj why should we , good lady , 
▁ xxmaj upon what cause , wrong you ? xxmaj alas , our places , 
▁ xxmaj the way of our profession is against it ; 
▁ xxmaj we are to cure such sorrows , not to sow 'em . 
▁ xxmaj for goodness ' sake , consider what you do ; 
▁ xxmaj how you may hurt yourself , ay , utterly 
▁ xxmaj grow from the xxmaj king 's acquaintance , by this carriage . 
▁ xxmaj the hearts of princes kiss obedience , 
▁ xxmaj so much they love it ; but to stubborn spirits 
▁ xxmaj they swell and grow as terrible as storms . 
▁ i know you have a gentle , noble temper , 
▁ a soul as even as a calm . xxmaj pray think us 
▁ xxmaj those we profess , peace - makers , friends , and servants . 
▁ xxup campeius . xxmaj madam , you 'll find it so . xxmaj you wrong your virtues 
▁ xxmaj with these weak women 's fears . a noble spirit , 
▁ xxmaj as yours was put into you , ever casts 
▁ xxmaj such doubts as false coin from it . xxmaj the xxmaj king loves you ; 
▁ xxmaj beware you lose it not . xxmaj for us , if you please 
▁ xxmaj to trust us in your business , we are ready 
▁ xxmaj to use our utmost studies in your service . 
▁ xxup queen xxup katharine . xxmaj do what ye will my lords ; and pray 
▁ forgive me 
▁ xxmaj if i have us'd myself unmannerly ; 
▁ xxmaj you know i am a woman , lacking wit 
▁ xxmaj to make a seemly answer to such persons . 
▁ xxmaj pray do my service to his xxmaj majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj he has my heart yet , and shall have my prayers 
▁ xxmaj while i shall have my life . xxmaj come , reverend fathers , 
▁ xxmaj bestow your counsels on me ; she now begs 
▁ xxmaj that little thought , when she set footing here , 
▁ xxmaj she should have bought her dignities so dear . xxmaj exeunt 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i .scene 2 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk , the xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk , the xxup earl xxup of xxup surrey , 
 and the xxup lord xxup chamberlain 

▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj if you will now unite in your complaints 
▁ xxmaj and force them with a constancy , the xxmaj cardinal 
▁ xxmaj can not stand under them : if you omit 
▁ xxmaj the offer of this time , i can not promise 
▁ xxmaj but that you shall sustain moe new disgraces 
▁ xxmaj with these you bear already . 
▁ xxup surrey . i am joyful 
▁ xxmaj to meet the least occasion that may give me 
▁ xxmaj remembrance of my father - in - law , the xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj to be reveng'd on him . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj which of the peers 
▁ xxmaj have uncontemn'd gone by him , or at least 
▁ xxmaj strangely neglected ? xxmaj when did he regard 
▁ xxmaj the stamp of nobleness in any person 
▁ xxmaj out of himself ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj my lords , you speak your pleasures . 
▁ xxmaj what he deserves of you and me i know ; 
▁ xxmaj what we can do to him - though now the time 
▁ xxmaj gives way to us - i much fear . xxmaj if you can not 
▁ xxmaj bar his access to th ' xxmaj king , never attempt 
▁ xxmaj anything on him ; for he hath a witchcraft 
▁ xxmaj over the xxmaj king in 's tongue . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxup o , fear him not ! 
▁ xxmaj his spell in that is out ; the xxmaj king hath found 
▁ xxmaj matter against him that for ever mars 
▁ xxmaj the honey of his language . xxmaj no , he 's settled , 
▁ xxmaj not to come off , in his displeasure . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj sir , 
▁ i should be glad to hear such news as this 
▁ xxmaj once every hour . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj believe it , this is true : 
▁ xxmaj in the divorce his contrary proceedings 
▁ xxmaj are all unfolded ; wherein he appears 
▁ xxmaj as i would wish mine enemy . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj how came 
▁ xxmaj his practices to light ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj most xxmaj strangely . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxup o , how , how ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal 's letters to the xxmaj pope miscarried , 
▁ xxmaj and came to th ' eye o ' th ' xxmaj king ; wherein was read 
▁ xxmaj how that the xxmaj cardinal did entreat his xxmaj holiness 
▁ xxmaj to stay the judgment o ' th ' divorce ; for if 
▁ xxmaj it did take place , ' i do ' quoth he ' perceive 
▁ xxmaj my king is tangled in affection to 
▁ a creature of the xxmaj queen 's , xxmaj lady xxmaj anne xxmaj bullen . ' 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj has the xxmaj king this ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj believe it . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj will this work ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj the xxmaj king in this perceives him how he coasts 
▁ xxmaj and hedges his own way . xxmaj but in this point 
▁ xxmaj all his tricks founder , and he brings his physic 
▁ xxmaj after his patient 's death : the xxmaj king already 
▁ xxmaj hath married the fair lady . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj would he had ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj may you be happy in your wish , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj for , i profess , you have it . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj now , all my joy 
▁ xxmaj trace the conjunction ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj my amen to't ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj an men 's ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj there 's order given for her coronation ; 
▁ xxmaj marry , this is yet but young , and may be left 
▁ xxmaj to some ears unrecounted . xxmaj but , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj she is a gallant creature , and complete 
▁ xxmaj in mind and feature . i persuade me from her 
▁ xxmaj will fall some blessing to this land , which shall 
▁ xxmaj in it be memoriz'd . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj but will the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj digest this letter of the xxmaj cardinal 's ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lord forbid ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj marry , amen ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj no , no ; 
▁ xxmaj there be moe wasps that buzz about his nose 
▁ xxmaj will make this sting the sooner . xxmaj cardinal xxmaj campeius 
▁ xxmaj is stol'n away to xxmaj rome ; hath ta'en no leave ; 
▁ xxmaj has left the cause o ' th ' xxmaj king unhandled , and 
▁ xxmaj is posted , as the agent of our xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj to second all his plot . i do assure you 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king cried ' ha ! ' at this . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj now , xxmaj god incense him , 
▁ xxmaj and let him cry ' ha ! ' louder ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj but , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj when returns xxmaj cranmer ? 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj he is return'd in his opinions ; which 
▁ xxmaj have satisfied the xxmaj king for his divorce , 
▁ xxmaj together with all famous colleges 
▁ xxmaj almost in xxmaj christendom . xxmaj shortly , i believe , 
▁ xxmaj his second marriage shall be publish'd , and 
▁ xxmaj her coronation . xxmaj katharine no more 
▁ xxmaj shall be call'd queen , but princess dowager 
▁ xxmaj and widow to xxmaj prince xxmaj arthur . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj this same xxmaj cranmer 's 
▁ a worthy fellow , and hath ta'en much pain 
▁ xxmaj in the xxmaj king 's business . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj he has ; and we shall see him 
▁ xxmaj for it an archbishop . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj so i hear . 
▁ xxup suffolk . ' tis so . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup wolsey and xxup cromwell 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj observe , observe , he 's moody . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj the packet , xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ xxmaj gave't you the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj to his own hand , in 's bedchamber . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj look'd he o ' th ' inside of the paper ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj presently 
▁ xxmaj he did unseal them ; and the first he view'd , 
▁ xxmaj he did it with a serious mind ; a heed 
▁ xxmaj was in his countenance . xxmaj you he bade 
▁ xxmaj attend him here this morning . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj is he ready 
▁ xxmaj to come abroad ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . i think by this he is . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj leave me awhile . xxmaj exit xxup cromwell 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj it shall be to the xxmaj duchess of xxmaj alencon , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french xxmaj king 's sister ; he shall marry her . 
▁ xxmaj anne xxmaj bullen ! xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll no xxmaj anne xxmaj bullens for him ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's more in't than fair visage . xxmaj bullen ! 
▁ xxmaj no , we 'll no xxmaj bullens . xxmaj speedily i wish 
▁ xxmaj to hear from xxmaj rome . xxmaj the xxmaj marchioness of xxmaj pembroke ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj he 's discontented . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj may be he hears the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj does whet his anger to him . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj sharp enough , 
▁ xxmaj lord , for thy justice ! 
▁ xxup wolsey . [ aside ] xxmaj the late xxmaj queen 's gentlewoman , a knight 's 
▁ daughter , 
▁ xxmaj to be her mistress ' mistress ! xxmaj the xxmaj queen 's queen ! 
▁ xxmaj this candle burns not clear . ' tis i must snuff it ; 
▁ xxmaj then out it goes . xxmaj what though i know her virtuous 
▁ xxmaj and well deserving ? xxmaj yet i know her for 
▁ a spleeny xxmaj lutheran ; and not wholesome to 
▁ xxmaj our cause that she should lie i ' th ' bosom of 
▁ xxmaj our hard - rul'd xxmaj king . xxmaj again , there is sprung up 
▁ xxmaj an heretic , an arch one , xxmaj cranmer ; one 
▁ xxmaj hath crawl'd into the favour of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and is his oracle . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj he is vex'd at something . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king , reading of a schedule , and xxup lovell 

▁ xxup surrey . i would ' twere something that would fret the string , 
▁ xxmaj the master - cord on 's heart ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj the xxmaj king , the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what piles of wealth hath he accumulated 
▁ xxmaj to his own portion ! xxmaj and what expense by th ' hour 
▁ xxmaj seems to flow from him ! xxmaj how , i ' th ' name of thrift , 
▁ xxmaj does he rake this together?-now , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj saw you the xxmaj cardinal ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj my lord , we have 
▁ xxmaj stood here observing him . xxmaj some strange commotion 
▁ xxmaj is in his brain : he bites his lip and starts , 
▁ xxmaj stops on a sudden , looks upon the ground , 
▁ xxmaj then lays his finger on his temple ; straight 
▁ xxmaj springs out into fast gait ; then stops again , 
▁ xxmaj strikes his breast hard ; and anon he casts 
▁ xxmaj his eye against the moon . xxmaj in most strange postures 
▁ xxmaj we have seen him set himself . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj it may well be 
▁ xxmaj there is a mutiny in 's mind . xxmaj this morning 
▁ xxmaj papers of state he sent me to peruse , 
▁ xxmaj as i requir'd ; and wot you what i found 
▁ xxmaj there - on my conscience , put unwittingly ? 
▁ xxmaj forsooth , an inventory , thus importing 
▁ xxmaj the several parcels of his plate , his treasure , 
▁ xxmaj rich stuffs , and ornaments of household ; which 
▁ i find at such proud rate that it outspeaks 
▁ xxmaj possession of a subject . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj it 's heaven 's will ; 
▁ xxmaj some spirit put this paper in the packet 
▁ xxmaj to bless your eye withal . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj if we did think 
▁ xxmaj his contemplation were above the earth 
▁ xxmaj and fix'd on spiritual object , he should still 
▁ dwell in his musings ; but i am afraid 
▁ xxmaj his thinkings are below the moon , not worth 
▁ xxmaj his serious considering . 
▁ [ the xxup king takes his seat and whispers xxup lovell , 
▁ who goes to the xxup cardinal ] 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj heaven forgive me ! 
▁ xxmaj ever xxmaj god bless your xxmaj highness ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj good , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you are full of heavenly stuff , and bear the inventory 
▁ xxmaj of your best graces in your mind ; the which 
▁ xxmaj you were now running o'er . xxmaj you have scarce time 
▁ xxmaj to steal from spiritual leisure a brief span 
▁ xxmaj to keep your earthly audit ; sure , in that 
▁ i deem you an ill husband , and am glad 
▁ xxmaj to have you therein my companion . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj for holy offices i have a time ; a time 
▁ xxmaj to think upon the part of business which 
▁ i bear i ' th ' state ; and nature does require 
▁ xxmaj her times of preservation , which perforce 
▁ xxup i , her frail son , amongst my brethren mortal , 
▁ xxmaj must give my tendance to . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you have said well . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj and ever may your xxmaj highness yoke together , 
▁ xxmaj as i will lend you cause , my doing well 
▁ xxmaj with my well saying ! 
▁ xxup king . ' tis well said again ; 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis a kind of good deed to say well ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet words are no deeds . xxmaj my father lov'd you : 
▁ xxmaj he said he did ; and with his deed did crown 
▁ xxmaj his word upon you . xxmaj since i had my office 
▁ i have kept you next my heart ; have not alone 
▁ xxmaj employ'd you where high profits might come home , 
▁ xxmaj but par'd my present havings to bestow 
▁ xxmaj my bounties upon you . 
▁ xxup wolsey . [ aside ] xxmaj what should this mean ? 
▁ xxup surrey . [ aside ] xxmaj the xxmaj lord increase this business ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj have i not made you 
▁ xxmaj the prime man of the state ? i pray you tell me 
▁ xxmaj if what i now pronounce you have found true ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if you may confess it , say withal 
▁ xxmaj if you are bound to us or no . xxmaj what say you ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj my sovereign , i confess your royal graces , 
▁ xxmaj show'r'd on me daily , have been more than could 
▁ xxmaj my studied purposes requite ; which went 
▁ xxmaj beyond all man 's endeavours . xxmaj my endeavours , 
▁ xxmaj have ever come too short of my desires , 
▁ xxmaj yet fil'd with my abilities ; mine own ends 
▁ xxmaj have been mine so that evermore they pointed 
▁ xxmaj to th ' good of your most sacred person and 
▁ xxmaj the profit of the state . xxmaj for your great graces 
▁ xxmaj heap'd upon me , poor undeserver , i 
▁ xxmaj can nothing render but allegiant thanks ; 
▁ xxmaj my pray'rs to heaven for you ; my loyalty , 
▁ xxmaj which ever has and ever shall be growing , 
▁ xxmaj till death , that winter , kill it . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj fairly answer'd ! 
▁ a loyal and obedient subject is 
▁ xxmaj therein illustrated ; the honour of it 
▁ xxmaj does pay the act of it , as , i ' th ' contrary , 
▁ xxmaj the foulness is the punishment . i presume 
▁ xxmaj that , as my hand has open'd bounty to you , 
▁ xxmaj my heart dropp'd love , my pow'r rain'd honour , more 
▁ xxmaj on you than any , so your hand and heart , 
▁ xxmaj your brain , and every function of your power , 
▁ xxmaj should , notwithstanding that your bond of duty , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere in love 's particular , be more 
▁ xxmaj to me , your friend , than any . 
▁ xxup wolsey . i do profess 
▁ xxmaj that for your xxmaj highness ' good i ever labour'd 
▁ xxmaj more than mine own ; that am , have , and will be- 
▁ xxmaj though all the world should crack their duty to you , 
▁ xxmaj and throw it from their soul ; though perils did 
▁ xxmaj abound as thick as thought could make 'em , and