xxbos xxmaj appear in forms more horrid - yet my duty , 
▁ xxmaj as doth a rock against the chiding flood , 
▁ xxmaj should the approach of this wild river break , 
▁ xxmaj and stand unshaken yours . 
▁ xxup king . ' tis nobly spoken . 
▁ xxmaj take notice , lords , he has a loyal breast , 
▁ xxmaj for you have seen him open ' t. xxmaj read o'er this ; 
▁ [ giving him papers ] 
▁ xxmaj and after , this ; and then to breakfast with 
▁ xxmaj what appetite you have . 
▁ xxmaj exit the xxup king , frowning upon the xxup cardinal ; the xxup nobles 
▁ throng after him , smiling and whispering 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj what should this mean ? 
▁ xxmaj what sudden anger 's this ? xxmaj how have i reap'd it ? 
▁ xxmaj he parted frowning from me , as if ruin 
▁ xxmaj leap'd from his eyes ; so looks the chafed lion 
▁ xxmaj upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him- 
▁ xxmaj then makes him nothing . i must read this paper ; 
▁ i fear , the story of his anger . ' tis so ; 
▁ xxmaj this paper has undone me . ' tis th ' account 
▁ xxmaj of all that world of wealth i have drawn together 
▁ xxmaj for mine own ends ; indeed to gain the popedom , 
▁ xxmaj and fee my friends in xxmaj rome . o negligence , 
▁ xxmaj fit for a fool to fall by ! xxmaj what cross devil 
▁ xxmaj made me put this main secret in the packet 
▁ i sent the xxmaj king ? xxmaj is there no way to cure this ? 
▁ xxmaj no new device to beat this from his brains ? 
▁ i know ' twill stir him strongly ; yet i know 
▁ a way , if it take right , in spite of fortune , 
▁ xxmaj will bring me off again . xxmaj what 's this ? ' to th ' xxmaj pope . ' 
▁ xxmaj the letter , as i live , with all the business 
▁ i writ to 's xxmaj holiness . xxmaj nay then , farewell ! 
▁ i have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness , 
▁ xxmaj and from that full meridian of my glory 
▁ i haste now to my setting . i shall fall 
▁ xxmaj like a bright exhalation in the evening , 
▁ xxmaj and no man see me more . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter to xxup wolsey the xxup dukes xxup of xxup norfolk and 
▁ xxup suffolk , the xxup earl xxup of xxup surrey , and the xxup lord 
▁ xxup chamberlain 

▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj hear the xxmaj king 's pleasure , xxmaj cardinal , who commands you 
▁ xxmaj to render up the great seal presently 
▁ xxmaj into our hands , and to confine yourself 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj asher xxmaj house , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester 's , 
▁ xxmaj till you hear further from his xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj stay : 
▁ xxmaj where 's your commission , lords ? xxmaj words can not carry 
▁ xxmaj authority so weighty . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj who dares cross 'em , 
▁ xxmaj bearing the xxmaj king 's will from his mouth expressly ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj till i find more than will or words to do it- 
▁ i mean your malice - know , officious lords , 
▁ i dare and must deny it . xxmaj now i feel 
▁ xxmaj of what coarse metal ye are moulded - envy ; 
▁ xxmaj how eagerly ye follow my disgraces , 
▁ xxmaj as if it fed ye ; and how sleek and wanton 
▁ xxmaj ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin ! 
▁ xxmaj follow your envious courses , men of malice ; 
▁ xxmaj you have xxmaj christian warrant for 'em , and no doubt 
▁ xxmaj in time will find their fit rewards . xxmaj that seal 
▁ xxmaj you ask with such a violence , the xxmaj king- 
▁ xxmaj mine and your master - with his own hand gave me ; 
▁ xxmaj bade me enjoy it , with the place and honours , 
▁ xxmaj during my life ; and , to confirm his goodness , 
▁ xxmaj tied it by letters - patents . xxmaj now , who 'll take it ? 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj the xxmaj king , that gave it . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj it must be himself then . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj thou art a proud traitor , priest . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj proud lord , thou liest . 
▁ xxmaj within these forty hours xxmaj surrey durst better 
▁ xxmaj have burnt that tongue than said so . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj thy ambition , 
▁ xxmaj thou scarlet sin , robb'd this bewailing land 
▁ xxmaj of noble xxmaj buckingham , my father - in - law . 
▁ xxmaj the heads of all thy brother cardinals , 
▁ xxmaj with thee and all thy best parts bound together , 
▁ xxmaj weigh'd not a hair of his . xxmaj plague of your policy ! 
▁ xxmaj you sent me deputy for xxmaj ireland ; 
▁ xxmaj far from his succour , from the xxmaj king , from all 
▁ xxmaj that might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst your great goodness , out of holy pity , 
▁ xxmaj absolv'd him with an axe . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj this , and all else 
▁ xxmaj this talking lord can lay upon my credit , 
▁ i answer is most false . xxmaj the xxmaj duke by law 
▁ xxmaj found his deserts ; how innocent i was 
▁ xxmaj from any private malice in his end , 
▁ xxmaj his noble jury and foul cause can witness . 
▁ xxmaj if i lov'd many words , lord , i should tell you 
▁ xxmaj you have as little honesty as honour , 
▁ xxmaj that in the way of loyalty and truth 
▁ xxmaj toward the xxmaj king , my ever royal master , 
▁ xxmaj dare mate a sounder man than xxmaj surrey can be 
▁ xxmaj and an that love his follies . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj by my soul , 
▁ xxmaj your long coat , priest , protects you ; thou shouldst feel 
▁ xxmaj my sword i ' the life - blood of thee else . xxmaj my lords 
▁ xxmaj can ye endure to hear this arrogance ? 
▁ xxmaj and from this fellow ? xxmaj if we live thus tamely , 
▁ xxmaj to be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet , 
▁ xxmaj farewell nobility ! xxmaj let his xxmaj grace go forward 
▁ xxmaj and dare us with his cap like larks . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj all goodness 
▁ xxmaj is poison to thy stomach . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj yes , that goodness 
▁ xxmaj of gleaning all the land 's wealth into one , 
▁ xxmaj into your own hands , xxmaj cardinal , by extortion ; 
▁ xxmaj the goodness of your intercepted packets 
▁ xxmaj you writ to th ' xxmaj pope against the xxmaj king ; your goodness , 
▁ xxmaj since you provoke me , shall be most notorious . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj norfolk , as you are truly noble , 
▁ xxmaj as you respect the common good , the state 
▁ xxmaj of our despis'd nobility , our issues , 
▁ xxmaj whom , if he live , will scarce be gentlemen- 
▁ xxmaj produce the grand sum of his sins , the articles 
▁ xxmaj collected from his life . xxmaj i 'll startle you 
▁ xxmaj worse than the sacring bell , when the brown wench 
▁ xxmaj lay kissing in your arms , xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj how much , methinks , i could despise this man , 
▁ xxmaj but that i am bound in charity against it ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj those articles , my lord , are in the xxmaj king 's hand ; 
▁ xxmaj but , thus much , they are foul ones . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj so much fairer 
▁ xxmaj and spotless shall mine innocence arise , 
▁ xxmaj when the xxmaj king knows my truth . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj this can not save you . 
▁ i thank my memory i yet remember 
▁ xxmaj some of these articles ; and out they shall . 
▁ xxmaj now , if you can blush and cry guilty , xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj you 'll show a little honesty . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj speak on , sir ; 
▁ i dare your worst objections . xxmaj if i blush , 
▁ xxmaj it is to see a nobleman want manners . 
▁ xxup surrey . i had rather want those than my head . xxmaj have at you ! 
▁ xxmaj first , that without the xxmaj king 's assent or knowledge 
▁ xxmaj you wrought to be a legate ; by which power 
▁ xxmaj you maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj then , that in all you writ to xxmaj rome , or else 
▁ xxmaj to foreign princes , ' ego et xxmaj rex meus ' 
▁ xxmaj was still inscrib'd ; in which you brought the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj to be your servant . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj then , that without the knowledge 
▁ xxmaj either of xxmaj king or xxmaj council , when you went 
▁ xxmaj ambassador to the xxmaj emperor , you made bold 
▁ xxmaj to carry into xxmaj flanders the great seal . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj item , you sent a large commission 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj gregory de xxmaj cassado , to conclude , 
▁ xxmaj without the xxmaj king 's will or the state 's allowance , 
▁ a league between his xxmaj highness and xxmaj ferrara . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj that out of mere ambition you have caus'd 
▁ xxmaj your holy hat to be stamp'd on the xxmaj king 's coin . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj then , that you have sent innumerable substance , 
▁ xxmaj by what means got i leave to your own conscience , 
▁ xxmaj to furnish xxmaj rome and to prepare the ways 
▁ xxmaj you have for dignities , to the mere undoing 
▁ xxmaj of all the kingdom . xxmaj many more there are , 
▁ xxmaj which , since they are of you , and odious , 
▁ i will not taint my mouth with . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . o my lord , 
▁ xxmaj press not a falling man too far ! ' tis virtue . 
▁ xxmaj his faults lie open to the laws ; let them , 
▁ xxmaj not you , correct him . xxmaj my heart weeps to see him 
▁ xxmaj so little of his great self . 
▁ xxup surrey . i forgive him . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , the xxmaj king 's further pleasure is- 
▁ xxmaj because all those things you have done of late , 
▁ xxmaj by your power legatine within this kingdom , 
▁ xxmaj fall into th ' compass of a praemunire- 
▁ xxmaj that therefore such a writ be sued against you : 
▁ xxmaj to forfeit all your goods , lands , tenements , 
▁ xxmaj chattels , and whatsoever , and to be 
▁ xxmaj out of the xxmaj king 's protection . xxmaj this is my charge . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj and so we 'll leave you to your meditations 
▁ xxmaj how to live better . xxmaj for your stubborn answer 
▁ xxmaj about the giving back the great seal to us , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king shall know it , and , no doubt , shall thank you . 
▁ xxmaj so fare you well , my little good xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup wolsey 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj so farewell to the little good you bear me . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , a long farewell , to all my greatness ! 
▁ xxmaj this is the state of man : to - day he puts forth 
▁ xxmaj the tender leaves of hopes ; to - morrow blossoms 
▁ xxmaj and bears his blushing honours thick upon him ; 
▁ xxmaj the third day comes a frost , a killing frost , 
▁ xxmaj and when he thinks , good easy man , full surely 
▁ xxmaj his greatness is a - ripening , nips his root , 
▁ xxmaj and then he falls , as i do . i have ventur'd , 
▁ xxmaj like little wanton boys that swim on bladders , 
▁ xxmaj this many summers in a sea of glory ; 
▁ xxmaj but far beyond my depth . xxmaj my high - blown pride 
▁ xxmaj at length broke under me , and now has left me , 
▁ xxmaj weary and old with service , to the mercy 
▁ xxmaj of a rude stream , that must for ever hide me . 
▁ xxmaj vain pomp and glory of this world , i hate ye ; 
▁ i feel my heart new open'd . xxup o , how wretched 
▁ xxmaj is that poor man that hangs on princes ' favours ! 
▁ xxmaj there is betwixt that smile we would aspire to , 
▁ xxmaj that sweet aspect of princes , and their ruin 
▁ xxmaj more pangs and fears than wars or women have ; 
▁ xxmaj and when he falls , he falls like xxmaj lucifer , 
▁ xxmaj never to hope again . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cromwell , standing amazed 

▁ xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj cromwell ! 
▁ xxup cromwell . i have no power to speak , sir . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj what , amaz'd 
▁ xxmaj at my misfortunes ? xxmaj can thy spirit wonder 
▁ a great man should decline ? xxmaj nay , an you weep , 
▁ i am fall'n indeed . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj how does your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj why , well ; 
▁ xxmaj never so truly happy , my good xxmaj cromwell . 
▁ i know myself now , and i feel within me 
▁ a peace above all earthly dignities , 
▁ a still and quiet conscience . xxmaj the xxmaj king has cur'd me , 
▁ i humbly thank his xxmaj grace ; and from these shoulders , 
▁ xxmaj these ruin'd pillars , out of pity , taken 
▁ a load would sink a navy - too much honour . 
▁ xxup o , ' tis a burden , xxmaj cromwell , ' tis a burden 
▁ xxmaj too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven ! 
▁ xxup cromwell . i am glad your xxmaj grace has made that right use of it . 
▁ xxup wolsey . i hope i have . i am able now , methinks , 
▁ xxmaj out of a fortitude of soul i feel , 
▁ xxmaj to endure more miseries and greater far 
▁ xxmaj than my weak - hearted enemies dare offer . 
▁ xxmaj what news abroad ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj the heaviest and the worst 
▁ xxmaj is your displeasure with the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj god bless him ! 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj the next is that xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj more is chosen 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj chancellor in your place . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj that 's somewhat sudden . 
▁ xxmaj but he 's a learned man . xxmaj may he continue 
▁ xxmaj long in his xxmaj highness ' favour , and do justice 
▁ xxmaj for truth 's sake and his conscience ; that his bones 
▁ xxmaj when he has run his course and sleeps in blessings , 
▁ xxmaj may have a tomb of orphans ' tears wept on him ! 
▁ xxmaj what more ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj that xxmaj cranmer is return'd with welcome , 
▁ xxmaj install'd xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj canterbury . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj that 's news indeed . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj last , that the xxmaj lady xxmaj anne , 
▁ xxmaj whom the xxmaj king hath in secrecy long married , 
▁ xxmaj this day was view'd in open as his queen , 
▁ xxmaj going to chapel ; and the voice is now 
▁ xxmaj only about her coronation . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj there was the weight that pull'd me down . 
▁ o xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king has gone beyond me . xxmaj all my glories 
▁ xxmaj in that one woman i have lost for ever . 
▁ xxmaj no sun shall ever usher forth mine honours , 
▁ xxmaj or gild again the noble troops that waited 
▁ xxmaj upon my smiles . xxmaj go get thee from me , xxmaj cromwell ; 
▁ i am a poor fall'n man , unworthy now 
▁ xxmaj to be thy lord and master . xxmaj seek the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj that sun , i pray , may never set ! i have told him 
▁ xxmaj what and how true thou art . xxmaj he will advance thee ; 
▁ xxmaj some little memory of me will stir him- 
▁ i know his noble nature - not to let 
▁ xxmaj thy hopeful service perish too . xxmaj good xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ xxmaj neglect him not ; make use now , and provide 
▁ xxmaj for thine own future safety . 
▁ xxup cromwell . o my lord , 
▁ xxmaj must i then leave you ? xxmaj must i needs forgo 
▁ xxmaj so good , so noble , and so true a master ? 
▁ xxmaj bear witness , all that have not hearts of iron , 
▁ xxmaj with what a sorrow xxmaj cromwell leaves his lord . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king shall have my service ; but my prayers 
▁ xxmaj for ever and for ever shall be yours . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj cromwell , i did not think to shed a tear 
▁ xxmaj in all my miseries ; but thou hast forc'd me , 
▁ xxmaj out of thy honest truth , to play the woman . 
▁ xxmaj let 's dry our eyes ; and thus far hear me , xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ xxmaj and when i am forgotten , as i shall be , 
▁ xxmaj and sleep in dull cold marble , where no mention 
▁ xxmaj of me more must be heard of , say i taught thee- 
▁ xxmaj say xxmaj wolsey , that once trod the ways of glory , 
▁ xxmaj and sounded all the depths and shoals of honour , 
▁ xxmaj found thee a way , out of his wreck , to rise in- 
▁ a sure and safe one , though thy master miss'd it . 
▁ xxmaj mark but my fall and that that ruin'd me . 
▁ xxmaj cromwell , i charge thee , fling away ambition : 
▁ xxmaj by that sin fell the angels . xxmaj how can man then , 
▁ xxmaj the image of his xxmaj maker , hope to win by it ? 
▁ xxmaj love thyself last ; cherish those hearts that hate thee ; 
▁ xxmaj corruption wins not more than honesty . 
▁ xxmaj still in thy right hand carry gentle peace 
▁ xxmaj to silence envious tongues . xxmaj be just , and fear not ; 
▁ xxmaj let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country 's , 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj god 's , and truth 's ; then , if thou fall'st , o xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ xxmaj thou fall'st a blessed martyr ! 
▁ xxmaj serve the xxmaj king , and - prithee lead me in . 
▁ xxmaj there take an inventory of all i have 
▁ xxmaj to the last penny ; ' tis the xxmaj king 's . xxmaj my robe , 
▁ xxmaj and my integrity to heaven , is all 
▁ i dare now call mine own . o xxmaj cromwell , xxmaj cromwell ! 
▁ xxmaj had i but serv'd my xxmaj god with half the zeal 
▁ i serv'd my xxmaj king , he would not in mine age 
▁ xxmaj have left me naked to mine enemies . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj good sir , have patience . 
▁ xxup wolsey . xxmaj so i have . xxmaj farewell 
▁ xxmaj the hopes of court ! xxmaj my hopes in heaven do dwell . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 

 a street in xxmaj westminster 

 xxmaj enter two xxup gentlemen , meeting one another 

▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj y'are well met once again . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj so are you . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj you come to take your stand here , and 
▁ behold 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lady xxmaj anne pass from her coronation ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . ' tis all my business . xxmaj at our last encounter 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham came from his trial . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . ' tis very true . xxmaj but that time offer'd 
▁ sorrow ; 
▁ xxmaj this , general joy . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . ' tis well . xxmaj the citizens , 
▁ i am sure , have shown at full their royal minds- 
▁ xxmaj as , let 'em have their rights , they are ever forward- 
▁ xxmaj in celebration of this day with shows , 
▁ xxmaj pageants , and sights of honour . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj never greater , 
▁ xxmaj nor , xxmaj i 'll assure you , better taken , sir . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj may i be bold to ask what that contains , 
▁ xxmaj that paper in your hand ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes ; ' tis the list 
▁ xxmaj of those that claim their offices this day , 
▁ xxmaj by custom of the coronation . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk is the first , and claims 
▁ xxmaj to be xxmaj high xxmaj steward ; next , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , 
▁ xxmaj he to be xxmaj earl xxmaj marshal . xxmaj you may read the rest . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i thank you , sir ; had i not known 
▁ those customs , 
▁ i should have been beholding to your paper . 
▁ xxmaj but , i beseech you , what 's become of xxmaj katharine , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj princess xxmaj dowager ? xxmaj how goes her business ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj that i can tell you too . xxmaj the xxmaj archbishop 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj canterbury , accompanied with other 
▁ xxmaj learned and reverend fathers of his order , 
▁ xxmaj held a late court at xxmaj dunstable , six miles of 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj ampthill , where the xxmaj princess lay ; to which 
▁ xxmaj she was often cited by them , but appear'd not . 
▁ xxmaj and , to be short , for not appearance and 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's late scruple , by the main assent 
▁ xxmaj of all these learned men , she was divorc'd , 
▁ xxmaj and the late marriage made of none effect ; 
▁ xxmaj since which she was removed to xxmaj kimbolton , 
▁ xxmaj where she remains now sick . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj alas , good lady ! [ trumpets ] 
▁ xxmaj the trumpets sound . xxmaj stand close , the xxmaj queen is coming . 
 [ hautboys ] 

▁ xxup the xxup order xxup of xxup the xxup coronation . 

▁ 1 . a lively flourish of trumpets . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj then two xxup judges . 
▁ 3 . xxup lord xxup chancellor , with purse and mace before him . 
▁ 4 . xxup choristers singing . [ music ] 
▁ 5 . xxup mayor xxup of xxup london , bearing the mace . xxmaj then xxup garter , in 
▁ his coat of arms , and on his head he wore a gilt copper 
▁ crown . 
▁ 6 . xxup marquis xxup dorset , bearing a sceptre of gold , on his head a 
▁ demi - coronal of gold . xxmaj with him , the xxup earl xxup of xxup surrey , 
▁ bearing the rod of silver with the dove , crowned with an 
▁ earl 's coronet . xxmaj collars of xxmaj esses . 
▁ 7 . xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk , in his robe of estate , his coronet on 
▁ his head , bearing a long white wand , as xxmaj high xxmaj steward . 
▁ xxmaj with him , the xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk , with the rod of 
▁ marshalship , a coronet on his head . xxmaj collars of xxmaj esses . 
▁ 8 . a canopy borne by four of the xxup cinque - ports ; under it 
▁ the xxup queen in her robe ; in her hair richly adorned with 
▁ pearl , crowned . xxmaj on each side her , the xxup bishops xxup of xxup london 
▁ and xxup winchester . 
▁ 9 . xxmaj the old xxup duchess xxup of xxup norfolk , in a coronal of gold 
▁ wrought with flowers , bearing the xxup queen 's train . 
▁ 10 . xxmaj certain xxup ladies or xxup countesses , with plain circlets of gold 
▁ without flowers . 

▁ xxmaj exeunt , first passing over the stage in order and state , 
▁ and then a great flourish of trumpets 

▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . a royal train , believe me . xxmaj these know . 
▁ xxmaj who 's that that bears the sceptre ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj marquis xxmaj dorset ; 
▁ xxmaj and that the xxmaj earl of xxmaj surrey , with the rod . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . a bold brave gentleman . xxmaj that should be 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . ' tis the same - high xxmaj steward . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj and that my xxmaj lord of xxmaj norfolk ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . [ looking on the xxup queen ] xxmaj heaven 
▁ bless thee ! 
▁ xxmaj thou hast the sweetest face i ever look'd on . 
▁ xxmaj sir , as i have a soul , she is an angel ; 
▁ xxmaj our king has all the xxmaj indies in his arms , 
▁ xxmaj and more and richer , when he strains that lady ; 
▁ i can not blame his conscience . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj they that bear 
▁ xxmaj the cloth of honour over her are four barons 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj cinque - ports . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj those men are happy ; and so are all 
▁ are near her . 
▁ i take it she that carries up the train 
▁ xxmaj is that old noble lady , xxmaj duchess of xxmaj norfolk . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj it is ; and all the rest are countesses . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj their coronets say so . xxmaj these are stars indeed , 
▁ xxmaj and sometimes falling ones . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj no more of that . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj procession , with a great flourish of trumpets 

▁ xxmaj enter a third xxup gentleman 

▁ xxmaj god save you , sir ! xxmaj where have you been broiling ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj among the crowds i ' th ' xxmaj abbey , where a finger 
▁ xxmaj could not be wedg'd in more ; i am stifled 
▁ xxmaj with the mere rankness of their joy . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj you saw 
▁ xxmaj the ceremony ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj that i did . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj how was it ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj well worth the seeing . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj good sir , speak it to us . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj as well as i am able . xxmaj the rich stream 
▁ xxmaj of lords and ladies , having brought the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj to a prepar'd place in the choir , fell of 
▁ a distance from her , while her xxmaj grace sat down 
▁ xxmaj to rest awhile , some half an hour or so , 
▁ xxmaj in a rich chair of state , opposing freely 
▁ xxmaj the beauty of her person to the people . 
▁ xxmaj believe me , sir , she is the goodliest woman 
▁ xxmaj that ever lay by man ; which when the people 
▁ xxmaj had the full view of , such a noise arose 
▁ xxmaj as the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest , 
▁ xxmaj as loud , and to as many tunes ; hats , cloaks- 
▁ xxmaj doublets , i think - flew up , and had their faces 
▁ xxmaj been loose , this day they had been lost . xxmaj such joy 
▁ i never saw before . xxmaj great - bellied women , 
▁ xxmaj that had not half a week to go , like rams 
▁ xxmaj in the old time of war , would shake the press , 
▁ xxmaj and make 'em reel before 'em . xxmaj no man living 
▁ xxmaj could say ' this is my wife ' there , all were woven 
▁ xxmaj so strangely in one piece . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj but what follow'd ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj at length her xxmaj grace rose , and with 
▁ modest paces 
▁ xxmaj came to the altar , where she kneel'd , and saintlike 
▁ xxmaj cast her fair eyes to heaven , and pray'd devoutly . 
▁ xxmaj then rose again , and bow'd her to the people ; 
▁ xxmaj when by the xxmaj archbishop of xxmaj canterbury 
▁ xxmaj she had all the royal makings of a queen : 
▁ xxmaj as holy oil , xxmaj edward xxmaj confessor 's crown , 
▁ xxmaj the rod , and bird of peace , and all such emblems 
▁ xxmaj laid nobly on her ; which perform'd , the choir , 
▁ xxmaj with all the choicest music of the kingdom , 
▁ xxmaj together sung ' te xxmaj deum . ' xxmaj so she parted , 
▁ xxmaj and with the same full state pac'd back again 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj york xxmaj place , where the feast is held . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj you must no more call it xxmaj york xxmaj place : that 's past : 
▁ xxmaj for since the xxmaj cardinal fell that title 's lost . 
▁ ' tis now the xxmaj king 's , and called xxmaj whitehall . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . i know it ; 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis so lately alter'd that the old name 
▁ xxmaj is fresh about me . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj what two reverend bishops 
▁ xxmaj were those that went on each side of the xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj stokesly and xxmaj gardiner : the one of xxmaj winchester , 
▁ xxmaj newly preferr'd from the xxmaj king 's secretary ; 
▁ xxmaj the other , xxmaj london . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj he of xxmaj winchester 
▁ xxmaj is held no great good lover of the xxmaj archbishop 's , 
▁ xxmaj the virtuous xxmaj cranmer . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj all the land knows that ; 
▁ xxmaj however , yet there is no great breach . xxmaj when it comes , 
▁ xxmaj cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj who may that be , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj thomas xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ a man in much esteem with th ' xxmaj king , and truly 
▁ a worthy friend . xxmaj the xxmaj king has made him xxmaj master 
▁ xxup o ' th ' jewel xxmaj house , 
▁ xxmaj and one , already , of the xxmaj privy xxmaj council . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj he will deserve more . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes , without all doubt . 
▁ xxmaj come , gentlemen , ye shall go my way , which 
▁ xxmaj is to th ' court , and there ye shall be my guests : 
▁ xxmaj something i can command . xxmaj as i walk thither , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell ye more . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj you may command us , sir . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj kimbolton 

 xxmaj enter xxup katharine , xxmaj dowager , sick ; led between xxup griffith , her xxmaj gentleman xxmaj usher , 
 and xxup patience , her woman 

▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj how does your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup katharine . o xxmaj griffith , sick to death ! 
▁ xxmaj my legs like loaden branches bow to th ' earth , 
▁ xxmaj willing to leave their burden . xxmaj reach a chair . 
▁ xxmaj so - now , methinks , i feel a little ease . 
▁ xxmaj didst thou not tell me , xxmaj griffith , as thou led'st me , 
▁ xxmaj that the great child of honour , xxmaj cardinal xxmaj wolsey , 
▁ xxmaj was dead ? 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj yes , madam ; but i think your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj out of the pain you suffer'd , gave no ear to't . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj prithee , good xxmaj griffith , tell me how he died . 
▁ xxmaj if well , he stepp'd before me , happily , 
▁ xxmaj for my example . 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj well , the voice goes , madam ; 
▁ xxmaj for after the stout xxmaj earl xxmaj northumberland 
▁ xxmaj arrested him at xxmaj york and brought him forward , 
▁ xxmaj as a man sorely tainted , to his answer , 
▁ xxmaj he fell sick suddenly , and grew so ill 
▁ xxmaj he could not sit his mule . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj alas , poor man ! 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj at last , with easy roads , he came to xxmaj leicester , 
▁ xxmaj lodg'd in the abbey ; where the reverend abbot , 
▁ xxmaj with all his covent , honourably receiv'd him ; 
▁ xxmaj to whom he gave these words : ' o father xxmaj abbot , 
▁ xxmaj an old man , broken with the storms of state , 
▁ xxmaj is come to lay his weary bones among ye ; 
▁ xxmaj give him a little earth for charity ! ' 
▁ xxmaj so went to bed ; where eagerly his sickness 
▁ xxmaj pursu'd him still xxmaj and three nights after this , 
▁ xxmaj about the hour of eight - which he himself 
▁ xxmaj foretold should be his last - full of repentance , 
▁ xxmaj continual meditations , tears , and sorrows , 
▁ xxmaj he gave his honours to the world again , 
▁ xxmaj his blessed part to heaven , and slept in peace . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj so may he rest ; his faults lie gently on him ! 
▁ xxmaj yet thus far , xxmaj griffith , give me leave to speak him , 
▁ xxmaj and yet with charity . xxmaj he was a man 
▁ xxmaj of an unbounded stomach , ever ranking 
▁ xxmaj himself with princes ; one that , by suggestion , 
▁ xxmaj tied all the kingdom . xxmaj simony was fair play ; 
▁ xxmaj his own opinion was his law . xxup i ' th ' presence 
▁ xxmaj he would say untruths , and be ever double 
▁ xxmaj both in his words and meaning . xxmaj he was never , 
▁ xxmaj but where he meant to ruin , pitiful . 
▁ xxmaj his promises were , as he then was , mighty ; 
▁ xxmaj but his performance , as he is now , nothing . 
▁ xxmaj of his own body he was ill , and gave 
▁ xxmaj the clergy ill example . 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj noble madam , 
▁ xxmaj men 's evil manners live in brass : their virtues 
▁ xxmaj we write in water . xxmaj may it please your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj to hear me speak his good now ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj yes , good xxmaj griffith ; 
▁ i were malicious else . 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj this xxmaj cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj though from an humble stock , undoubtedly 
▁ xxmaj was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle . 
▁ xxmaj he was a scholar , and a ripe and good one ; 
▁ xxmaj exceeding wise , fair - spoken , and persuading ; 
▁ xxmaj lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not , 
▁ xxmaj but to those men that sought him sweet as summer . 
▁ xxmaj and though he were unsatisfied in getting- 
▁ xxmaj which was a sin - yet in bestowing , madam , 
▁ xxmaj he was most princely : ever witness for him 
▁ xxmaj those twins of learning that he rais'd in you , 
▁ xxmaj ipswich and xxmaj oxford ! xxmaj one of which fell with him , 
▁ xxmaj unwilling to outlive the good that did it ; 
▁ xxmaj the other , though unfinish'd , yet so famous , 
▁ xxmaj so excellent in art , and still so rising , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj christendom shall ever speak his virtue . 
▁ xxmaj his overthrow heap'd happiness upon him ; 
▁ xxmaj for then , and not till then , he felt himself , 
▁ xxmaj and found the blessedness of being little . 
▁ xxmaj and , to add greater honours to his age 
▁ xxmaj than man could give him , he died fearing xxmaj god . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj after my death i wish no other herald , 
▁ xxmaj no other speaker of my living actions , 
▁ xxmaj to keep mine honour from corruption , 
▁ xxmaj but such an honest chronicler as xxmaj griffith . 
▁ xxmaj whom i most hated living , thou hast made me , 
▁ xxmaj with thy religious truth and modesty , 
▁ xxmaj now in his ashes honour . xxmaj peace be with him ! 
▁ patience , be near me still , and set me lower : 
▁ i have not long to trouble thee . xxmaj good xxmaj griffith , 
▁ xxmaj cause the musicians play me that sad note 
▁ i nam'd my knell , whilst i sit meditating 
▁ xxmaj on that celestial harmony i go to . 
▁ [ sad and solemn music ] 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj she is asleep . xxmaj good wench , let 's sit down quiet , 
▁ xxmaj for fear we wake her . xxmaj softly , gentle xxmaj patience . 

▁ xxup the xxup vision . 

▁ xxmaj enter , solemnly tripping one after another , six 
▁ xxup personages clad in white robes , wearing on their 
▁ heads garlands of bays , and golden vizards on their 
▁ faces ; branches of bays or palm in their hands . xxmaj they 
▁ first congee unto her , then dance ; and , at certain 
▁ changes , the first two hold a spare garland over her 
▁ head , at which the other four make reverent curtsies . 
▁ xxmaj then the two that held the garland deliver the 
▁ same to the other next two , who observe the same 
▁ order in their changes , and holding the garland over 
▁ her head ; which done , they deliver the same garland 
▁ to the last two , who likewise observe the same order ; 
▁ at which , as it were by inspiration , she makes 
▁ in her sleep signs of rejoicing , and holdeth up her 
▁ hands to heaven . xxmaj and so in their dancing vanish , 
▁ carrying the garland with them . xxmaj the music continues 

▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj spirits of peace , where are ye ? xxmaj are ye all gone ? 
▁ xxmaj and leave me here in wretchedness behind ye ? 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj madam , we are here . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj it is not you i call for . 
▁ xxmaj saw ye none enter since i slept ? 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj none , madam . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj no ? xxmaj saw you not , even now , a blessed troop 
▁ xxmaj invite me to a banquet ; whose bright faces 
▁ xxmaj cast thousand beams upon me , like the sun ? 
▁ xxmaj they promis'd me eternal happiness , 
▁ xxmaj and brought me garlands , xxmaj griffith , which i feel 
▁ i am not worthy yet to wear . i shall , assuredly . 
▁ xxup griffith . i am most joyful , madam , such good dreams 
▁ xxmaj possess your fancy . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj bid the music leave , 
▁ xxmaj they are harsh and heavy to me . [ music ceases ] 
▁ xxup patience . xxmaj do you note 
▁ xxmaj how much her xxmaj grace is alter'd on the sudden ? 
▁ xxmaj how long her face is drawn ! xxmaj how pale she looks , 
▁ xxmaj and of an earthly cold ! xxmaj mark her eyes . 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj she is going , wench . xxmaj pray , pray . 
▁ xxup patience . xxmaj heaven comfort her ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj an't like your xxmaj grace- 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj you are a saucy fellow . 
▁ xxmaj deserve we no more reverence ? 
▁ xxup griffith . xxmaj you are to blame , 
▁ xxmaj knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness , 
▁ xxmaj to use so rude behaviour . xxmaj go to , kneel . 
▁ xxup messenger . i humbly do entreat your xxmaj highness ' pardon ; 
▁ xxmaj my haste made me unmannerly . xxmaj there is staying 
▁ a gentleman , sent from the xxmaj king , to see you . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj admit him entrance , xxmaj griffith ; but this fellow 
▁ xxmaj let me ne'er see again . xxmaj exit xxup messenger 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup capucius 

▁ xxmaj if my sight fail not , 
▁ xxmaj you should be xxmaj lord xxmaj ambassador from the xxmaj emperor , 
▁ xxmaj my royal nephew , and your name xxmaj capucius . 
▁ xxup capucius . xxmaj madam , the same - your servant . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxup o , my xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxmaj the times and titles now are alter'd strangely 
▁ xxmaj with me since first you knew me . xxmaj but , i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj what is your pleasure with me ? 
▁ xxup capucius . xxmaj noble lady , 
▁ xxmaj first , mine own service to your xxmaj grace ; the next , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's request that i would visit you , 
▁ xxmaj who grieves much for your weakness , and by me 
▁ xxmaj sends you his princely commendations 
▁ xxmaj and heartily entreats you take good comfort . 
▁ xxup katharine . o my good lord , that comfort comes too late , 
▁ ' tis like a pardon after execution : 
▁ xxmaj that gentle physic , given in time , had cur'd me ; 
▁ xxmaj but now i am past all comforts here , but prayers . 
▁ xxmaj how does his xxmaj highness ? 
▁ xxup capucius . xxmaj madam , in good health . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj so may he ever do ! and ever flourish 
▁ xxmaj when i shall dwell with worms , and my poor name 
▁ xxmaj banish'd the kingdom ! xxmaj patience , is that letter 
▁ i caus'd you write yet sent away ? 
▁ xxup patience . xxmaj no , madam . [ giving it to xxup katharine ] 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj sir , i most humbly pray you to deliver 
▁ xxmaj this to my lord the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup capucius . xxmaj most willing , madam . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj in which i have commended to his goodness 
▁ xxmaj the model of our chaste loves , his young daughter- 
▁ xxmaj the dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!- 
▁ xxmaj beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding- 
▁ xxmaj she is young , and of a noble modest nature ; 
▁ i hope she will deserve well - and a little 
▁ xxmaj to love her for her mother 's sake , that lov'd him , 
▁ xxmaj heaven knows how dearly . xxmaj my next poor petition 
▁ xxmaj is that his noble xxmaj grace would have some pity 
▁ xxmaj upon my wretched women that so long 
▁ xxmaj have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully ; 
▁ xxmaj of which there is not one , i dare avow- 
▁ xxmaj and now i should not lie - but will deserve , 
▁ xxmaj for virtue and true beauty of the soul , 
▁ xxmaj for honesty and decent carriage , 
▁ a right good husband , let him be a noble ; 
▁ xxmaj and sure those men are happy that shall have 'em . 
▁ xxmaj the last is for my men - they are the poorest , 
▁ xxmaj but poverty could never draw 'em from me- 
▁ xxmaj that they may have their wages duly paid 'em , 
▁ xxmaj and something over to remember me by . 
▁ xxmaj if heaven had pleas'd to have given me longer life 
▁ xxmaj and able means , we had not parted thus . 
▁ xxmaj these are the whole contents ; and , good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj by that you love the dearest in this world , 
▁ xxmaj as you wish xxmaj christian peace to souls departed , 
▁ xxmaj stand these poor people 's friend , and urge the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj to do me this last right . 
▁ xxup capucius . xxmaj by heaven , i will , 
▁ xxmaj or let me lose the fashion of a man ! 
▁ xxup katharine . i thank you , honest lord . xxmaj remember me 
▁ xxmaj in all humility unto his xxmaj highness ; 
▁ xxmaj say his long trouble now is passing 
▁ xxmaj out of this world . xxmaj tell him in death i bless'd him , 
▁ xxmaj for so i will . xxmaj mine eyes grow dim . xxmaj farewell , 
▁ xxmaj my lord . xxmaj griffith , farewell . xxmaj nay , xxmaj patience , 
▁ xxmaj you must not leave me yet . i must to bed ; 
▁ xxmaj call in more women . xxmaj when i am dead , good wench , 
▁ xxmaj let me be us'd with honour ; strew me over 
▁ xxmaj with maiden flowers , that all the world may know 
▁ i was a chaste wife to my grave . xxmaj embalm me , 
▁ xxmaj then lay me forth ; although unqueen'd , yet like 
▁ a queen , and daughter to a king , inter me . 
▁ i can no more . xxmaj exeunt , leading xxup katharine 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . a gallery in the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup gardiner , xxup bishop xxup of xxup winchester , a xxup page with a torch before him , 
 met by xxup sir xxup thomas xxup lovell 

▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj it 's one o'clock , boy , is't not ? 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj it hath struck . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj these should be hours for necessities , 
▁ xxmaj not for delights ; times to repair our nature 
▁ xxmaj with comforting repose , and not for us 
▁ xxmaj to waste these times . xxmaj good hour of night , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas ! 
▁ xxmaj whither so late ? 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj came you from the xxmaj king , my lord ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . i did , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas , and left him at primero 
▁ xxmaj with the xxmaj duke of xxmaj suffolk . 
▁ xxup lovell . i must to him too , 
▁ xxmaj before he go to bed . xxmaj i 'll take my leave . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj not yet , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj it seems you are in haste . xxmaj an if there be 
▁ xxmaj no great offence belongs to't , give your friend 
▁ xxmaj some touch of your late business . xxmaj affairs that walk- 
▁ xxmaj as they say spirits do - at midnight , have 
▁ xxmaj in them a wilder nature than the business 
▁ xxmaj that seeks despatch by day . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj my lord , i love you ; 
▁ xxmaj and durst commend a secret to your ear 
▁ xxmaj much weightier than this work . xxmaj the xxmaj queen 's in labour , 
▁ xxmaj they say in great extremity , and fear'd 
▁ xxmaj she 'll with the labour end . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj the fruit she goes with 
▁ i pray for heartily , that it may find 
▁ xxmaj good time , and live ; but for the stock , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas , 
▁ i wish it grubb'd up now . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj methinks i could 
▁ xxmaj cry thee amen ; and yet my conscience says 
▁ xxmaj she 's a good creature , and , sweet lady , does 
▁ xxmaj deserve our better wishes . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj but , sir , sir- 
▁ xxmaj hear me , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas . xxmaj y'are a gentleman 
▁ xxmaj of mine own way ; i know you wise , religious ; 
▁ xxmaj and , let me tell you , it will ne'er be well- 
▁ ' twill not , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovell , take't of me- 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj cranmer , xxmaj cromwell , her two hands , and she , 
▁ xxmaj sleep in their graves . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj now , sir , you speak of two 
▁ xxmaj the most remark'd i ' th ' kingdom . xxmaj as for xxmaj cromwell , 
▁ xxmaj beside that of the xxmaj jewel xxmaj house , is made xxmaj master 
▁ xxup o ' th ' xxmaj rolls , and the xxmaj king 's secretary ; further , sir , 
▁ xxmaj stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments , 
▁ xxmaj with which the time will load him . xxmaj th ' xxmaj archbishop 
▁ xxmaj is the xxmaj king 's hand and tongue , and who dare speak 
▁ xxmaj one syllable against him ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj yes , yes , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas , 
▁ xxmaj there are that dare ; and i myself have ventur'd 
▁ xxmaj to speak my mind of him ; and indeed this day , 
▁ sir - i may tell it you - i think i have 
▁ xxmaj incens'd the lords o ' th ' xxmaj council , that he is- 
▁ xxmaj for so i know he is , they know he is- 
▁ a most arch heretic , a pestilence 
▁ xxmaj that does infect the land ; with which they moved 
▁ xxmaj have broken with the xxmaj king , who hath so far 
▁ xxmaj given ear to our complaint - of his great grace 
▁ xxmaj and princely care , foreseeing those fell mischiefs 
▁ xxmaj our reasons laid before him - hath commanded 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow morning to the xxmaj council board 
▁ xxmaj he be convented . xxmaj he 's a rank weed , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas , 
▁ xxmaj and we must root him out . xxmaj from your affairs 
▁ i hinder you too long - good night , xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas . 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj many good nights , my lord ; i rest your servant . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gardiner and xxup page 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king and the xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj charles , i will play no more to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj my mind 's not on't ; you are too hard for me . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj sir , i did never win of you before . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj but little , xxmaj charles ; 
▁ xxmaj nor shall not , when my fancy 's on my play . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj lovell , from the xxmaj queen what is the news ? 
▁ xxup lovell . i could not personally deliver to her 
▁ xxmaj what you commanded me , but by her woman 
▁ i sent your message ; who return'd her thanks 
▁ xxmaj in the great'st humbleness , and desir'd your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj most heartily to pray for her . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what say'st thou , ha ? 
▁ xxmaj to pray for her ? xxmaj what , is she crying out ? 
▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj so said her woman ; and that her suff'rance made 
▁ xxmaj almost each pang a death . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj alas , good lady ! 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj god safely quit her of her burden , and 
▁ xxmaj with gentle travail , to the gladding of 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness with an heir ! 
▁ xxup king . ' tis midnight , xxmaj charles ; 
▁ xxmaj prithee to bed ; and in thy pray'rs remember 
▁ xxmaj th ' estate of my poor queen . xxmaj leave me alone , 
▁ xxmaj for i must think of that which company 
▁ xxmaj will not be friendly to . 
▁ xxup suffolk . i wish your xxmaj highness 
▁ a quiet night , and my good mistress will 
▁ xxmaj remember in my prayers . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj charles , good night . xxmaj exit xxup suffolk 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup anthony xxup denny 

▁ xxmaj well , sir , what follows ? 
▁ xxup denny . xxmaj sir , i have brought my lord the xxmaj archbishop , 
▁ xxmaj as you commanded me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj canterbury ? 
▁ xxup denny . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup king . ' tis true . xxmaj where is he , xxmaj denny ? 
▁ xxup denny . xxmaj he attends your xxmaj highness ' pleasure . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj bring him to us . xxmaj exit xxup denny 
▁ xxup lovell . [ aside ] xxmaj this is about that which the bishop spake . 
▁ i am happily come hither . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup denny , xxmaj with xxup cranmer 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj avoid the gallery . [ lovell seems to stay ] 
▁ xxmaj ha ! i have said . xxmaj be gone . 
▁ xxmaj what ! xxmaj exeunt xxup lovell and xxup denny 
▁ xxup cranmer . [ aside ] i am fearful - wherefore frowns he thus ? 
▁ ' tis his aspect of terror . xxmaj all 's not well . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how now , my lord ? xxmaj you do desire to know 
▁ xxmaj wherefore i sent for you . 
▁ xxup cranmer . [ kneeling ] xxmaj it is my duty 
▁ xxmaj t'attend your xxmaj highness ' pleasure . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj pray you , arise , 
▁ xxmaj my good and gracious xxmaj lord of xxmaj canterbury . 
▁ xxmaj come , you and i must walk a turn together ; 
▁ i have news to tell you ; come , come , me your hand . 
▁ xxmaj ah , my good lord , i grieve at what i speak , 
▁ xxmaj and am right sorry to repeat what follows . 
▁ i have , and most unwillingly , of late 
▁ xxmaj heard many grievous - i do say , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj grievous - complaints of you ; which , being consider'd , 
▁ xxmaj have mov'd us and our xxmaj council that you shall 
▁ xxmaj this morning come before us ; where i know 
▁ xxmaj you can not with such freedom purge yourself 
▁ xxmaj but that , till further trial in those charges 
▁ xxmaj which will require your answer , you must take 
▁ xxmaj your patience to you and be well contented 
▁ xxmaj to make your house our xxmaj tow'r . xxmaj you a brother of us , 
▁ xxmaj it fits we thus proceed , or else no witness 
▁ xxmaj would come against you . 
▁ xxup cranmer . i humbly thank your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj and am right glad to catch this good occasion 
▁ xxmaj most throughly to be winnowed where my chaff 
▁ xxmaj and corn shall fly asunder ; for i know 
▁ xxmaj there 's none stands under more calumnious tongues 
▁ xxmaj than i myself , poor man . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj stand up , good xxmaj canterbury ; 
▁ xxmaj thy truth and thy integrity is rooted 
▁ xxmaj in us , thy friend . xxmaj give me thy hand , stand up ; 
▁ xxmaj prithee let 's walk . xxmaj now , by my holidame , 
▁ xxmaj what manner of man are you ? xxmaj my lord , i look'd 
▁ xxmaj you would have given me your petition that 
▁ i should have ta'en some pains to bring together 
▁ xxmaj yourself and your accusers , and to have heard you 
▁ xxmaj without indurance further . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj most dread liege , 
▁ xxmaj the good i stand on is my truth and honesty ; 
▁ xxmaj if they shall fail , i with mine enemies 
▁ xxmaj will triumph o'er my person ; which i weigh not , 
▁ xxmaj being of those virtues vacant . i fear nothing 
▁ xxmaj what can be said against me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj know you not 
▁ xxmaj how your state stands i ' th ' world , with the whole world ? 
▁ xxmaj your enemies are many , and not small ; their practices 
▁ xxmaj must bear the same proportion ; and not ever 
▁ xxmaj the justice and the truth o ' th ' question carries 
▁ xxmaj the due o ' th ' verdict with it ; at what ease 
▁ xxmaj might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt 
▁ xxmaj to swear against you ? xxmaj such things have been done . 
▁ xxmaj you are potently oppos'd , and with a malice 
▁ xxmaj of as great size . xxmaj ween you of better luck , 
▁ i mean in perjur'd witness , than your xxmaj master , 
▁ xxmaj whose minister you are , whiles here xxmaj he liv'd 
▁ xxmaj upon this naughty earth ? xxmaj go to , go to ; 
▁ xxmaj you take a precipice for no leap of danger , 
▁ xxmaj and woo your own destruction . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj god and your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj protect mine innocence , or i fall into 
▁ xxmaj the trap is laid for me ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj be of good cheer ; 
▁ xxmaj they shall no more prevail than we give way to . 
▁ xxmaj keep comfort to you , and this morning see 
▁ xxmaj you do appear before them ; if they shall chance , 
▁ xxmaj in charging you with matters , to commit you , 
▁ xxmaj the best persuasions to the contrary 
▁ xxmaj fail not to use , and with what vehemency 
▁ xxmaj th ' occasion shall instruct you . xxmaj if entreaties 
▁ xxmaj will render you no remedy , this ring 
▁ xxmaj deliver them , and your appeal to us 
▁ xxmaj there make before them . xxmaj look , the good man weeps ! 
▁ xxmaj he 's honest , on mine honour . xxmaj god 's blest xxmaj mother ! 
▁ i swear he is true - hearted , and a soul 
▁ xxmaj none better in my kingdom . xxmaj get you gone , 
▁ xxmaj and do as i have bid you . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup cranmer 
▁ xxmaj he has strangled his language in his tears . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup old xxup lady 

▁ xxup gentleman . [ within ] xxmaj come back ; what mean you ? 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj i 'll not come back ; the tidings that i bring 
▁ xxmaj will make my boldness manners . xxmaj now , good angels 
▁ xxmaj fly o'er thy royal head , and shade thy person 
▁ xxmaj under their blessed wings ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj now , by thy looks 
▁ i guess thy message . xxmaj is the xxmaj queen deliver'd ? 
▁ xxmaj say ay , and of a boy . 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj ay , ay , my liege ; 
▁ xxmaj and of a lovely boy . xxmaj the xxmaj god of xxmaj heaven 
▁ xxmaj both now and ever bless her ! ' tis a girl , 
▁ xxmaj promises boys hereafter . xxmaj sir , your queen 
▁ xxmaj desires your visitation , and to be 
▁ xxmaj acquainted with this stranger ; ' tis as like you 
▁ xxmaj as cherry is to cherry . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj lovell ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lovell 

▁ xxup lovell . xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj give her an hundred marks . xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj queen . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup old xxup lady . xxmaj an hundred marks ? xxmaj by this light , xxmaj i 'll ha ' more ! 
▁ xxmaj an ordinary groom is for such payment . 
▁ i will have more , or scold it out of him . 
▁ xxmaj said i for this the girl was like to him ! xxmaj i 'll 
▁ xxmaj have more , or else unsay't ; and now , while ' tis hot , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll put it to the issue . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj lobby before the xxmaj council xxmaj chamber 

 xxmaj enter xxup cranmer , xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury 

▁ xxup cranmer . i hope i am not too late ; and yet the gentleman 
▁ xxmaj that was sent to me from the xxmaj council pray'd me 
▁ xxmaj to make great haste . xxmaj all fast ? xxmaj what means this ? xxmaj ho !