xxbos xxmaj who waits there ? xxmaj sure you know me ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup keeper 

▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj yes , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet i can not help you . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj your xxmaj grace must wait till you be call'd for . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup doctor xxup butts 

▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj so . 
▁ xxup butts . [ aside ] xxmaj this is a piece of malice . i am glad 
▁ i came this way so happily ; the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj shall understand it presently . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cranmer . [ aside ] ' tis xxmaj butts , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's physician ; as he pass'd along , 
▁ xxmaj how earnestly he cast his eyes upon me ! 
▁ xxmaj pray heaven he sound not my disgrace ! xxmaj for certain , 
▁ xxmaj this is of purpose laid by some that hate me- 
▁ xxmaj god turn their hearts ! i never sought their malice- 
▁ xxmaj to quench mine honour ; they would shame to make me 
▁ xxmaj wait else at door , a fellow councillor , 
▁ ' mong boys , grooms , and lackeys . xxmaj but their pleasures 
▁ xxmaj must be fulfill'd , and i attend with patience . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king and xxup butts at window above 

▁ xxup butts . xxmaj i 'll show your xxmaj grace the strangest sight- 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what 's that , xxmaj butts ? 
▁ xxup butts . i think your xxmaj highness saw this many a day . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj body a me , where is it ? 
▁ xxup butts . xxmaj there my lord : 
▁ xxmaj the high promotion of his xxmaj grace of xxmaj canterbury ; 
▁ xxmaj who holds his state at door , ' mongst pursuivants , 
▁ xxmaj pages , and footboys . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ha , ' tis he indeed . 
▁ xxmaj is this the honour they do one another ? 
▁ ' tis well there 's one above 'em yet . i had thought 
▁ xxmaj they had parted so much honesty among ' em- 
▁ xxmaj at least good manners - as not thus to suffer 
▁ a man of his place , and so near our favour , 
▁ xxmaj to dance attendance on their lordships ' pleasures , 
▁ xxmaj and at the door too , like a post with packets . 
▁ xxmaj by holy xxmaj mary , xxmaj butts , there 's knavery ! 
▁ xxmaj let 'em alone , and draw the curtain close ; 
▁ xxmaj we shall hear more anon . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj council xxmaj chamber 

 a xxmaj council table brought in , with chairs and stools , and placed 
 under the state . xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup chancellor , places himself at the upper end 
 of the table on the left band , a seat being left void above him , 
 as for xxmaj canterbury 's seat . xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk , xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk , xxup surrey , 
 xxup lord xxup chamberlain , xxup gardiner , seat themselves in order on each side ; 
 xxup cromwell at lower end , as secretary . xxup keeper at the door 

▁ xxup chancellor . xxmaj speak to the business , master secretary ; 
▁ xxmaj why are we met in council ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj please your honours , 
▁ xxmaj the chief cause concerns his xxmaj grace of xxmaj canterbury . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj has he had knowledge of it ? 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj who waits there ? 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj without , my noble lords ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop ; 
▁ xxmaj and has done half an hour , to know your pleasures . 
▁ xxup chancellor . xxmaj let him come in . 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj your xxmaj grace may enter now . 

▁ xxup cranmer approaches the xxmaj council table 

▁ xxup chancellor . xxmaj my good xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop , i am very sorry 
▁ xxmaj to sit here at this present , and behold 
▁ xxmaj that chair stand empty ; but we all are men , 
▁ xxmaj in our own natures frail and capable 
▁ xxmaj of our flesh ; few are angels ; out of which frailty 
▁ xxmaj and want of wisdom , you , that best should teach us , 
▁ xxmaj have misdemean'd yourself , and not a little , 
▁ xxmaj toward the xxmaj king first , then his laws , in filling 
▁ xxmaj the whole realm by your teaching and your chaplains- 
▁ xxmaj for so we are inform'd - with new opinions , 
▁ xxmaj divers and dangerous ; which are heresies , 
▁ xxmaj and , not reform'd , may prove pernicious . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj which reformation must be sudden too , 
▁ xxmaj my noble lords ; for those that tame wild horses 
▁ xxmaj pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle , 
▁ xxmaj but stop their mouth with stubborn bits and spur 'em 
▁ xxmaj till they obey the manage . xxmaj if we suffer , 
▁ xxmaj out of our easiness and childish pity 
▁ xxmaj to one man 's honour , this contagious sickness , 
▁ xxmaj farewell all physic ; and what follows then ? 
▁ xxmaj commotions , uproars , with a general taint 
▁ xxmaj of the whole state ; as of late days our neighbours , 
▁ xxmaj the upper xxmaj germany , can dearly witness , 
▁ xxmaj yet freshly pitied in our memories . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj my good lords , hitherto in all the progress 
▁ xxmaj both of my life and office , i have labour'd , 
▁ xxmaj and with no little study , that my teaching 
▁ xxmaj and the strong course of my authority 
▁ xxmaj might go one way , and safely ; and the end 
▁ xxmaj was ever to do well . xxmaj nor is there living- 
▁ i speak it with a single heart , my lords- 
▁ a man that more detests , more stirs against , 
▁ xxmaj both in his private conscience and his place , 
▁ xxmaj defacers of a public peace than i do . 
▁ xxmaj pray heaven the xxmaj king may never find a heart 
▁ xxmaj with less allegiance in it ! xxmaj men that make 
▁ xxmaj envy and crooked malice nourishment 
▁ xxmaj dare bite the best . i do beseech your lordships 
▁ xxmaj that , in this case of justice , my accusers , 
▁ xxmaj be what they will , may stand forth face to face 
▁ xxmaj and freely urge against me . 
▁ xxup suffolk . xxmaj nay , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj that can not be ; you are a councillor , 
▁ xxmaj and by that virtue no man dare accuse you . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj my lord , because we have business of more moment , 
▁ xxmaj we will be short with you . ' tis his xxmaj highness ' pleasure 
▁ xxmaj and our consent , for better trial of you , 
▁ xxmaj from hence you be committed to the xxmaj tower ; 
▁ xxmaj where , being but a private man again , 
▁ xxmaj you shall know many dare accuse you boldly , 
▁ xxmaj more than , i fear , you are provided for . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj ah , my good xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , i thank you ; 
▁ xxmaj you are always my good friend ; if your will pass , 
▁ i shall both find your lordship judge and juror , 
▁ xxmaj you are so merciful . i see your end- 
▁ ' tis my undoing . xxmaj love and meekness , lord , 
▁ xxmaj become a churchman better than ambition ; 
▁ xxmaj win straying souls with modesty again , 
▁ xxmaj cast none away . xxmaj that i shall clear myself , 
▁ xxmaj lay all the weight ye can upon my patience , 
▁ i make as little doubt as you do conscience 
▁ xxmaj in doing daily wrongs . i could say more , 
▁ xxmaj but reverence to your calling makes me modest . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj my lord , my lord , you are a sectary ; 
▁ xxmaj that 's the plain truth . xxmaj your painted gloss discovers , 
▁ xxmaj to men that understand you , words and weakness . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , y'are a little , 
▁ xxmaj by your good favour , too sharp ; men so noble , 
▁ xxmaj however faulty , yet should find respect 
▁ xxmaj for what they have been ; ' tis a cruelty 
▁ xxmaj to load a falling man . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj secretary , 
▁ i cry your honour mercy ; you may , worst 
▁ xxmaj of all this table , say so . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj why , my lord ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj do not i know you for a favourer 
▁ xxmaj of this new sect ? xxmaj ye are not sound . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj not sound ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj not sound , i say . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj would you were half so honest ! 
▁ xxmaj men 's prayers then would seek you , not their fears . 
▁ xxup gardiner . i shall remember this bold language . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj do . 
▁ xxmaj remember your bold life too . 
▁ xxup chancellor . xxmaj this is too much ; 
▁ xxmaj forbear , for shame , my lords . 
▁ xxup gardiner . i have done . 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj and xxup i. 
▁ xxup chancellor . xxmaj then thus for you , my lord : it stands agreed , 
▁ i take it , by all voices , that forthwith 
▁ xxmaj you be convey'd to th ' xxmaj tower a prisoner ; 
▁ xxmaj there to remain till the xxmaj king 's further pleasure 
▁ xxmaj be known unto us . xxmaj are you all agreed , lords ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj we are . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj is there no other way of mercy , 
▁ xxmaj but i must needs to th ' xxmaj tower , my lords ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj what other 
▁ xxmaj would you expect ? xxmaj you are strangely troublesome . 
▁ xxmaj let some o ' th ' guard be ready there . 

▁ xxmaj enter the guard 

▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj for me ? 
▁ xxmaj must i go like a traitor thither ? 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj receive him , 
▁ xxmaj and see him safe i ' th ' xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj stay , good my lords , 
▁ i have a little yet to say . xxmaj look there , my lords ; 
▁ xxmaj by virtue of that ring i take my cause 
▁ xxmaj out of the gripes of cruel men and give it 
▁ xxmaj to a most noble judge , the xxmaj king my master . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj this is the xxmaj king 's ring . 
▁ xxup surrey . ' tis no counterfeit . 
▁ xxup suffolk . ' tis the right ring , by heav'n . i told ye all , 
▁ xxmaj when we first put this dangerous stone a - rolling , 
▁ ' twould fall upon ourselves . 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj do you think , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king will suffer but the little finger 
▁ xxmaj of this man to be vex'd ? 
▁ xxup chamberlain . ' tis now too certain ; 
▁ xxmaj how much more is his life in value with him ! 
▁ xxmaj would i were fairly out on't ! 
▁ xxup cromwell . xxmaj my mind gave me , 
▁ xxmaj in seeking tales and informations 
▁ xxmaj against this man - whose honesty the devil 
▁ xxmaj and his disciples only envy at- 
▁ xxmaj ye blew the fire that burns ye . xxmaj now have at ye ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king frowning on them ; he takes his seat 

▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj dread sovereign , how much are we bound to heaven 
▁ xxmaj in daily thanks , that gave us such a prince ; 
▁ xxmaj not only good and wise but most religious ; 
▁ xxmaj one that in all obedience makes the church 
▁ xxmaj the chief aim of his honour and , to strengthen 
▁ xxmaj that holy duty , out of dear respect , 
▁ xxmaj his royal self in judgment comes to hear 
▁ xxmaj the cause betwixt her and this great offender . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you were ever good at sudden commendations , 
▁ xxmaj bishop of xxmaj winchester . xxmaj but know i come not 
▁ xxmaj to hear such flattery now , and in my presence 
▁ xxmaj they are too thin and bare to hide offences . 
▁ xxmaj to me you can not reach you play the spaniel , 
▁ xxmaj and think with wagging of your tongue to win me ; 
▁ xxmaj but whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for , xxmaj i 'm sure 
▁ xxmaj thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody . 
▁ [ to xxup cranmer ] xxmaj good man , sit down . xxmaj now let me see the proudest 
▁ xxmaj he that dares most but wag his finger at thee . 
▁ xxmaj by all that 's holy , he had better starve 
▁ xxmaj than but once think this place becomes thee not . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj may it please your xxmaj grace- 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no , sir , it does not please me . 
▁ i had thought i had had men of some understanding 
▁ xxmaj and wisdom of my xxmaj council ; but i find none . 
▁ xxmaj was it discretion , lords , to let this man , 
▁ xxmaj this good man - few of you deserve that title- 
▁ xxmaj this honest man , wait like a lousy footboy 
▁ xxmaj at chamber door ? and one as great as you are ? 
▁ xxmaj why , what a shame was this ! xxmaj did my commission 
▁ xxmaj bid ye so far forget yourselves ? i gave ye 
▁ xxmaj power as he was a councillor to try him , 
▁ xxmaj not as a groom . xxmaj there 's some of ye , i see , 
▁ xxmaj more out of malice than integrity , 
▁ xxmaj would try him to the utmost , had ye mean ; 
▁ xxmaj which ye shall never have while i live . 
▁ xxup chancellor . xxmaj thus far , 
▁ xxmaj my most dread sovereign , may it like your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj to let my tongue excuse all . xxmaj what was purpos'd 
▁ concerning his imprisonment was rather- 
▁ xxmaj if there be faith in men - meant for his trial 
▁ xxmaj and fair purgation to the world , than malice , 
▁ xxmaj i 'm sure , in me . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj well , well , my lords , respect him ; 
▁ xxmaj take him , and use him well , he 's worthy of it . 
▁ i will say thus much for him : if a prince 
▁ xxmaj may be beholding to a subject , 
▁ xxmaj am for his love and service so to him . 
▁ xxmaj make me no more ado , but all embrace him ; 
▁ xxmaj be friends , for shame , my lords ! xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj canterbury , 
▁ i have a suit which you must not deny me : 
▁ xxmaj that is , a fair young maid that yet wants baptism ; 
▁ xxmaj you must be godfather , and answer for her . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj the greatest monarch now alive may glory 
▁ xxmaj in such an honour ; how may i deserve it , 
▁ xxmaj that am a poor and humble subject to you ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj come , come , my lord , you 'd spare your spoons . xxmaj you 
▁ shall have 
▁ xxmaj two noble partners with you : the old xxmaj duchess of xxmaj norfolk 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj lady xxmaj marquis xxmaj dorset . xxmaj will these please you ? 
▁ xxmaj once more , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj winchester , i charge you , 
▁ xxmaj embrace and love this man . 
▁ xxup gardiner . xxmaj with a true heart 
▁ xxmaj and brother - love i do it . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj and let heaven 
▁ xxmaj witness how dear i hold this confirmation . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj good man , those joyful tears show thy true heart . 
▁ xxmaj the common voice , i see , is verified 
▁ xxmaj of thee , which says thus : ' do my xxmaj lord of xxmaj canterbury 
▁ a shrewd turn and he 's your friend for ever . ' 
▁ xxmaj come , lords , we trifle time away ; i long 
▁ xxmaj to have this young one made a xxmaj christian . 
▁ xxmaj as i have made ye one , lords , one remain ; 
▁ xxmaj so i grow stronger , you more honour gain . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj the palace yard 

 xxmaj noise and tumult within . xxmaj enter xxup porter and his xxup man 

▁ xxup porter . xxmaj you 'll leave your noise anon , ye rascals . xxmaj do you 
▁ take the court for xxmaj paris garden ? xxmaj ye rude slaves , leave your 
▁ gaping . 
▁ [ within : xxmaj good master porter , i belong to th ' larder . ] 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj belong to th ' gallows , and be hang'd , ye rogue ! xxmaj is 
▁ this a place to roar in ? xxmaj fetch me a dozen crab - tree staves , 
▁ and strong ones ; these are but switches to 'em . xxmaj i 'll scratch 
▁ your heads . xxmaj you must be seeing christenings ? xxmaj do you look 
▁ for ale and cakes here , you rude rascals ? 
▁ xxup man . xxmaj pray , sir , be patient ; ' tis as much impossible , 
▁ xxmaj unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons , 
▁ xxmaj to scatter 'em as ' tis to make 'em sleep 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj may - day morning ; which will never be . 
▁ xxmaj we may as well push against xxmaj paul 's as stir 'em . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj how got they in , and be hang'd ? 
▁ xxup man . xxmaj alas , i know not : how gets the tide in ? 
▁ xxmaj as much as one sound cudgel of four foot- 
▁ xxmaj you see the poor remainder - could distribute , 
▁ i made no spare , sir . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj you did nothing , sir . 
▁ xxup man . i am not xxmaj samson , nor xxmaj sir xxmaj guy , nor xxmaj colbrand , 
▁ xxmaj to mow 'em down before me ; but if i spar'd any 
▁ xxmaj that had a head to hit , either young or old , 
▁ xxmaj he or she , cuckold or cuckold - maker , 
▁ xxmaj let me ne'er hope to see a chine again ; 
▁ xxmaj and that i would not for a cow , xxmaj god save her ! 
▁ [ xxmaj within : xxmaj do you hear , master porter ? ] 
▁ xxup porter . i shall be with you presently , good master puppy . 
▁ xxmaj keep the door close , sirrah . 
▁ xxup man . xxmaj what would you have me do ? 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj what should you do , but knock 'em down by th ' 
▁ dozens ? xxmaj is this xxmaj moorfields to muster in ? xxmaj or have we some 
▁ strange xxmaj indian with the great tool come to court , the 
▁ women so besiege us ? xxmaj bless me , what a fry of fornication 
▁ is at door ! xxmaj on my xxmaj christian conscience , this one christening 
▁ will beget a thousand : here will be father , godfather , 
▁ and all together . 
▁ xxup man . xxmaj the spoons will be the bigger , sir . xxmaj there is a fellow 
▁ somewhat near the door , he should be a brazier by his 
▁ face , for , o ' my conscience , twenty of the dog - days now 
▁ reign in 's nose ; all that stand about him are under the line , 
▁ they need no other penance . xxmaj that fire - drake did i hit three 
▁ times on the head , and three times was his nose discharged 
▁ against me ; he stands there like a mortar - piece , to blow us . 
▁ xxmaj there was a haberdasher 's wife of small wit near him , that 
▁ rail'd upon me till her pink'd porringer fell off her head , 
▁ for kindling such a combustion in the state . i miss'd the 
▁ meteor once , and hit that woman , who cried out ' clubs ! ' 
▁ when i might see from far some forty truncheoners draw 
▁ to her succour , which were the hope o ' th ' xxmaj strand , where 
▁ she was quartered . xxmaj they fell on ; i made good my place . 
▁ xxmaj at length they came to th ' broomstaff to me ; i defied 'em 
▁ still ; when suddenly a file of boys behind 'em , loose shot , 
▁ deliver'd such a show'r of pebbles that i was fain to draw 
▁ mine honour in and let 'em win the work : the devil was 
▁ amongst 'em , i think surely . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj these are the youths that thunder at a playhouse 
▁ and fight for bitten apples ; that no audience but the tribulation 
▁ of xxmaj tower - hill or the limbs of xxmaj limehouse , their dear 
▁ brothers , are able to endure . i have some of 'em in xxmaj limbo 
▁ xxmaj patrum , and there they are like to dance these three days ; 
▁ besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup chamberlain 

▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj mercy o ' me , what a multitude are here ! 
▁ xxmaj they grow still too ; from all parts they are coming , 
▁ xxmaj as if we kept a fair here ! xxmaj where are these porters , 
▁ xxmaj these lazy knaves ? xxmaj y'have made a fine hand , fellows . 
▁ xxmaj there 's a trim rabble let in : are all these 
▁ xxmaj your faithful friends o ' th ' suburbs ? xxmaj we shall have 
▁ xxmaj great store of room , no doubt , left for the ladies , 
▁ xxmaj when they pass back from the christening . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj an't please your honour , 
▁ xxmaj we are but men ; and what so many may do , 
▁ xxmaj not being torn a pieces , we have done . 
▁ xxmaj an army can not rule 'em . 
▁ xxup chamberlain . xxmaj as i live , 
▁ xxmaj if the xxmaj king blame me for't , xxmaj i 'll lay ye an 
▁ xxmaj by th ' heels , and suddenly ; and on your heads 
▁ xxmaj clap round fines for neglect . xxmaj y'are lazy knaves ; 
▁ xxmaj and here ye lie baiting of bombards , when 
▁ xxmaj ye should do service . xxmaj hark ! the trumpets sound ; 
▁ xxmaj th ' are come already from the christening . 
▁ xxmaj go break among the press and find a way out 
▁ xxmaj to let the troops pass fairly , or xxmaj i 'll find 
▁ a xxmaj marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj make way there for the xxmaj princess . 
▁ xxup man . xxmaj you great fellow , 
▁ xxmaj stand close up , or xxmaj i 'll make your head ache . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj you i ' th ' camlet , get up o ' th ' rail ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll peck you o'er the pales else . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup trumpets , sounding ; then two xxup aldermen , xxup lord xxup mayor , xxup garter , xxup cranmer , 
 xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk , with his marshal 's staff , xxup duke xxup of xxup suffolk , 
 two xxmaj noblemen bearing great standing - bowls for the christening gifts ; 
 then four xxmaj noblemen bearing a canopy , under which the xxup duchess xxup of xxup norfolk , 
 godmother , bearing the xxup child richly habited in a mantle , etc . , 
 train borne by a xxup lady ; then follows the xxup marchioness xxup dorset , 
 the other godmother , and xxup ladies . xxmaj the troop pass once about the stage , 
 and xxup garter speaks 

▁ xxup garter . xxmaj heaven , from thy endless goodness , send prosperous 
▁ life , long and ever - happy , to the high and mighty 
▁ xxmaj princess of xxmaj england , xxmaj elizabeth ! 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king and guard 
▁
▁ xxup cranmer . [ kneeling ] xxmaj and to your royal xxmaj grace and the 
▁ good xxmaj queen ! 
▁ xxmaj my noble partners and myself thus pray : 
▁ xxmaj all comfort , joy , in this most gracious lady , 
▁ xxmaj heaven ever laid up to make parents happy , 
▁ xxmaj may hourly fall upon ye ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thank you , good xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop . 
▁ xxmaj what is her name ? 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj elizabeth . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj stand up , lord . [ the xxup king kisses the child ] 
▁ xxmaj with this kiss take my blessing : xxmaj god protect thee ! 
▁ xxmaj into whose hand i give thy life . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my noble gossips , y'have been too prodigal ; 
▁ i thank ye heartily . xxmaj so shall this lady , 
▁ xxmaj when she has so much xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj let me speak , sir , 
▁ xxmaj for heaven now bids me ; and the words i utter 
▁ xxmaj let none think flattery , for they 'll find 'em truth . 
▁ xxmaj this royal infant - heaven still move about her!- 
▁ xxmaj though in her cradle , yet now promises 
▁ xxmaj upon this land a thousand blessings , 
▁ xxmaj which time shall bring to ripeness . xxmaj she shall be- 
▁ xxmaj but few now living can behold that goodness- 
▁ a pattern to all princes living with her , 
▁ xxmaj and all that shall succeed . xxmaj saba was never 
▁ xxmaj more covetous of wisdom and fair virtue 
▁ xxmaj than this pure soul shall be . xxmaj all princely graces 
▁ xxmaj that mould up such a mighty piece as this is , 
▁ xxmaj with all the virtues that attend the good , 
▁ xxmaj shall still be doubled on her . xxmaj truth shall nurse her , 
▁ xxmaj holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her ; 
▁ xxmaj she shall be lov'd and fear'd . xxmaj her own shall bless her : 
▁ xxmaj her foes shake like a field of beaten corn , 
▁ xxmaj and hang their heads with sorrow . xxmaj good grows with her ; 
▁ xxmaj in her days every man shall eat in safety 
▁ xxmaj under his own vine what he plants , and sing 
▁ xxmaj the merry songs of peace to all his neighbours . 
▁ xxmaj god shall be truly known ; and those about her 
▁ xxmaj from her shall read the perfect ways of honour , 
▁ xxmaj and by those claim their greatness , not by blood . 
▁ xxmaj nor shall this peace sleep with her ; but as when 
▁ xxmaj the bird of wonder dies , the maiden phoenix 
▁ xxmaj her ashes new create another heir 
▁ xxmaj as great in admiration as herself , 
▁ xxmaj so shall she leave her blessedness to one- 
▁ xxmaj when heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness- 
▁ xxmaj who from the sacred ashes of her honour 
▁ xxmaj shall star - like rise , as great in fame as she was , 
▁ xxmaj and so stand fix'd . xxmaj peace , plenty , love , truth , terror , 
▁ xxmaj that were the servants to this chosen infant , 
▁ xxmaj shall then be his , and like a vine grow to him ; 
▁ xxmaj wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine , 
▁ xxmaj his honour and the greatness of his name 
▁ xxmaj shall be , and make new nations ; he shall flourish , 
▁ xxmaj and like a mountain cedar reach his branches 
▁ xxmaj to all the plains about him ; our children 's children 
▁ xxmaj shall see this and bless heaven . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thou speakest wonders . 
▁ xxup cranmer . xxmaj she shall be , to the happiness of xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj an aged princess ; many days shall see her , 
▁ xxmaj and yet no day without a deed to crown it . 
▁ xxmaj would i had known no more ! xxmaj but she must die- 
▁ xxmaj she must , the saints must have her - yet a virgin ; 
▁ a most unspotted lily shall she pass 
▁ xxmaj to th ' ground , and all the world shall mourn her . 
▁ xxup king . o xxmaj lord xxmaj archbishop , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast made me now a man ; never before 
▁ xxmaj this happy child did i get anything . 
▁ xxmaj this oracle of comfort has so pleas'd me 
▁ xxmaj that when i am in heaven i shall desire 
▁ xxmaj to see what this child does , and praise my xxmaj maker . 
▁ i thank ye all . xxmaj to you , my good xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor , 
▁ xxmaj and you , good brethren , i am much beholding ; 
▁ i have receiv'd much honour by your presence , 
▁ xxmaj and ye shall find me thankful . xxmaj lead the way , lords ; 
▁ xxmaj ye must all see the xxmaj queen , and she must thank ye , 
▁ xxmaj she will be sick else . xxmaj this day , no man think 
▁ xxmaj has business at his house ; for all shall stay . 
▁ xxmaj this little one shall make it holiday . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup king_henry_v xxrep 3 i |epilogue 
▁ xxup the xxup epilogue . 

▁ ' tis ten to one this play can never please 
▁ xxmaj all that are here . xxmaj some come to take their ease 
▁ xxmaj and sleep an act or two ; but those , we fear , 
▁ xxmaj w'have frighted with our trumpets ; so , ' tis clear , 
▁ xxmaj they 'll say ' tis nought ; others to hear the city 
▁ xxmaj abus'd extremely , and to cry ' that 's witty ! ' 
▁ xxmaj which we have not done neither ; that , i fear , 
▁ xxmaj all the expected good w'are like to hear 
▁ xxmaj for this play at this time is only in 
▁ xxmaj the merciful construction of good women ; 
▁ xxmaj for such a one we show'd 'em . xxmaj if they smile 
▁ xxmaj and say ' twill do , i know within a while 
▁ xxmaj all the best men are ours ; for ' tis ill hap 
▁ xxmaj if they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap . 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1597 

 xxup king xxup john 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup king xxup john 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry , his son 
▁ xxup arthur , xxup duke xxup of xxup britaine , son of xxmaj geffrey , late xxmaj duke of 
▁ xxmaj britaine , the elder brother of xxmaj king xxmaj john 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup pembroke 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup essex 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup lord xxup bigot 
▁ xxup hubert xxup de xxup burgh 
▁ xxup robert xxup faulconbridge , son to xxmaj sir xxmaj robert xxmaj faulconbridge 
▁ xxup philip xxup the xxup bastard , his half - brother 
▁ xxup james xxup gurney , servant to xxmaj lady xxmaj faulconbridge 
▁ xxup peter xxup of xxup pomfret , a prophet 

▁ xxup king xxup philip xxup of xxup france 
▁ xxup lewis , the xxmaj dauphin 
▁ xxup lymoges , xxmaj duke of xxmaj austria 
▁ xxup cardinal xxup pandulph , the xxmaj pope 's legate 
▁ xxup melun , a xxmaj french lord 
▁ xxup chatillon , ambassador from xxmaj france to xxmaj king xxmaj john 

▁ xxup queen xxup elinor , widow of xxmaj king xxmaj henry xxup ii and mother to 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj john 
▁ xxup constance , xxmaj mother to xxmaj arthur 
▁ xxup blanch xxup of xxup spain , daughter to the xxmaj king of xxmaj castile 
▁ and niece to xxmaj king xxmaj john 
▁ xxup lady xxup faulconbridge , widow of xxmaj sir xxmaj robert xxmaj faulconbridge 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj citizens of xxmaj angiers , xxmaj sheriff , xxmaj heralds , xxmaj officers , 
▁ xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj executioners , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj england and xxmaj france 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 

 xxup king john 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup queen xxup elinor , xxup pembroke , xxup essex , xxup salisbury , and others , 
 with xxup chatillon 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj now , say , xxmaj chatillon , what would xxmaj france with us ? 
▁ xxup chatillon . xxmaj thus , after greeting , speaks the xxmaj king of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj in my behaviour to the majesty , 
▁ xxmaj the borrowed majesty , of xxmaj england here . 
▁ xxup elinor . a strange beginning- ' borrowed majesty ' ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj silence , good mother ; hear the embassy . 
▁ xxup chatillon . xxmaj philip of xxmaj france , in right and true behalf 
▁ xxmaj of thy deceased brother xxmaj geffrey 's son , 
▁ xxmaj arthur xxmaj plantagenet , lays most lawful claim 
▁ xxmaj to this fair island and the territories , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj ireland , xxmaj poictiers , xxmaj anjou , xxmaj touraine , xxmaj maine , 
▁ xxmaj desiring thee to lay aside the sword 
▁ xxmaj which sways usurpingly these several titles , 
▁ xxmaj and put the same into young xxmaj arthur 's hand , 
▁ xxmaj thy nephew and right royal sovereign . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj what follows if we disallow of this ? 
▁ xxup chatillon . xxmaj the proud control of fierce and bloody war , 
▁ xxmaj to enforce these rights so forcibly withheld . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj here have we war for war , and blood for blood , 
▁ xxmaj controlment for controlment- so answer xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup chatillon . xxmaj then take my king 's defiance from my mouth- 
▁ xxmaj the farthest limit of my embassy . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj bear mine to him , and so depart in peace ; 
▁ xxmaj be thou as lightning in the eyes of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj for ere thou canst report i will be there , 
▁ xxmaj the thunder of my cannon shall be heard . 
▁ xxmaj so hence ! xxmaj be thou the trumpet of our wrath 
▁ xxmaj and sullen presage of your own decay . 
▁ xxmaj an honourable conduct let him have- 
▁ xxmaj pembroke , look to ' t. xxmaj farewell , xxmaj chatillon . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup chatillon and xxup pembroke 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj what now , my son ! xxmaj have i not ever said 
▁ xxmaj how that ambitious xxmaj constance would not cease 
▁ xxmaj till she had kindled xxmaj france and all the world 
▁ xxmaj upon the right and party of her son ? 
▁ xxmaj this might have been prevented and made whole 
▁ xxmaj with very easy arguments of love , 
▁ xxmaj which now the manage of two kingdoms must 
▁ xxmaj with fearful bloody issue arbitrate . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj our strong possession and our right for us ! 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj your strong possession much more than your right , 
▁ xxmaj or else it must go wrong with you and me ; 
▁ xxmaj so much my conscience whispers in your ear , 
▁ xxmaj which none but heaven and you and i shall hear . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup sheriff 

▁ xxup essex . xxmaj my liege , here is the strangest controversy 
▁ xxmaj come from the country to be judg'd by you 
▁ xxmaj that e'er i heard . xxmaj shall i produce the men ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj let them approach . xxmaj exit xxup sheriff 
▁ xxmaj our abbeys and our priories shall pay 
▁ xxmaj this expedition 's charge . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup robert xxup faulconbridge and xxup philip , his bastard 
▁ brother 

▁ xxmaj what men are you ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj your faithful subject xxup i , a gentleman 
▁ xxmaj born in xxmaj northamptonshire , and eldest son , 
▁ xxmaj as i suppose , to xxmaj robert xxmaj faulconbridge- 
▁ a soldier by the honour - giving hand 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj coeur - de - lion knighted in the field . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxup robert . xxmaj the son and heir to that same xxmaj faulconbridge . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj is that the elder , and art thou the heir ? 
▁ xxmaj you came not of one mother then , it seems . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj most certain of one mother , mighty king- 
▁ xxmaj that is well known- and , as i think , one father ; 
▁ xxmaj but for the certain knowledge of that truth 
▁ i put you o'er to heaven and to my mother . 
▁ xxmaj of that i doubt , as all men 's children may . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj out on thee , rude man ! xxmaj thou dost shame thy mother , 
▁ xxmaj and wound her honour with this diffidence . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxup i , madam ? xxmaj no , i have no reason for it- 
▁ xxmaj that is my brother 's plea , and none of mine ; 
▁ xxmaj the which if he can prove , ' a pops me out 
▁ xxmaj at least from fair five hundred pound a year . 
▁ xxmaj heaven guard my mother 's honour and my land ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . a good blunt fellow . xxmaj why , being younger born , 
▁ xxmaj doth he lay claim to thine inheritance ? 
▁ xxup bastard . i know not why , except to get the land . 
▁ xxmaj but once he slander'd me with bastardy ; 
▁ xxmaj but whe'er i be as true begot or no , 
▁ xxmaj that still i lay upon my mother 's head ; 
▁ xxmaj but that i am as well begot , my liege- 
▁ xxmaj fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!- 
▁ xxmaj compare our faces and be judge yourself . 
▁ xxmaj if old xxmaj sir xxmaj robert did beget us both 
▁ xxmaj and were our father , and this son like him- 
▁ o old xxmaj sir xxmaj robert , father , on my knee 
▁ i give heaven thanks i was not like to thee ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj why , what a madcap hath heaven lent us here ! 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj he hath a trick of xxmaj coeur - de - lion 's face ; 
▁ xxmaj the accent of his tongue affecteth him . 
▁ xxmaj do you not read some tokens of my son 
▁ xxmaj in the large composition of this man ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj mine eye hath well examined his parts 
▁ xxmaj and finds them perfect xxmaj richard . xxmaj sirrah , speak , 
▁ xxmaj what doth move you to claim your brother 's land ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj because he hath a half - face , like my father . 
▁ xxmaj with half that face would he have all my land : 
▁ a half - fac'd groat five hundred pound a year ! 
▁ xxup robert . xxmaj my gracious liege , when that my father liv'd , 
▁ xxmaj your brother did employ my father much- 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj well , sir , by this you can not get my land : 
▁ xxmaj your tale must be how he employ'd my mother . 
▁ xxup robert . xxmaj and once dispatch'd him in an embassy 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj germany , there with the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj to treat of high affairs touching that time . 
▁ xxmaj th ' advantage of his absence took the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and in the meantime sojourn'd at my father 's ; 
▁ xxmaj where how he did prevail i shame to speak- 
▁ xxmaj but truth is truth : large lengths of seas and shores 
▁ xxmaj between my father and my mother lay , 
▁ xxmaj as i have heard my father speak himself , 
▁ xxmaj when this same lusty gentleman was got . 
▁ xxmaj upon his death - bed he by will bequeath'd 
▁ xxmaj his lands to me , and took it on his death 
▁ xxmaj that this my mother 's son was none of his ; 
▁ xxmaj and if he were , he came into the world 
▁ xxmaj full fourteen weeks before the course of time . 
▁ xxmaj then , good my liege , let me have what is mine , 
▁ xxmaj my father 's land , as was my father 's will . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj sirrah , your brother is legitimate : 
▁ xxmaj your father 's wife did after wedlock bear him , 
▁ xxmaj and if she did play false , the fault was hers ; 
▁ xxmaj which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands 
▁ xxmaj that marry wives . xxmaj tell me , how if my brother , 
▁ xxmaj who , as you say , took pains to get this son , 
▁ xxmaj had of your father claim'd this son for his ? 
▁ xxmaj in sooth , good friend , your father might have kept 
▁ xxmaj this calf , bred from his cow , from all the world ; 
▁ xxmaj in sooth , he might ; then , if he were my brother 's , 
▁ xxmaj my brother might not claim him ; nor your father , 
▁ xxmaj being none of his , refuse him . xxmaj this concludes : 
▁ xxmaj my mother 's son did get your father 's heir ; 
▁ xxmaj your father 's heir must have your father 's land . 
▁ xxup robert . xxmaj shall then my father 's will be of no force 
▁ xxmaj to dispossess that child which is not his ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj of no more force to dispossess me , sir , 
▁ xxmaj than was his will to get me , as i think . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj whether hadst thou rather be a xxmaj faulconbridge , 
▁ xxmaj and like thy brother , to enjoy thy land , 
▁ xxmaj or the reputed son of xxmaj coeur - de - lion , 
▁ xxmaj lord of thy presence and no land beside ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj madam , an if my brother had my shape 
▁ xxmaj and i had his , xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's his , like him ; 
▁ xxmaj and if my legs were two such riding - rods , 
▁ xxmaj my arms such eel - skins stuff'd , my face so thin 
▁ xxmaj that in mine ear i durst not stick a rose 
▁ xxmaj lest men should say ' look where three - farthings goes ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and , to his shape , were heir to all this land- 
▁ xxmaj would i might never stir from off this place , 
▁ i would give it every foot to have this face ! 
▁ i would not be xxmaj sir xxmaj nob in any case . 
▁ xxup elinor . i like thee well . xxmaj wilt thou forsake thy fortune , 
▁ xxmaj bequeath thy land to him and follow me ? 
▁ i am a soldier and now bound to xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj brother , take you my land , xxmaj i 'll take my chance . 
▁ xxmaj your face hath got five hundred pound a year , 
▁ xxmaj yet sell your face for fivepence and ' tis dear . 
▁ xxmaj madam , xxmaj i 'll follow you unto the death . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj nay , i would have you go before me thither . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj our country manners give our betters way . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj what is thy name ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj philip , my liege , so is my name begun : 
▁ xxmaj philip , good old xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's wife 's eldest son . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj from henceforth bear his name whose form thou bearest : 
▁ xxmaj kneel thou down xxmaj philip , but rise more great- 
▁ xxmaj arise xxmaj sir xxmaj richard and xxmaj plantagenet . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj brother by th ' mother 's side , give me your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj my father gave me honour , yours gave land . 
▁ xxmaj now blessed be the hour , by night or day , 
▁ xxmaj when i was got , xxmaj sir xxmaj robert was away ! 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj the very spirit of xxmaj plantagenet ! 
▁ i am thy grandam , xxmaj richard : call me so . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj madam , by chance , but not by truth ; what though ? 
▁ xxmaj something about , a little from the right , 
▁ xxmaj in at the window , or else o'er the hatch ; 
▁ xxmaj who dares not stir by day must walk by night ; 
▁ xxmaj and have is have , however men do catch . 
▁ xxmaj near or far off , well won is still well shot ; 
▁ xxmaj and i am xxup i , howe'er i was begot . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj go , xxmaj faulconbridge ; now hast thou thy desire : 
▁ a landless knight makes thee a landed squire . 
▁ xxmaj come , madam , and come , xxmaj richard , we must speed 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj france , for xxmaj france , for it is more than need . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj brother , adieu . xxmaj good fortune come to thee ! 
▁ xxmaj for thou wast got i ' th ' way of honesty . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup bastard 
▁ a foot of honour better than i was ; 
▁ xxmaj but many a many foot of land the worse . 
▁ xxmaj well , now can i make any xxmaj joan a lady . 
▁ ' good den , xxmaj sir richard!'-'god - a - mercy , fellow ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and if his name be xxmaj george , xxmaj i 'll call him xxmaj peter ; 
▁ xxmaj for new - made honour doth forget men 's names : 
▁ ' tis too respective and too sociable 
▁ xxmaj for your conversion . xxmaj now your traveller , 
▁ xxmaj he and his toothpick at my worship 's mess- 
▁ xxmaj and when my knightly stomach is suffic'd , 
▁ xxmaj why then i suck my teeth and catechize 
▁ xxmaj my picked man of countries : ' my dear sir , ' 
▁ xxmaj thus leaning on mine elbow i begin 
▁ ' i shall beseech you'-that is question now ; 
▁ xxmaj and then comes answer like an xxmaj absey book : 
▁ ' o sir , ' says answer ' at your best command , 
▁ xxmaj at your employment , at your service , sir ! ' 
▁ ' no , sir , ' says question ' i , sweet sir , at yours . ' 
▁ xxmaj and so , ere answer knows what question would , 
▁ xxmaj saving in dialogue of compliment , 
▁ xxmaj and talking of the xxmaj alps and xxmaj apennines , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj pyrenean and the river xxmaj po- 
▁ xxmaj it draws toward supper in conclusion so . 
▁ xxmaj but this is worshipful society , 
▁ xxmaj and fits the mounting spirit like myself ; 
▁ xxmaj for he is but a bastard to the time 
▁ xxmaj that doth not smack of observation- 
▁ xxmaj and so am xxup i , whether i smack or no ; 
▁ xxmaj and not alone in habit and device , 
▁ xxmaj exterior form , outward accoutrement , 
▁ xxmaj but from the inward motion to deliver 
▁ xxmaj sweet , sweet , sweet poison for the age 's tooth ; 
▁ xxmaj which , though i will not practise to deceive , 
▁ xxmaj yet , to avoid deceit , i mean to learn ; 
▁ xxmaj for it shall strew the footsteps of my rising . 
▁ xxmaj but who comes in such haste in riding - robes ? 
▁ xxmaj what woman - post is this ? xxmaj hath she no husband 
▁ xxmaj that will take pains to blow a horn before her ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lady xxup faulconbridge , and xxup james xxup gurney 

▁ o me , ' tis my mother ! xxmaj how now , good lady ! 
▁ xxmaj what brings you here to court so hastily ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup faulconbridge . xxmaj where is that slave , thy brother ? 
▁ xxmaj where is he 
▁ xxmaj that holds in chase mine honour up and down ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj my brother xxmaj robert , old xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son ? 
▁ xxmaj colbrand the giant , that same mighty man ? 
▁ xxmaj is it xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son that you seek so ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup faulconbridge . xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son ! xxmaj ay , thou unreverend boy , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son ! xxmaj why scorn'st thou at xxmaj sir xxmaj robert ? 
▁ xxmaj he is xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son , and so art thou . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj james xxmaj gurney , wilt thou give us leave awhile ? 
▁ xxup gurney . xxmaj good leave , good xxmaj philip . 
▁ xxup bastard . philip - sparrow ! xxmaj james , 
▁ xxmaj there 's toys abroad - anon xxmaj i 'll tell thee more . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup gurney 
▁ xxmaj madam , i was not old xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son ; 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj robert might have eat his part in me 
▁ xxmaj upon xxmaj good xxmaj friday , and ne'er broke his fast . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj robert could do : well - marry , to confess- 
▁ xxmaj could he get me ? xxmaj sir xxmaj robert could not do it : 
▁ xxmaj we know his handiwork . xxmaj therefore , good mother , 
▁ xxmaj to whom am i beholding for these limbs ? 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj robert never holp to make this leg . 
▁ xxup lady xxup faulconbridge . xxmaj hast thou conspired with thy brother too , 
▁ xxmaj that for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour ? 
▁ xxmaj what means this scorn , thou most untoward knave ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj knight , knight , good mother , xxmaj basilisco - like . 
▁ xxmaj what ! i am dubb'd ; i have it on my shoulder . 
▁ xxmaj but , mother , i am not xxmaj sir xxmaj robert 's son : 
▁ i have disclaim'd xxmaj sir xxmaj robert and my land ; 
▁ xxmaj legitimation , name , and all is gone . 
▁ xxmaj then , good my mother , let me know my father- 
▁ xxmaj some proper man , i hope . xxmaj who was it , mother ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup faulconbridge . xxmaj hast thou denied thyself a xxmaj faulconbridge ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj as faithfully as i deny the devil . 
▁ xxup lady xxup faulconbridge . xxmaj king xxmaj richard xxmaj coeur - de - lion was thy father . 
▁ xxmaj by long and vehement suit i was seduc'd 
▁ xxmaj to make room for him in my husband 's bed . 
▁ xxmaj heaven lay not my transgression to my charge ! 
▁ xxmaj thou art the issue of my dear offence , 
▁ xxmaj which was so strongly urg'd past my defence . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj now , by this light , were i to get again , 
▁ xxmaj madam , i would not wish a better father . 
▁ xxmaj some sins do bear their privilege on earth , 
▁ xxmaj and so doth yours : your fault was not your folly ; 
▁ xxmaj needs must you lay your heart at his dispose , 
▁ xxmaj subjected tribute to commanding love , 
▁ xxmaj against whose fury and unmatched force 
▁ xxmaj the aweless lion could not wage the fight 
▁ xxmaj nor keep his princely heart from xxmaj richard 's hand . 
▁ xxmaj he that perforce robs lions of their hearts 
▁ xxmaj may easily win a woman 's . xxmaj ay , my mother , 
▁ xxmaj with all my heart i thank thee for my father ! 
▁ xxmaj who lives and dares but say thou didst not well 
▁ xxmaj when i was got , xxmaj i 'll send his soul to hell . 
▁ xxmaj come , lady , i will show thee to my kin ; 
▁ xxmaj and they shall say when xxmaj richard me begot , 
▁ xxmaj if thou hadst said him nay , it had been sin . 
▁ xxmaj who says it was , he lies ; i say ' twas not . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj france . xxmaj before xxmaj angiers 

 xxmaj enter , on one side , xxup austria and forces ; on the other , xxup king xxup philip xxup of xxup france , 
 xxup lewis the xxmaj dauphin , xxup constance , xxup arthur , and forces 

▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj before xxmaj angiers well met , brave xxmaj austria . 
▁ xxmaj arthur , that great forerunner of thy blood , 
▁ xxmaj richard , that robb'd the lion of his heart 
▁ xxmaj and fought the holy wars in xxmaj palestine , 
▁ xxmaj by this brave duke came early to his grave ; 
▁ xxmaj and for amends to his posterity , 
▁ xxmaj at our importance hither is he come 
▁ xxmaj to spread his colours , boy , in thy behalf ; 
▁ xxmaj and to rebuke the usurpation 
▁ xxmaj of thy unnatural uncle , xxmaj english xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj embrace him , love him , give him welcome hither . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj god shall forgive you xxmaj coeur - de - lion 's death 
▁ xxmaj the rather that you give his offspring life , 
▁ xxmaj shadowing their right under your wings of war . 
▁ i give you welcome with a powerless hand , 
▁ xxmaj but with a heart full of unstained love ; 
▁ xxmaj welcome before the gates of xxmaj angiers , xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . a noble boy ! xxmaj who would not do thee right ? 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj upon thy cheek lay i this zealous kiss 
▁ xxmaj as seal to this indenture of my love : 
▁ xxmaj that to my home i will no more return 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj angiers and the right thou hast in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj together with that pale , that white - fac'd shore , 
▁ xxmaj whose foot spurns back the ocean 's roaring tides 
▁ xxmaj and coops from other lands her islanders- 
▁ xxmaj even till that xxmaj england , hedg'd in with the main , 
▁ xxmaj that water - walled bulwark , still secure 
▁ xxmaj and confident from foreign purposes- 
▁ xxmaj even till that utmost corner of the west 
▁ xxmaj salute thee for her king . xxmaj till then , fair boy , 
▁ xxmaj will i not think of home , but follow arms . 
▁ xxup constance . xxup o , take his mother 's thanks , a widow 's thanks , 
▁ xxmaj till your strong hand shall help to give him strength 
▁ xxmaj to make a more requital to your love ! 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj the peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords 
▁ xxmaj in such a just and charitable war . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj well then , to work ! xxmaj our cannon shall be bent 
▁ xxmaj against the brows of this resisting town ; 
▁ xxmaj call for our chiefest men of discipline , 
▁ xxmaj to cull the plots of best advantages . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll lay before this town our royal bones , 
▁ xxmaj wade to the market - place in xxmaj frenchmen 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj but we will make it subject to this boy . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj stay for an answer to your embassy , 
▁ xxmaj lest unadvis'd you stain your swords with blood ; 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj chatillon may from xxmaj england bring 
▁ xxmaj that right in peace which here we urge in war , 
▁ xxmaj and then we shall repent each drop of blood 
▁ xxmaj that hot rash haste so indirectly shed . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup chatillon 

▁ xxup king xxup philip . a wonder , lady ! xxmaj lo , upon thy wish , 
▁ xxmaj our messenger xxmaj chatillon is arriv'd . 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj england says , say briefly , gentle lord ; 
▁ xxmaj we coldly pause for thee . xxmaj chatillon , speak . 
▁ xxup chatillon . xxmaj then turn your forces from this paltry siege 
▁ xxmaj and stir them up against a mightier task . 
▁ xxmaj england , impatient of your just demands , 
▁ xxmaj hath put himself in arms . xxmaj the adverse winds , 
▁ xxmaj whose leisure i have stay'd , have given him time 
▁ xxmaj to land his legions all as soon as xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj his marches are expedient to this town , 
▁ xxmaj his forces strong , his soldiers confident . 
▁ xxmaj with him along is come the mother - queen , 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj ate , stirring him to blood and strife ; 
▁ xxmaj with her the xxmaj lady xxmaj blanch of xxmaj spain ; 
▁ xxmaj with them a bastard of the king 's deceas'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and all th ' unsettled humours of the land- 
▁ xxmaj rash , inconsiderate , fiery voluntaries , 
▁ xxmaj with ladies ' faces and fierce dragons ' spleens- 
▁ xxmaj have sold their fortunes at their native homes , 
▁ xxmaj bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs , 
▁ xxmaj to make a hazard of new fortunes here . 
▁ xxmaj in brief , a braver choice of dauntless spirits 
▁ xxmaj than now the xxmaj english bottoms have waft o'er 
▁ xxmaj did never float upon the swelling tide 
▁ xxmaj to do offence and scathe in xxmaj christendom . [ drum beats ] 
▁ xxmaj the interruption of their churlish drums 
▁ xxmaj cuts off more circumstance : they are at hand ; 
▁ xxmaj to parley or to fight , therefore prepare . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj how much unlook'd for is this expedition ! 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj by how much unexpected , by so much 
▁ xxmaj we must awake endeavour for defence , 
▁ xxmaj for courage mounteth with occasion . 
▁ xxmaj let them be welcome then ; we are prepar'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup elinor , xxup blanch , the xxup bastard , 
▁ xxup pembroke , and others 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj peace be to xxmaj france , if xxmaj france in peace permit 
▁ xxmaj our just and lineal entrance to our own ! 
▁ xxmaj if not , bleed xxmaj france , and peace ascend to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj whiles we , xxmaj god 's wrathful agent , do correct 
▁ xxmaj their proud contempt that beats xxmaj his peace to heaven ! 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj peace be to xxmaj england , if that war return 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj france to xxmaj england , there to live in peace !