xxbos xxmaj england we love , and for that xxmaj england 's sake 
▁ xxmaj with burden of our armour here we sweat . 
▁ xxmaj this toil of ours should be a work of thine ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou from loving xxmaj england art so far 
▁ xxmaj that thou hast under - wrought his lawful king , 
▁ xxmaj cut off the sequence of posterity , 
▁ xxmaj outfaced infant state , and done a rape 
▁ xxmaj upon the maiden virtue of the crown . 
▁ xxmaj look here upon thy brother xxmaj geffrey 's face : 
▁ xxmaj these eyes , these brows , were moulded out of his ; 
▁ xxmaj this little abstract doth contain that large 
▁ xxmaj which died in xxmaj geffrey , and the hand of time 
▁ xxmaj shall draw this brief into as huge a volume . 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj geffrey was thy elder brother born , 
▁ xxmaj and this his son ; xxmaj england was xxmaj geffrey 's right , 
▁ xxmaj and this is xxmaj geffrey 's . xxmaj in the name of xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj how comes it then that thou art call'd a king , 
▁ xxmaj when living blood doth in these temples beat 
▁ xxmaj which owe the crown that thou o'er - masterest ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj from whom hast thou this great commission , xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj to draw my answer from thy articles ? 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj from that supernal judge that stirs good thoughts 
▁ xxmaj in any breast of strong authority 
▁ xxmaj to look into the blots and stains of right . 
▁ xxmaj that judge hath made me guardian to this boy , 
▁ xxmaj under whose warrant i impeach thy wrong , 
▁ xxmaj and by whose help i mean to chastise it . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj alack , thou dost usurp authority . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj excuse it is to beat usurping down . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj who is it thou dost call usurper , xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj let me make answer : thy usurping son . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj out , insolent ! xxmaj thy bastard shall be king , 
▁ xxmaj that thou mayst be a queen and check the world ! 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj my bed was ever to thy son as true 
▁ xxmaj as thine was to thy husband ; and this boy 
▁ xxmaj liker in feature to his father xxmaj geffrey 
▁ xxmaj than thou and xxmaj john in manners - being as xxmaj eke 
▁ xxmaj as rain to water , or devil to his dam . 
▁ xxmaj my boy a bastard ! xxmaj by my soul , i think 
▁ xxmaj his father never was so true begot ; 
▁ xxmaj it can not be , an if thou wert his mother . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj there 's a good mother , boy , that blots thy father . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj there 's a good grandam , boy , that would blot thee . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj hear the crier . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj what the devil art thou ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj one that will play the devil , sir , with you , 
▁ xxmaj an ' a may catch your hide and you alone . 
▁ xxmaj you are the hare of whom the proverb goes , 
▁ xxmaj whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll smoke your skin - coat an i catch you right ; 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , look to ' t ; i ' faith i will , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup blanch . xxup o , well did he become that lion 's robe 
▁ xxmaj that did disrobe the lion of that robe ! 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj it lies as sightly on the back of him 
▁ xxmaj as great xxmaj alcides ' shows upon an ass ; 
▁ xxmaj but , ass , xxmaj i 'll take that burden from your back , 
▁ xxmaj or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj what cracker is this same that deafs our ears 
▁ xxmaj with this abundance of superfluous breath ? 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj philip , determine what we shall do straight . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj women and fools , break off your conference . 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj john , this is the very sum of all : 
▁ xxmaj england and xxmaj ireland , xxmaj anjou , xxmaj touraine , xxmaj maine , 
▁ xxmaj in right of xxmaj arthur , do i claim of thee ; 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj my life as soon . i do defy thee , xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj arthur of xxmaj britaine , yield thee to my hand , 
▁ xxmaj and out of my dear love xxmaj i 'll give thee more 
▁ xxmaj than e'er the coward hand of xxmaj france can win . 
▁ xxmaj submit thee , boy . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj come to thy grandam , child . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj do , child , go to it grandam , child ; 
▁ xxmaj give grandam kingdom , and it grandam will 
▁ xxmaj give it a plum , a cherry , and a fig . 
▁ xxmaj there 's a good grandam ! 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj good my mother , peace ! 
▁ i would that i were low laid in my grave : 
▁ i am not worth this coil that 's made for me . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj his mother shames him so , poor boy , he weeps . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj now shame upon you , whe'er she does or no ! 
▁ xxmaj his grandam 's wrongs , and not his mother 's shames , 
▁ xxmaj draws those heaven - moving pearls from his poor eyes , 
▁ xxmaj which heaven shall take in nature of a fee ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , with these crystal beads heaven shall be brib'd 
▁ xxmaj to do him justice and revenge on you . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth ! 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth , 
▁ xxmaj call not me slanderer ! xxmaj thou and thine usurp 
▁ xxmaj the dominations , royalties , and rights , 
▁ xxmaj of this oppressed boy ; this is thy eldest son 's son , 
▁ xxmaj infortunate in nothing but in thee . 
▁ xxmaj thy sins are visited in this poor child ; 
▁ xxmaj the canon of the law is laid on him , 
▁ xxmaj being but the second generation 
▁ xxmaj removed from thy sin - conceiving womb . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj bedlam , have done . 
▁ xxup constance . i have but this to say- 
▁ xxmaj that he is not only plagued for her sin , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj god hath made her sin and her the plague 
▁ xxmaj on this removed issue , plagued for her 
▁ xxmaj and with her plague ; her sin his injury , 
▁ xxmaj her injury the beadle to her sin ; 
▁ xxmaj all punish'd in the person of this child , 
▁ xxmaj and all for her - a plague upon her ! 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj thou unadvised scold , i can produce 
▁ a will that bars the title of thy son . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj ay , who doubts that ? a will , a wicked will ; 
▁ a woman 's will ; a cank'red grandam 's will ! 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj peace , lady ! pause , or be more temperate . 
▁ xxmaj it ill beseems this presence to cry aim 
▁ xxmaj to these ill - tuned repetitions . 
▁ xxmaj some trumpet summon hither to the walls 
▁ xxmaj these men of xxmaj angiers ; let us hear them speak 
▁ xxmaj whose title they admit , xxmaj arthur 's or xxmaj john 's . 

▁ xxmaj trumpet sounds . xxmaj enter citizens upon the walls 
▁
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj who is it that hath warn'd us to the walls ? 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . ' tis xxmaj france , for xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj england for itself . 
▁ xxmaj you men of xxmaj angiers , and my loving subjects- 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj you loving men of xxmaj angiers , xxmaj arthur 's subjects , 
▁ xxmaj our trumpet call'd you to this gentle parle- 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj for our advantage ; therefore hear us first . 
▁ xxmaj these flags of xxmaj france , that are advanced here 
▁ xxmaj before the eye and prospect of your town , 
▁ xxmaj have hither march'd to your endamagement ; 
▁ xxmaj the cannons have their bowels full of wrath , 
▁ xxmaj and ready mounted are they to spit forth 
▁ xxmaj their iron indignation ' gainst your walls ; 
▁ xxmaj all preparation for a bloody siege 
▁ xxmaj and merciless proceeding by these xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj confront your city 's eyes , your winking gates ; 
▁ xxmaj and but for our approach those sleeping stones 
▁ xxmaj that as a waist doth girdle you about 
▁ xxmaj by the compulsion of their ordinance 
▁ xxmaj by this time from their fixed beds of lime 
▁ xxmaj had been dishabited , and wide havoc made 
▁ xxmaj for bloody power to rush upon your peace . 
▁ xxmaj but on the sight of us your lawful king , 
▁ xxmaj who painfully with much expedient march 
▁ xxmaj have brought a countercheck before your gates , 
▁ xxmaj to save unscratch'd your city 's threat'ned cheeks- 
▁ xxmaj behold , the xxmaj french amaz'd vouchsafe a parle ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , instead of bullets wrapp'd in fire , 
▁ xxmaj to make a shaking fever in your walls , 
▁ xxmaj they shoot but calm words folded up in smoke , 
▁ xxmaj to make a faithless error in your cars ; 
▁ xxmaj which trust accordingly , kind citizens , 
▁ xxmaj and let us in - your xxmaj king , whose labour'd spirits , 
▁ xxmaj forwearied in this action of swift speed , 
▁ xxmaj craves harbourage within your city walls . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj when i have said , make answer to us both . 
▁ xxmaj lo , in this right hand , whose protection 
▁ xxmaj is most divinely vow'd upon the right 
▁ xxmaj of him it holds , stands young xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj son to the elder brother of this man , 
▁ xxmaj and king o'er him and all that he enjoys ; 
▁ xxmaj for this down - trodden equity we tread 
▁ xxmaj in warlike march these greens before your town , 
▁ xxmaj being no further enemy to you 
▁ xxmaj than the constraint of hospitable zeal 
▁ xxmaj in the relief of this oppressed child 
▁ xxmaj religiously provokes . xxmaj be pleased then 
▁ xxmaj to pay that duty which you truly owe 
▁ xxmaj to him that owes it , namely , this young prince ; 
▁ xxmaj and then our arms , like to a muzzled bear , 
▁ xxmaj save in aspect , hath all offence seal'd up ; 
▁ xxmaj our cannons ' malice vainly shall be spent 
▁ xxmaj against th ' invulnerable clouds of heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj and with a blessed and unvex'd retire , 
▁ xxmaj with unhack'd swords and helmets all unbruis'd , 
▁ xxmaj we will bear home that lusty blood again 
▁ xxmaj which here we came to spout against your town , 
▁ xxmaj and leave your children , wives , and you , in peace . 
▁ xxmaj but if you fondly pass our proffer'd offer , 
▁ ' tis not the roundure of your old - fac'd walls 
▁ xxmaj can hide you from our messengers of war , 
▁ xxmaj though all these xxmaj english and their discipline 
▁ xxmaj were harbour'd in their rude circumference . 
▁ xxmaj then tell us , shall your city call us lord 
▁ xxmaj in that behalf which we have challeng'd it ; 
▁ xxmaj or shall we give the signal to our rage , 
▁ xxmaj and stalk in blood to our possession ? 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj in brief : we are the xxmaj king of xxmaj england 's subjects ; 
▁ xxmaj for him , and in his right , we hold this town . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj acknowledge then the xxmaj king , and let me in . 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj that can we not ; but he that proves the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj to him will we prove loyal . xxmaj till that time 
▁ xxmaj have we ramm'd up our gates against the world . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj doth not the crown of xxmaj england prove the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj and if not that , i bring you witnesses : 
▁ xxmaj twice fifteen thousand hearts of xxmaj england 's breed- 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj bastards and else . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj to verify our title with their lives . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj as many and as well - born bloods as those- 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj some bastards too . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj stand in his face to contradict his claim . 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj till you compound whose right is worthiest , 
▁ xxmaj we for the worthiest hold the right from both . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj then xxmaj god forgive the sin of all those souls 
▁ xxmaj that to their everlasting residence , 
▁ xxmaj before the dew of evening fall shall fleet 
▁ xxmaj in dreadful trial of our kingdom 's king ! 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj amen , xxmaj amen ! xxmaj mount , chevaliers ; to arms ! 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj saint xxmaj george , that swing'd the dragon , and e'er since 
▁ xxmaj sits on 's horse back at mine hostess ' door , 
▁ xxmaj teach us some fence ! [ to xxup austria ] xxmaj sirrah , were i at home , 
▁ xxmaj at your den , sirrah , with your lioness , 
▁ i would set an ox - head to your lion 's hide , 
▁ xxmaj and make a monster of you . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj peace ! no more . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxup o , tremble , for you hear the lion roar ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj up higher to the plain , where we 'll set forth 
▁ xxmaj in best appointment all our regiments . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj speed then to take advantage of the field . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj it shall be so ; and at the other hill 
▁ xxmaj command the rest to stand . xxmaj god and our right ! xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj here , after excursions , enter the xxup herald xxup of xxup france , 
▁ with trumpets , to the gates 

▁ xxup french xxup herald . xxmaj you men of xxmaj angiers , open wide your gates 
▁ xxmaj and let young xxmaj arthur , xxmaj duke of xxmaj britaine , in , 
▁ xxmaj who by the hand of xxmaj france this day hath made 
▁ xxmaj much work for tears in many an xxmaj english mother , 
▁ xxmaj whose sons lie scattered on the bleeding ground ; 
▁ xxmaj many a widow 's husband grovelling lies , 
▁ xxmaj coldly embracing the discoloured earth ; 
▁ xxmaj and victory with little loss doth play 
▁ xxmaj upon the dancing banners of the xxmaj french , 
▁ xxmaj who are at hand , triumphantly displayed , 
▁ xxmaj to enter conquerors , and to proclaim 
▁ xxmaj arthur of xxmaj britaine xxmaj england 's xxmaj king and yours . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup english xxup herald , with trumpet 
▁
▁ xxup english xxup herald . xxmaj rejoice , you men of xxmaj angiers , ring your bells : 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj john , your king and xxmaj england 's , doth approach , 
▁ xxmaj commander of this hot malicious day . 
▁ xxmaj their armours that march'd hence so silver - bright 
▁ xxmaj hither return all gilt with xxmaj frenchmen 's blood . 
▁ xxmaj there stuck no plume in any xxmaj english crest 
▁ xxmaj that is removed by a staff of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj our colours do return in those same hands 
▁ xxmaj that did display them when we first march'd forth ; 
▁ xxmaj and like a jolly troop of huntsmen come 
▁ xxmaj our lusty xxmaj english , all with purpled hands , 
▁ xxmaj dy'd in the dying slaughter of their foes . 
▁ xxmaj open your gates and give the victors way . 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj heralds , from off our tow'rs we might behold 
▁ xxmaj from first to last the onset and retire 
▁ xxmaj of both your armies , whose equality 
▁ xxmaj by our best eyes can not be censured . 
▁ xxmaj blood hath bought blood , and blows have answer'd blows ; 
▁ xxmaj strength match'd with strength , and power confronted power ; 
▁ xxmaj both are alike , and both alike we like . 
▁ xxmaj one must prove greatest . xxmaj while they weigh so even , 
▁ xxmaj we hold our town for neither , yet for both . 

▁ xxmaj enter the two xxup kings , with their powers , at several doors 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj france , hast thou yet more blood to cast away ? 
▁ xxmaj say , shall the current of our right run on ? 
▁ xxmaj whose passage , vex'd with thy impediment , 
▁ xxmaj shall leave his native channel and o'erswell 
▁ xxmaj with course disturb'd even thy confining shores , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou let his silver water keep 
▁ a peaceful progress to the ocean . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj england , thou hast not sav'd one drop of blood 
▁ xxmaj in this hot trial more than we of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj rather , lost more . xxmaj and by this hand i swear , 
▁ xxmaj that sways the earth this climate overlooks , 
▁ xxmaj before we will lay down our just - borne arms , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll put thee down , ' gainst whom these arms we bear , 
▁ xxmaj or add a royal number to the dead , 
▁ xxmaj gracing the scroll that tells of this war 's loss 
▁ xxmaj with slaughter coupled to the name of kings . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj ha , majesty ! how high thy glory tow'rs 
▁ xxmaj when the rich blood of kings is set on fire ! 
▁ xxup o , now doth xxmaj death line his dead chaps with steel ; 
▁ xxmaj the swords of soldiers are his teeth , his fangs ; 
▁ xxmaj and now he feasts , mousing the flesh of men , 
▁ xxmaj in undetermin'd differences of kings . 
▁ xxmaj why stand these royal fronts amazed thus ? 
▁ xxmaj cry ' havoc ! ' kings ; back to the stained field , 
▁ xxmaj you equal potents , fiery kindled spirits ! 
▁ xxmaj then let confusion of one part confirm 
▁ xxmaj the other 's peace . xxmaj till then , blows , blood , and death ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj whose party do the townsmen yet admit ? 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj speak , citizens , for xxmaj england ; who 's your king ? 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj the xxmaj king of xxmaj england , when we know the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj know him in us that here hold up his right . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj in us that are our own great deputy 
▁ xxmaj and bear possession of our person here , 
▁ xxmaj lord of our presence , xxmaj angiers , and of you . 
▁ xxup citizen . a greater pow'r than we denies all this ; 
▁ xxmaj and till it be undoubted , we do lock 
▁ xxmaj our former scruple in our strong - barr'd gates ; 
▁ xxmaj king'd of our fears , until our fears , resolv'd , 
▁ xxmaj be by some certain king purg'd and depos'd . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj by heaven , these scroyles of xxmaj angiers flout you , kings , 
▁ xxmaj and stand securely on their battlements 
▁ xxmaj as in a theatre , whence they gape and point 
▁ xxmaj at your industrious scenes and acts of death . 
▁ xxmaj your royal presences be rul'd by me : 
▁ xxmaj do like the mutines of xxmaj jerusalem , 
▁ xxmaj be friends awhile , and both conjointly bend 
▁ xxmaj your sharpest deeds of malice on this town . 
▁ xxmaj by east and west let xxmaj france and xxmaj england mount 
▁ xxmaj their battering cannon , charged to the mouths , 
▁ xxmaj till their soul - fearing clamours have brawl'd down 
▁ xxmaj the flinty ribs of this contemptuous city . 
▁ xxmaj i 'd play incessantly upon these jades , 
▁ xxmaj even till unfenced desolation 
▁ xxmaj leave them as naked as the vulgar air . 
▁ xxmaj that done , dissever your united strengths 
▁ xxmaj and part your mingled colours once again , 
▁ xxmaj turn face to face and bloody point to point ; 
▁ xxmaj then in a moment xxmaj fortune shall cull forth 
▁ xxmaj out of one side her happy minion , 
▁ xxmaj to whom in favour she shall give the day , 
▁ xxmaj and kiss him with a glorious victory . 
▁ xxmaj how like you this wild counsel , mighty states ? 
▁ xxmaj smacks it not something of the policy ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj now , by the sky that hangs above our heads , 
▁ i like it well . xxmaj france , shall we knit our pow'rs 
▁ xxmaj and lay this xxmaj angiers even with the ground ; 
▁ xxmaj then after fight who shall be king of it ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj an if thou hast the mettle of a king , 
▁ xxmaj being wrong'd as we are by this peevish town , 
▁ xxmaj turn thou the mouth of thy artillery , 
▁ xxmaj as we will ours , against these saucy walls ; 
▁ xxmaj and when that we have dash'd them to the ground , 
▁ xxmaj why then defy each other , and pell - mell 
▁ xxmaj make work upon ourselves , for heaven or hell . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj let it be so . xxmaj say , where will you assault ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj we from the west will send destruction 
▁ xxmaj into this city 's bosom . 
▁ xxup austria . i from the north . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj our thunder from the south 
▁ xxmaj shall rain their drift of bullets on this town . 
▁ xxup bastard . [ aside ] o prudent discipline ! xxmaj from north to south , 
▁ xxmaj austria and xxmaj france shoot in each other 's mouth . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll stir them to it.-come , away , away ! 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj hear us , great kings : vouchsafe awhile to stay , 
▁ xxmaj and i shall show you peace and fair - fac'd league ; 
▁ xxmaj win you this city without stroke or wound ; 
▁ xxmaj rescue those breathing lives to die in beds 
▁ xxmaj that here come sacrifices for the field . 
▁ xxmaj persever not , but hear me , mighty kings . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj speak on with favour ; we are bent to hear . 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj that daughter there of xxmaj spain , the xxmaj lady xxmaj blanch , 
▁ xxmaj is niece to xxmaj england ; look upon the years 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj lewis the xxmaj dauphin and that lovely maid . 
▁ xxmaj if lusty love should go in quest of beauty , 
▁ xxmaj where should he find it fairer than in xxmaj blanch ? 
▁ xxmaj if zealous love should go in search of virtue , 
▁ xxmaj where should he find it purer than in xxmaj blanch ? 
▁ xxmaj if love ambitious sought a match of birth , 
▁ xxmaj whose veins bound richer blood than xxmaj lady xxmaj blanch ? 
▁ xxmaj such as she is , in beauty , virtue , birth , 
▁ xxmaj is the young xxmaj dauphin every way complete- 
▁ xxmaj if not complete of , say he is not she ; 
▁ xxmaj and she again wants nothing , to name want , 
▁ xxmaj if want it be not that she is not he . 
▁ xxmaj he is the half part of a blessed man , 
▁ xxmaj left to be finished by such as she ; 
▁ xxmaj and she a fair divided excellence , 
▁ xxmaj whose fulness of perfection lies in him . 
▁ xxup o , two such silver currents , when they join , 
▁ xxmaj do glorify the banks that bound them in ; 
▁ xxmaj and two such shores to two such streams made one , 
▁ xxmaj two such controlling bounds , shall you be , xxmaj kings , 
▁ xxmaj to these two princes , if you marry them . 
▁ xxmaj this union shall do more than battery can 
▁ xxmaj to our fast - closed gates ; for at this match 
▁ xxmaj with swifter spleen than powder can enforce , 
▁ xxmaj the mouth of passage shall we fling wide ope 
▁ xxmaj and give you entrance ; but without this match , 
▁ xxmaj the sea enraged is not half so deaf , 
▁ xxmaj lions more confident , mountains and rocks 
▁ xxmaj more free from motion - no , not xxmaj death himself 
▁ xxmaj in mortal fury half so peremptory 
▁ xxmaj as we to keep this city . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj here 's a stay 
▁ xxmaj that shakes the rotten carcass of old xxmaj death 
▁ xxmaj out of his rags ! xxmaj here 's a large mouth , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj that spits forth death and mountains , rocks and seas ; 
▁ xxmaj talks as familiarly of roaring lions 
▁ xxmaj as maids of thirteen do of puppy - dogs ! 
▁ xxmaj what cannoneer begot this lusty blood ? 
▁ xxmaj he speaks plain cannon - fire , and smoke and bounce ; 
▁ xxmaj he gives the bastinado with his tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj our ears are cudgell'd ; not a word of his 
▁ xxmaj but buffets better than a fist of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj zounds ! i was never so bethump'd with words 
▁ xxmaj since i first call'd my brother 's father dad . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj son , list to this conjunction , make this match ; 
▁ xxmaj give with our niece a dowry large enough ; 
▁ xxmaj for by this knot thou shalt so surely tie 
▁ xxmaj thy now unsur'd assurance to the crown 
▁ xxmaj that yon green boy shall have no sun to ripe 
▁ xxmaj the bloom that promiseth a mighty fruit . 
▁ i see a yielding in the looks of xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj mark how they whisper . xxmaj urge them while their souls 
▁ xxmaj are capable of this ambition , 
▁ xxmaj lest zeal , now melted by the windy breath 
▁ xxmaj of soft petitions , pity , and remorse , 
▁ xxmaj cool and congeal again to what it was . 
▁ xxup citizen . xxmaj why answer not the double majesties 
▁ xxmaj this friendly treaty of our threat'ned town ? 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj speak xxmaj england first , that hath been forward first 
▁ xxmaj to speak unto this city : what say you ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj if that the xxmaj dauphin there , thy princely son , 
▁ xxmaj can in this book of beauty read ' i love , ' 
▁ xxmaj her dowry shall weigh equal with a queen ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj anjou , and fair xxmaj touraine , xxmaj maine , xxmaj poictiers , 
▁ xxmaj and all that we upon this side the sea- 
▁ xxmaj except this city now by us besieg'd- 
▁ xxmaj find liable to our crown and dignity , 
▁ xxmaj shall gild her bridal bed , and make her rich 
▁ xxmaj in titles , honours , and promotions , 
▁ xxmaj as she in beauty , education , blood , 
▁ xxmaj holds hand with any princess of the world . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj what say'st thou , boy ? xxmaj look in the lady 's face . 
▁ xxup lewis . i do , my lord , and in her eye i find 
▁ a wonder , or a wondrous miracle , 
▁ xxmaj the shadow of myself form'd in her eye ; 
▁ xxmaj which , being but the shadow of your son , 
▁ xxmaj becomes a sun , and makes your son a shadow . 
▁ i do protest i never lov'd myself 
▁ xxmaj till now infixed i beheld myself 
▁ xxmaj drawn in the flattering table of her eye . 
▁ [ whispers with xxup blanch ] 
▁ xxup bastard . [ aside ] xxmaj drawn in the flattering table of her eye , 
▁ xxmaj hang'd in the frowning wrinkle of her brow , 
▁ xxmaj and quarter'd in her heart - he doth espy 
▁ xxmaj himself love 's traitor . xxmaj this is pity now , 
▁ xxmaj that hang'd and drawn and quarter'd there should be 
▁ xxmaj in such a love so vile a lout as he . 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj my uncle 's will in this respect is mine . 
▁ xxmaj if he see aught in you that makes him like , 
▁ xxmaj that anything he sees which moves his liking 
▁ i can with ease translate it to my will ; 
▁ xxmaj or if you will , to speak more properly , 
▁ i will enforce it eas'ly to my love . 
▁ xxmaj further i will not flatter you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj that all i see in you is worthy love , 
▁ xxmaj than this : that nothing do i see in you- 
▁ xxmaj though churlish thoughts themselves should be your judge- 
▁ xxmaj that i can find should merit any hate . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj what say these young ones ? xxmaj what say you , my niece ? 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj that she is bound in honour still to do 
▁ xxmaj what you in wisdom still vouchsafe to say . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj speak then , xxmaj prince xxmaj dauphin ; can you love this lady ? 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj nay , ask me if i can refrain from love ; 
▁ xxmaj for i do love her most unfeignedly . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj then do i give xxmaj volquessen , xxmaj touraine , xxmaj maine , 
▁ xxmaj poictiers , and xxmaj anjou , these five provinces , 
▁ xxmaj with her to thee ; and this addition more , 
▁ xxmaj full thirty thousand marks of xxmaj english coin . 
▁ xxmaj philip of xxmaj france , if thou be pleas'd withal , 
▁ xxmaj command thy son and daughter to join hands . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj it likes us well ; young princes , close your hands . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj and your lips too ; for i am well assur'd 
▁ xxmaj that i did so when i was first assur'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj now , citizens of xxmaj angiers , ope your gates , 
▁ xxmaj let in that amity which you have made ; 
▁ xxmaj for at xxmaj saint xxmaj mary 's chapel presently 
▁ xxmaj the rites of marriage shall be solemniz'd . 
▁ xxmaj is not the xxmaj lady xxmaj constance in this troop ? 
▁ i know she is not ; for this match made up 
▁ xxmaj her presence would have interrupted much . 
▁ xxmaj where is she and her son ? xxmaj tell me , who knows . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj she is sad and passionate at your xxmaj highness ' tent . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj and , by my faith , this league that we have made 
▁ xxmaj will give her sadness very little cure . 
▁ xxmaj brother of xxmaj england , how may we content 
▁ xxmaj this widow lady ? xxmaj in her right we came ; 
▁ xxmaj which we , xxmaj god knows , have turn'd another way , 
▁ xxmaj to our own vantage . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj we will heal up all , 
▁ xxmaj for we 'll create young xxmaj arthur xxmaj duke of xxmaj britaine , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj earl of xxmaj richmond ; and this rich fair town 
▁ xxmaj we make him lord of . xxmaj call the xxmaj lady xxmaj constance ; 
▁ xxmaj some speedy messenger bid her repair 
▁ xxmaj to our solemnity . i trust we shall , 
▁ xxmaj if not fill up the measure of her will , 
▁ xxmaj yet in some measure satisfy her so 
▁ xxmaj that we shall stop her exclamation . 
▁ xxmaj go we as well as haste will suffer us 
▁ xxmaj to this unlook'd - for , unprepared pomp . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup bastard 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj mad world ! mad kings ! mad composition ! 
▁ xxmaj john , to stop xxmaj arthur 's tide in the whole , 
▁ xxmaj hath willingly departed with a part ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj france , whose armour conscience buckled on , 
▁ xxmaj whom zeal and charity brought to the field 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj god 's own soldier , rounded in the ear 
▁ xxmaj with that same purpose - changer , that sly devil , 
▁ xxmaj that broker that still breaks the pate of faith , 
▁ xxmaj that daily break - vow , he that wins of all , 
▁ xxmaj of kings , of beggars , old men , young men , maids , 
▁ xxmaj who having no external thing to lose 
▁ xxmaj but the word ' maid , ' cheats the poor maid of that ; 
▁ xxmaj that smooth - fac'd gentleman , tickling commodity , 
▁ xxmaj commodity , the bias of the world- 
▁ xxmaj the world , who of itself is peised well , 
▁ xxmaj made to run even upon even ground , 
▁ xxmaj till this advantage , this vile - drawing bias , 
▁ xxmaj this sway of motion , this commodity , 
▁ xxmaj makes it take head from all indifferency , 
▁ xxmaj from all direction , purpose , course , intent- 
▁ xxmaj and this same bias , this commodity , 
▁ xxmaj this bawd , this broker , this all - changing word , 
▁ xxmaj clapp'd on the outward eye of fickle xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj hath drawn him from his own determin'd aid , 
▁ xxmaj from a resolv'd and honourable war , 
▁ xxmaj to a most base and vile - concluded peace . 
▁ xxmaj and why rail i on this commodity ? 
▁ xxmaj but for because he hath not woo'd me yet ; 
▁ xxmaj not that i have the power to clutch my hand 
▁ xxmaj when his fair angels would salute my palm , 
▁ xxmaj but for my hand , as unattempted yet , 
▁ xxmaj like a poor beggar raileth on the rich . 
▁ xxmaj well , whiles i am a beggar , i will rail 
▁ xxmaj and say there is no sin but to be rich ; 
▁ xxmaj and being rich , my virtue then shall be 
▁ xxmaj to say there is no vice but beggary . 
▁ xxmaj since kings break faith upon commodity , 
▁ xxmaj gain , be my lord , for i will worship thee . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj france . xxmaj the xxup french xxup king 's camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup constance , xxup arthur , and xxup salisbury 

▁ xxup constance . xxmaj gone to be married ! xxmaj gone to swear a peace ! 
▁ xxmaj false blood to false blood join'd ! xxmaj gone to be friends ! 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj lewis have xxmaj blanch , and xxmaj blanch those provinces ? 
▁ xxmaj it is not so ; thou hast misspoke , misheard ; 
▁ xxmaj be well advis'd , tell o'er thy tale again . 
▁ xxmaj it can not be ; thou dost but say ' tis so ; 
▁ i trust i may not trust thee , for thy word 
▁ xxmaj is but the vain breath of a common man : 
▁ xxmaj believe me i do not believe thee , man ; 
▁ i have a king 's oath to the contrary . 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me , 
▁ xxmaj for i am sick and capable of fears , 
▁ xxmaj oppress'd with wrongs , and therefore full of fears ; 
▁ a widow , husbandless , subject to fears ; 
▁ a woman , naturally born to fears ; 
▁ xxmaj and though thou now confess thou didst but jest , 
▁ xxmaj with my vex'd spirits i can not take a truce , 
▁ xxmaj but they will quake and tremble all this day . 
▁ xxmaj what dost thou mean by shaking of thy head ? 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou look so sadly on my son ? 
▁ xxmaj what means that hand upon that breast of thine ? 
▁ xxmaj why holds thine eye that lamentable rheum , 
▁ xxmaj like a proud river peering o'er his bounds ? 
▁ xxmaj be these sad signs confirmers of thy words ? 
▁ xxmaj then speak again - not all thy former tale , 
▁ xxmaj but this one word , whether thy tale be true . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj as true as i believe you think them false 
▁ xxmaj that give you cause to prove my saying true . 
▁ xxup constance . xxup o , if thou teach me to believe this sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj teach thou this sorrow how to make me die ; 
▁ xxmaj and let belief and life encounter so 
▁ xxmaj as doth the fury of two desperate men 
▁ xxmaj which in the very meeting fall and die ! 
▁ xxmaj lewis marry xxmaj blanch ! o boy , then where art thou ? 
▁ xxmaj france friend with xxmaj england ; what becomes of me ? 
▁ xxmaj fellow , be gone : i can not brook thy sight ; 
▁ xxmaj this news hath made thee a most ugly man . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj what other harm have xxup i , good lady , done 
▁ xxmaj but spoke the harm that is by others done ? 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj which harm within itself so heinous is 
▁ xxmaj as it makes harmful all that speak of it . 
▁ xxup arthur . i do beseech you , madam , be content . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj if thou that bid'st me be content wert grim , 
▁ xxmaj ugly , and sland'rous to thy mother 's womb , 
▁ xxmaj full of unpleasing blots and sightless stains , 
▁ xxmaj lame , foolish , crooked , swart , prodigious , 
▁ xxmaj patch'd with foul moles and eye - offending marks , 
▁ i would not care , i then would be content ; 
▁ xxmaj for then i should not love thee ; no , nor thou 
▁ xxmaj become thy great birth , nor deserve a crown . 
▁ xxmaj but thou art fair , and at thy birth , dear boy , 
▁ xxmaj nature and xxmaj fortune join'd to make thee great : 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj nature 's gifts thou mayst with lilies boast , 
▁ xxmaj and with the half - blown rose ; but xxmaj fortune , xxup o ! 
▁ xxmaj she is corrupted , chang'd , and won from thee ; 
▁ xxmaj sh ' adulterates hourly with thine uncle xxmaj john , 
▁ xxmaj and with her golden hand hath pluck'd on xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj to tread down fair respect of sovereignty , 
▁ xxmaj and made his majesty the bawd to theirs . 
▁ xxmaj france is a bawd to xxmaj fortune and xxmaj king xxmaj john- 
▁ xxmaj that strumpet xxmaj fortune , that usurping xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxmaj tell me , thou fellow , is not xxmaj france forsworn ? 
▁ xxmaj envenom him with words , or get thee gone 
▁ xxmaj and leave those woes alone which i alone 
▁ xxmaj am bound to under - bear . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj pardon me , madam , 
▁ i may not go without you to the kings . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj thou mayst , thou shalt ; i will not go with thee ; 
▁ i will instruct my sorrows to be proud , 
▁ xxmaj for grief is proud , and makes his owner stoop . 
▁ xxmaj to me , and to the state of my great grief , 
▁ xxmaj let kings assemble ; for my grief 's so great 
▁ xxmaj that no supporter but the huge firm earth 
▁ xxmaj can hold it up . [ seats herself on the ground ] 
▁ xxmaj here i and sorrows sit ; 
▁ xxmaj here is my throne , bid kings come bow to it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup king xxup philip , xxup lewis , xxup blanch , 
▁ xxup elinor , the xxup bastard , xxup austria , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup philip . ' tis true , fair daughter , and this blessed day 
▁ xxmaj ever in xxmaj france shall be kept festival . 
▁ xxmaj to solemnize this day the glorious sun 
▁ xxmaj stays in his course and plays the alchemist , 
▁ xxmaj turning with splendour of his precious eye 
▁ xxmaj the meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold . 
▁ xxmaj the yearly course that brings this day about 
▁ xxmaj shall never see it but a holiday . 
▁ xxup constance . [ rising ] a wicked day , and not a holy day ! 
▁ xxmaj what hath this day deserv'd ? what hath it done 
▁ xxmaj that it in golden letters should be set 
▁ xxmaj among the high tides in the calendar ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , rather turn this day out of the week , 
▁ xxmaj this day of shame , oppression , perjury ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if it must stand still , let wives with child 
▁ xxmaj pray that their burdens may not fall this day , 
▁ xxmaj lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but on this day let seamen fear no wreck ; 
▁ xxmaj no bargains break that are not this day made ; 
▁ xxmaj this day , all things begun come to ill end , 
▁ xxmaj yea , faith itself to hollow falsehood change ! 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj by heaven , lady , you shall have no cause 
▁ xxmaj to curse the fair proceedings of this day . 
▁ xxmaj have i not pawn'd to you my majesty ? 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj you have beguil'd me with a counterfeit 
▁ xxmaj resembling majesty , which , being touch'd and tried , 
▁ xxmaj proves valueless ; you are forsworn , forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj you came in arms to spill mine enemies ' blood , 
▁ xxmaj but now in arms you strengthen it with yours . 
▁ xxmaj the grappling vigour and rough frown of war 
▁ xxmaj is cold in amity and painted peace , 
▁ xxmaj and our oppression hath made up this league . 
▁ xxmaj arm , arm , you heavens , against these perjur'd kings ! 
▁ a widow cries : xxmaj be husband to me , heavens ! 
▁ xxmaj let not the hours of this ungodly day 
▁ xxmaj wear out the day in peace ; but , ere sunset , 
▁ xxmaj set armed discord ' twixt these perjur'd kings ! 
▁ xxmaj hear me , xxup o , hear me ! 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj lady xxmaj constance , peace ! 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj war ! war ! no peace ! xxmaj peace is to me a war . 
▁ o xxmaj lymoges ! o xxmaj austria ! thou dost shame 
▁ xxmaj that bloody spoil . xxmaj thou slave , thou wretch , thou coward ! 
▁ xxmaj thou little valiant , great in villainy ! 
▁ xxmaj thou ever strong upon the stronger side ! 
▁ xxmaj thou xxmaj fortune 's champion that dost never fight 
▁ xxmaj but when her humorous ladyship is by 
▁ xxmaj to teach thee safety ! xxmaj thou art perjur'd too , 
▁ xxmaj and sooth'st up greatness . xxmaj what a fool art thou , 
▁ a ramping fool , to brag and stamp and swear 
▁ xxmaj upon my party ! xxmaj thou cold - blooded slave , 
▁ xxmaj hast thou not spoke like thunder on my side , 
▁ xxmaj been sworn my soldier , bidding me depend 
▁ xxmaj upon thy stars , thy fortune , and thy strength , 
▁ xxmaj and dost thou now fall over to my foes ? 
▁ xxmaj thou wear a lion 's hide ! xxmaj doff it for shame , 
▁ xxmaj and hang a calf's - skin on those recreant limbs . 
▁ xxup austria . o that a man should speak those words to me ! 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj and hang a calf's - skin on those recreant limbs . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj thou dar'st not say so , villain , for thy life . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj and hang a calf's - skin on those recreant limbs . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj we like not this : thou dost forget thyself . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pandulph 

▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj here comes the holy legate of the xxmaj pope . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj hail , you anointed deputies of heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj to thee , xxmaj king xxmaj john , my holy errand is . 
▁ i xxmaj pandulph , of fair xxmaj milan cardinal , 
▁ xxmaj and from xxmaj pope xxmaj innocent the legate here , 
▁ xxmaj do in his name religiously demand 
▁ xxmaj why thou against the xxmaj church , our holy mother , 
▁ xxmaj so wilfully dost spurn ; and force perforce 
▁ xxmaj keep xxmaj stephen xxmaj langton , chosen xxmaj archbishop 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj canterbury , from that holy see ? 
▁ xxmaj this , in our foresaid holy father 's name , 
▁ xxmaj pope xxmaj innocent , i do demand of thee . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj what earthly name to interrogatories 
▁ xxmaj can task the free breath of a sacred king ? 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not , xxmaj cardinal , devise a name 
▁ xxmaj so slight , unworthy , and ridiculous , 
▁ xxmaj to charge me to an answer , as the xxmaj pope . 
▁ xxmaj tell him this tale , and from the mouth of xxmaj england 
▁ xxmaj add thus much more , that no xxmaj italian priest 
▁ xxmaj shall tithe or toll in our dominions ; 
▁ xxmaj but as we under heaven are supreme head , 
▁ xxmaj so , under xxmaj him that great supremacy , 
▁ xxmaj where we do reign we will alone uphold , 
▁ xxmaj without th ' assistance of a mortal hand . 
▁ xxmaj so tell the xxmaj pope , all reverence set apart 
▁ xxmaj to him and his usurp'd authority . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj brother of xxmaj england , you blaspheme in this . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj though you and all the kings of xxmaj christendom 
▁ xxmaj are led so grossly by this meddling priest , 
▁ xxmaj dreading the curse that money may buy out , 
▁ xxmaj and by the merit of vile gold , dross , dust , 
▁ xxmaj purchase corrupted pardon of a man , 
▁ xxmaj who in that sale sells pardon from himself- 
▁ xxmaj though you and all the rest , so grossly led , 
▁ xxmaj this juggling witchcraft with revenue cherish ; 
▁ xxmaj yet i alone , alone do me oppose 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj pope , and count his friends my foes . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj then by the lawful power that i have 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt stand curs'd and excommunicate ; 
▁ xxmaj and blessed shall he be that doth revolt 
▁ xxmaj from his allegiance to an heretic ; 
▁ xxmaj and meritorious shall that hand be call'd , 
▁ xxmaj canonized , and worshipp'd as a saint , 
▁ xxmaj that takes away by any secret course 
▁ xxmaj thy hateful life . 
▁ xxup constance . xxup o , lawful let it be 
▁ xxmaj that i have room with xxmaj rome to curse awhile ! 
▁ xxmaj good father xxmaj cardinal , cry thou ' amen ' 
▁ xxmaj to my keen curses ; for without my wrong 
▁ xxmaj there is no tongue hath power to curse him right . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj there 's law and warrant , lady , for my curse . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj and for mine too ; when law can do no right , 
▁ xxmaj let it be lawful that law bar no wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj law can not give my child his kingdom here , 
▁ xxmaj for he that holds his kingdom holds the law ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , since law itself is perfect wrong , 
▁ xxmaj how can the law forbid my tongue to curse ? 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj philip of xxmaj france , on peril of a curse , 
▁ xxmaj let go the hand of that arch - heretic , 
▁ xxmaj and raise the power of xxmaj france upon his head , 
▁ xxmaj unless he do submit himself to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj look'st thou pale , xxmaj france ? xxmaj do not let go thy hand . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj look to that , devil , lest that xxmaj france repent 
▁ xxmaj and by disjoining hands hell lose a soul . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj king xxmaj philip , listen to the xxmaj cardinal . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj and hang a calf's - skin on his recreant limbs . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj well , ruffian , i must pocket up these wrongs , 
▁ xxmaj because- 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj your breeches best may carry them . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj philip , what say'st thou to the xxmaj cardinal ? 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj what should he say , but as the xxmaj cardinal ? 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj bethink you , father ; for the difference 
▁ xxmaj is purchase of a heavy curse from xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj or the light loss of xxmaj england for a friend . 
▁ xxmaj forgo the easier . 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj that 's the curse of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup constance . o xxmaj lewis , stand fast ! xxmaj the devil tempts thee here 
▁ xxmaj in likeness of a new untrimmed bride . 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj the xxmaj lady xxmaj constance speaks not from her faith , 
▁ xxmaj but from her need . 
▁ xxup constance . xxup o , if thou grant my need , 
▁ xxmaj which only lives but by the death of faith , 
▁ xxmaj that need must needs infer this principle- 
▁ xxmaj that faith would live again by death of need . 
▁ o then , tread down my need , and faith mounts up : 
▁ xxmaj keep my need up , and faith is trodden down ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj the xxmaj king is mov'd , and answers not to this . 
▁ xxup constance . o be remov'd from him , and answer well ! 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj do so , xxmaj king xxmaj philip ; hang no more in doubt . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj hang nothing but a calf's - skin , most sweet lout . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . i am perplex'd and know not what to say . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj what canst thou say but will perplex thee more , 
▁ xxmaj if thou stand excommunicate and curs'd ? 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj good reverend father , make my person yours , 
▁ xxmaj and tell me how you would bestow yourself . 
▁ xxmaj this royal hand and mine are newly knit , 
▁ xxmaj and the conjunction of our inward souls 
▁ xxmaj married in league , coupled and link'd together 
▁ xxmaj with all religious strength of sacred vows ; 
▁ xxmaj the latest breath that gave the sound of words 
▁ xxmaj was deep - sworn faith , peace , amity , true love , 
▁ xxmaj between our kingdoms and our royal selves ; 
▁ xxmaj and even before this truce , but new before , 
▁ xxmaj no longer than we well could wash our hands , 
▁ xxmaj to clap this royal bargain up of peace , 
▁ xxmaj heaven knows , they were besmear'd and overstain'd 
▁ xxmaj with slaughter 's pencil , where revenge did paint 
▁ xxmaj the fearful difference of incensed kings . 
▁ xxmaj and shall these hands , so lately purg'd of blood , 
▁ xxmaj so newly join'd in love , so strong in both , 
▁ xxmaj unyoke this seizure and this kind regreet ? 
▁ xxmaj play fast and loose with faith ? so jest with heaven , 
▁ xxmaj make such unconstant children of ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj as now again to snatch our palm from palm , 
▁ xxmaj unswear faith sworn , and on the marriage - bed 
▁ xxmaj of smiling peace to march a bloody host , 
▁ xxmaj and make a riot on the gentle brow 
▁ xxmaj of true sincerity ? xxup o , holy sir , 
▁ xxmaj my reverend father , let it not be so ! 
▁ xxmaj out of your grace , devise , ordain , impose , 
▁ xxmaj some gentle order ; and then we shall be blest 
▁ xxmaj to do your pleasure , and continue friends . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj all form is formless , order orderless , 
▁ xxmaj save what is opposite to xxmaj england 's love . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , to arms ! be champion of our church , 
▁ xxmaj or let the church , our mother , breathe her curse- 
▁ a mother 's curse - on her revolting son . 
▁ xxmaj france , thou mayst hold a serpent by the tongue , 
▁ a chafed lion by the mortal paw , 
▁ a fasting tiger safer by the tooth , 
▁ xxmaj than keep in peace that hand which thou dost hold . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . i may disjoin my hand , but not my faith . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj so mak'st thou faith an enemy to faith ; 
▁ xxmaj and like . a civil war set'st oath to oath . 
▁ xxmaj thy tongue against thy tongue . xxup o , let thy vow 
▁ xxmaj first made to heaven , first be to heaven perform'd , 
▁ xxmaj that is , to be the champion of our xxmaj church . 
▁ xxmaj what since thou swor'st is sworn against thyself 
▁ xxmaj and may not be performed by thyself , 
▁ xxmaj for that which thou hast sworn to do amiss 
▁ xxmaj is not amiss when it is truly done ; 
▁ xxmaj and being not done , where doing tends to ill , 
▁ xxmaj the truth is then most done not doing it ; 
▁ xxmaj the better act of purposes mistook 
▁ xxmaj is to mistake again ; though indirect , 
▁ xxmaj yet indirection thereby grows direct , 
▁ xxmaj and falsehood cures , as fire cools fire 
▁ xxmaj within the scorched veins of one new - burn'd . 
▁ xxmaj it is religion that doth make vows kept ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou hast sworn against religion 
▁ xxmaj by what thou swear'st against the thing thou swear'st , 
▁ xxmaj and mak'st an oath the surety for thy truth 
▁ xxmaj against an oath ; the truth thou art unsure 
▁ xxmaj to swear swears only not to be forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj else what a mockery should it be to swear ! 
▁ xxmaj but thou dost swear only to be forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj and most forsworn to keep what thou dost swear . 
▁ xxmaj therefore thy later vows against thy first 
▁ xxmaj is in thyself rebellion to thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj and better conquest never canst thou make 
▁ xxmaj than arm thy constant and thy nobler parts 
▁ xxmaj against these giddy loose suggestions ; 
▁ xxmaj upon which better part our pray'rs come in , 
▁ xxmaj if thou vouchsafe them . xxmaj but if not , then know 
▁ xxmaj the peril of our curses fight on thee 
▁ xxmaj so heavy as thou shalt not shake them off , 
▁ xxmaj but in despair die under the black weight . 
▁ xxup austria . xxmaj rebellion , flat rebellion ! 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj will't not be ? 
▁ xxmaj will not a calf's - skin stop that mouth of thine ? 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj father , to arms ! 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj upon thy wedding - day ? 
▁ xxmaj against the blood that thou hast married ? 
▁ xxmaj what , shall our feast be kept with slaughtered men ? 
▁ xxmaj shall braying trumpets and loud churlish drums , 
▁ xxmaj clamours of hell , be measures to our pomp ? 
▁ o husband , hear me ! ay , alack , how new 
▁ xxmaj is ' husband ' in my mouth ! even for that name , 
▁ xxmaj which till this time my tongue did ne'er pronounce , 
▁ xxmaj upon my knee i beg , go not to arms 
▁ xxmaj against mine uncle . 
▁ xxup constance . xxup o , upon my knee , 
▁ xxmaj made hard with kneeling , i do pray to thee , 
▁ xxmaj thou virtuous xxmaj dauphin , alter not the doom 
▁ xxmaj forethought by heaven ! 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj now shall i see thy love . xxmaj what motive may 
▁ xxmaj be stronger with thee than the name of wife ? 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj that which upholdeth him that thee upholds , 
▁ xxmaj his honour . xxup o , thine honour , xxmaj lewis , thine honour ! 
▁ xxup lewis . i muse your xxmaj majesty doth seem so cold , 
▁ xxmaj when such profound respects do pull you on . 
▁ xxup pandulph . i will denounce a curse upon his head . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj thou shalt not need . xxmaj england , i will fall from thee . 
▁ xxup constance . o fair return of banish'd majesty ! 
▁ xxup elinor . o foul revolt of xxmaj french inconstancy ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj france , thou shalt rue this hour within this hour . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj old xxmaj time the clock - setter , that bald sexton xxmaj time , 
▁ xxmaj is it as he will ? xxmaj well then , xxmaj france shall rue . 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj the sun 's o'ercast with blood . xxmaj fair day , adieu ! 
▁ xxmaj which is the side that i must go withal ? 
▁ i am with both : each army hath a hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and in their rage , i having hold of both , 
▁ xxmaj they whirl asunder and dismember me . 
▁ xxmaj husband , i can not pray that thou mayst win ; 
▁ xxmaj uncle , i needs must pray that thou mayst lose ; 
▁ xxmaj father , i may not wish the fortune thine ; 
▁ xxmaj grandam , i will not wish thy wishes thrive . 
▁ xxmaj whoever wins , on that side shall i lose : 
▁ xxmaj assured loss before the match be play'd . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj lady , with me , with me thy fortune lies . 
▁ xxup blanch . xxmaj there where my fortune lives , there my life dies . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj cousin , go draw our puissance together . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup bastard 
▁ xxmaj france , i am burn'd up with inflaming wrath , 
▁ a rage whose heat hath this condition 
▁ xxmaj that nothing can allay , nothing but blood , 
▁ xxmaj the blood , and dearest - valu'd blood , of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj thy rage shall burn thee up , and thou shalt turn 
▁ xxmaj to ashes , ere our blood shall quench that fire . 
▁ xxmaj look to thyself , thou art in jeopardy . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj no more than he that threats . xxmaj to arms let 's hie ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj france . xxmaj plains near xxmaj angiers 

 xxmaj alarums , excursions . xxmaj enter the xxup bastard with xxup austria 's head 

▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj now , by my life , this day grows wondrous hot ; 
▁ xxmaj some airy devil hovers in the sky 
▁ xxmaj and pours down mischief . xxmaj austria 's head lie there , 
▁ xxmaj while xxmaj philip breathes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup arthur , and xxup hubert 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj hubert , keep this boy . xxmaj philip , make up : 
▁ xxmaj my mother is assailed in our tent , 
▁ xxmaj and ta'en , i fear . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj my lord , i rescued her ; 
▁ xxmaj her xxmaj highness is in safety , fear you not ; 
▁ xxmaj but on , my liege , for very little pains 
▁ xxmaj will bring this labour to an happy end . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj france . xxmaj plains near xxmaj angiers 

 xxmaj alarums , excursions , retreat . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup elinor , xxup arthur , 
 the xxup bastard , xxup hubert , and xxup lords 

▁ xxup king xxup john . [ to xxup elinor ] xxmaj so shall it be ; your xxmaj grace shall stay 
▁ behind , 
▁ xxmaj so strongly guarded . [ to xxup arthur ] xxmaj cousin , look not sad ; 
▁ xxmaj thy grandam loves thee , and thy uncle will 
▁ xxmaj as dear be to thee as thy father was . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxup o , this will make my mother die with grief ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . [ to the xxup bastard ] xxmaj cousin , away for xxmaj england ! haste 
▁ before , 
▁ xxmaj and , ere our coming , see thou shake the bags 
▁ xxmaj of hoarding abbots ; imprisoned angels 
▁ xxmaj set at liberty ; the fat ribs of peace 
▁ xxmaj must by the hungry now be fed upon . 
▁ xxmaj use our commission in his utmost force . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj bell , book , and candle , shall not drive me back , 
▁ xxmaj when gold and silver becks me to come on . 
▁ i leave your xxmaj highness . xxmaj grandam , i will pray , 
▁ xxmaj if ever i remember to be holy , 
▁ xxmaj for your fair safety . xxmaj so , i kiss your hand . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj farewell , gentle cousin . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj coz , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup bastard 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj come hither , little kinsman ; hark , a word . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj hubert . o my gentle xxmaj hubert , 
▁ xxmaj we owe thee much ! xxmaj within this wall of flesh 
▁ xxmaj there is a soul counts thee her creditor , 
▁ xxmaj and with advantage means to pay thy love ; 
▁ xxmaj and , my good friend , thy voluntary oath 
▁ xxmaj lives in this bosom , dearly cherished . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand . i had a thing to say- 
▁ xxmaj but i will fit it with some better time . 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj hubert , i am almost asham'd 
▁ xxmaj to say what good respect i have of thee . 
▁ xxup hubert . i am much bounden to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj good friend , thou hast no cause to say so yet , 
▁ xxmaj but thou shalt have ; and creep time ne'er so slow , 
▁ xxmaj yet it shall come for me to do thee good . 
▁ i had a thing to say - but let it go : 
▁ xxmaj the sun is in the heaven , and the proud day , 
▁ xxmaj attended with the pleasures of the world , 
▁ xxmaj is all too wanton and too full of gawds 
▁ xxmaj to give me audience . xxmaj if the midnight bell 
▁ xxmaj did with his iron tongue and brazen mouth 
▁ xxmaj sound on into the drowsy race of night ; 
▁ xxmaj if this same were a churchyard where we stand , 
▁ xxmaj and thou possessed with a thousand wrongs ;