xxbos xxmaj or if that surly spirit , melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj had bak'd thy blood and made it heavy - thick , 
▁ xxmaj which else runs tickling up and down the veins , 
▁ xxmaj making that idiot , laughter , keep men 's eyes 
▁ xxmaj and strain their cheeks to idle merriment , 
▁ a passion hateful to my purposes ; 
▁ xxmaj or if that thou couldst see me without eyes , 
▁ xxmaj hear me without thine cars , and make reply 
▁ xxmaj without a tongue , using conceit alone , 
▁ xxmaj without eyes , ears , and harmful sound of words- 
▁ xxmaj then , in despite of brooded watchful day , 
▁ i would into thy bosom pour my thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj but , ah , i will not ! xxmaj yet i love thee well ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by my troth , i think thou lov'st me well . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj so well that what you bid me undertake , 
▁ xxmaj though that my death were adjunct to my act , 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i would do it . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj do not i know thou wouldst ? 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj hubert , xxmaj hubert , xxmaj hubert , throw thine eye 
▁ xxmaj on yon young boy . xxmaj i 'll tell thee what , my friend , 
▁ xxmaj he is a very serpent in my way ; 
▁ xxmaj and wheresoe'er this foot of mine doth tread , 
▁ xxmaj he lies before me . xxmaj dost thou understand me ? 
▁ xxmaj thou art his keeper . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll keep him so 
▁ xxmaj that he shall not offend your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj death . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . a grave . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj he shall not live . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj enough ! 
▁ i could be merry now . xxmaj hubert , i love thee . 
▁ xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll not say what i intend for thee . 
▁ xxmaj remember . xxmaj madam , fare you well ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send those powers o'er to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup elinor . xxmaj my blessing go with thee ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . [ to xxup arthur ] xxmaj for xxmaj england , cousin , go ; 
▁ xxmaj hubert shall be your man , attend on you 
▁ xxmaj with all true duty . xxmaj on toward xxmaj calais , ho ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj france . xxmaj the xxup french king 's camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup philip , xxup lewis , xxup pandulph , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj so by a roaring tempest on the flood 
▁ a whole armado of convicted sail 
▁ xxmaj is scattered and disjoin'd from fellowship . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj courage and comfort ! xxmaj all shall yet go well . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj what can go well , when we have run so ill . 
▁ xxmaj are we not beaten ? xxmaj is not xxmaj angiers lost ? 
▁ xxmaj arthur ta'en prisoner ? xxmaj divers dear friends slain ? 
▁ xxmaj and bloody xxmaj england into xxmaj england gone , 
▁ xxmaj o'erbearing interruption , spite of xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup lewis . he hath won , that hath he fortified ; 
▁ xxmaj so hot a speed with such advice dispos'd , 
▁ xxmaj such temperate order in so fierce a cause , 
▁ xxmaj doth want example ; who hath read or heard 
▁ xxmaj of any kindred action like to this ? 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj well could i bear that xxmaj england had this praise , 
▁ xxmaj so we could find some pattern of our shame . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup constance 

▁ xxmaj look who comes here ! a grave unto a soul ; 
▁ xxmaj holding th ' eternal spirit , against her will , 
▁ xxmaj in the vile prison of afflicted breath . 
▁ i prithee , lady , go away with me . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj lo now ! now see the issue of your peace ! 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj patience , good lady ! xxmaj comfort , gentle xxmaj constance ! 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj no , i defy all counsel , all redress , 
▁ xxmaj but that which ends all counsel , true redress- 
▁ xxmaj death , death ; o amiable lovely death ! 
▁ xxmaj thou odoriferous stench ! sound rottenness ! 
▁ xxmaj arise forth from the couch of lasting night , 
▁ xxmaj thou hate and terror to prosperity , 
▁ xxmaj and i will kiss thy detestable bones , 
▁ xxmaj and put my eyeballs in thy vaulty brows , 
▁ xxmaj and ring these fingers with thy household worms , 
▁ xxmaj and stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust , 
▁ xxmaj and be a carrion monster like thyself . 
▁ xxmaj come , grin on me , and i will think thou smil'st , 
▁ xxmaj and buss thee as thy wife . xxmaj misery 's love , 
▁ xxup o , come to me ! 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . o fair affliction , peace ! 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj no , no , i will not , having breath to cry . 
▁ o that my tongue were in the thunder 's mouth ! 
▁ xxmaj then with a passion would i shake the world , 
▁ xxmaj and rouse from sleep that fell anatomy 
▁ xxmaj which can not hear a lady 's feeble voice , 
▁ xxmaj which scorns a modern invocation . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj lady , you utter madness and not sorrow . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj thou art not holy to belie me so . 
▁ i am not mad : this hair i tear is mine ; 
▁ xxmaj my name is xxmaj constance ; i was xxmaj geffrey 's wife ; 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj arthur is my son , and he is lost . 
▁ i am not mad - i would to heaven i were ! 
▁ xxmaj for then ' tis like i should forget myself . 
▁ xxup o , if i could , what grief should i forget ! 
▁ xxmaj preach some philosophy to make me mad , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt be canoniz'd , xxmaj cardinal ; 
▁ xxmaj for , being not mad , but sensible of grief , 
▁ xxmaj my reasonable part produces reason 
▁ xxmaj how i may be deliver'd of these woes , 
▁ xxmaj and teaches me to kill or hang myself . 
▁ xxmaj if i were mad i should forget my son , 
▁ xxmaj or madly think a babe of clouts were he . 
▁ i am not mad ; too well , too well i feel 
▁ xxmaj the different plague of each calamity . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj bind up those tresses . xxup o , what love i note 
▁ xxmaj in the fair multitude of those her hairs ! 
▁ xxmaj where but by a chance a silver drop hath fall'n , 
▁ xxmaj even to that drop ten thousand wiry friends 
▁ xxmaj do glue themselves in sociable grief , 
▁ xxmaj like true , inseparable , faithful loves , 
▁ xxmaj sticking together in calamity . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj to xxmaj england , if you will . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj bind up your hairs . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj yes , that i will ; and wherefore will i do it ? 
▁ i tore them from their bonds , and cried aloud 
▁ ' o that these hands could so redeem my son , 
▁ xxmaj as they have given these hairs their liberty ! ' 
▁ xxmaj but now i envy at their liberty , 
▁ xxmaj and will again commit them to their bonds , 
▁ xxmaj because my poor child is a prisoner . 
▁ xxmaj and , father xxmaj cardinal , i have heard you say 
▁ xxmaj that we shall see and know our friends in heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj if that be true , i shall see my boy again ; 
▁ xxmaj for since the birth of xxmaj cain , the first male child , 
▁ xxmaj to him that did but yesterday suspire , 
▁ xxmaj there was not such a gracious creature born . 
▁ xxmaj but now will canker sorrow eat my bud 
▁ xxmaj and chase the native beauty from his cheek , 
▁ xxmaj and he will look as hollow as a ghost , 
▁ xxmaj as dim and meagre as an ague 's fit ; 
▁ xxmaj and so he 'll die ; and , rising so again , 
▁ xxmaj when i shall meet him in the court of heaven 
▁ i shall not know him . xxmaj therefore never , never 
▁ xxmaj must i behold my pretty xxmaj arthur more . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj you hold too heinous a respect of grief . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj he talks to me that never had a son . 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . xxmaj you are as fond of grief as of your child . 
▁ xxup constance . xxmaj grief fills the room up of my absent child , 
▁ xxmaj lies in his bed , walks up and down with me , 
▁ xxmaj puts on his pretty looks , repeats his words , 
▁ xxmaj remembers me of all his gracious parts , 
▁ xxmaj stuffs out his vacant garments with his form ; 
▁ xxmaj then have i reason to be fond of grief . 
▁ xxmaj fare you well ; had you such a loss as xxup i , 
▁ i could give better comfort than you do . 
▁ i will not keep this form upon my head , 
▁ [ tearing her hair ] 
▁ xxmaj when there is such disorder in my wit . 
▁ o xxmaj lord ! my boy , my xxmaj arthur , my fair son ! 
▁ xxmaj my life , my joy , my food , my ail the world ! 
▁ xxmaj my widow - comfort , and my sorrows ' cure ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup philip . i fear some outrage , and xxmaj i 'll follow her . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj there 's nothing in this world can make me joy . 
▁ xxmaj life is as tedious as a twice - told tale 
▁ xxmaj vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man ; 
▁ xxmaj and bitter shame hath spoil'd the sweet world 's taste , 
▁ xxmaj that it yields nought but shame and bitterness . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj before the curing of a strong disease , 
▁ xxmaj even in the instant of repair and health , 
▁ xxmaj the fit is strongest ; evils that take leave 
▁ xxmaj on their departure most of all show evil ; 
▁ xxmaj what have you lost by losing of this day ? 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj all days of glory , joy , and happiness . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj if you had won it , certainly you had . 
▁ xxmaj no , no ; when xxmaj fortune means to men most good , 
▁ xxmaj she looks upon them with a threat'ning eye . 
▁ ' tis strange to think how much xxmaj king xxmaj john hath lost 
▁ xxmaj in this which he accounts so clearly won . 
▁ xxmaj are not you griev'd that xxmaj arthur is his prisoner ? 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj as heartily as he is glad he hath him . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj your mind is all as youthful as your blood . 
▁ xxmaj now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit ; 
▁ xxmaj for even the breath of what i mean to speak 
▁ xxmaj shall blow each dust , each straw , each little rub , 
▁ xxmaj out of the path which shall directly lead 
▁ xxmaj thy foot to xxmaj england 's throne . xxmaj and therefore mark : 
▁ xxmaj john hath seiz'd xxmaj arthur ; and it can not be 
▁ xxmaj that , whiles warm life plays in that infant 's veins , 
▁ xxmaj the misplac'd xxmaj john should entertain an hour , 
▁ xxmaj one minute , nay , one quiet breath of rest . 
▁ a sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand 
▁ xxmaj must be boisterously maintain'd as gain'd , 
▁ xxmaj and he that stands upon a slipp'ry place 
▁ xxmaj makes nice of no vile hold to stay him up ; 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj john may stand then , xxmaj arthur needs must fall ; 
▁ xxmaj so be it , for it can not be but so . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj but what shall i gain by young xxmaj arthur 's fall ? 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj you , in the right of xxmaj lady xxmaj blanch your wife , 
▁ xxmaj may then make all the claim that xxmaj arthur did . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj and lose it , life and all , as xxmaj arthur did . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj how green you are and fresh in this old world ! 
▁ xxmaj john lays you plots ; the times conspire with you ; 
▁ xxmaj for he that steeps his safety in true blood 
▁ xxmaj shall find but bloody safety and untrue . 
▁ xxmaj this act , so evilly borne , shall cool the hearts 
▁ xxmaj of all his people and freeze up their zeal , 
▁ xxmaj that none so small advantage shall step forth 
▁ xxmaj to check his reign but they will cherish it ; 
▁ xxmaj no natural exhalation in the sky , 
▁ xxmaj no scope of nature , no distemper'd day , 
▁ xxmaj no common wind , no customed event , 
▁ xxmaj but they will pluck away his natural cause 
▁ xxmaj and call them meteors , prodigies , and signs , 
▁ xxmaj abortives , presages , and tongues of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj plainly denouncing vengeance upon xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj may be he will not touch young xxmaj arthur 's life , 
▁ xxmaj but hold himself safe in his prisonment . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxup o , xxmaj sir , when he shall hear of your approach , 
▁ xxmaj if that young xxmaj arthur be not gone already , 
▁ xxmaj even at that news he dies ; and then the hearts 
▁ xxmaj of all his people shall revolt from him , 
▁ xxmaj and kiss the lips of unacquainted change , 
▁ xxmaj and pick strong matter of revolt and wrath 
▁ xxmaj out of the bloody fingers ' ends of john . 
▁ xxmaj methinks i see this hurly all on foot ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxup o , what better matter breeds for you 
▁ xxmaj than i have nam'd ! xxmaj the bastard xxmaj faulconbridge 
▁ xxmaj is now in xxmaj england ransacking the xxmaj church , 
▁ xxmaj offending charity ; if but a dozen xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj were there in arms , they would be as a can 
▁ xxmaj to train ten thousand xxmaj english to their side ; 
▁ xxmaj or as a little snow , tumbled about , 
▁ xxmaj anon becomes a mountain . o noble xxmaj dauphin , 
▁ xxmaj go with me to the xxmaj king . ' tis wonderful 
▁ xxmaj what may be wrought out of their discontent , 
▁ xxmaj now that their souls are topful of offence . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj england go ; i will whet on the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj strong reasons makes strong actions . xxmaj let us go ; 
▁ xxmaj if you say ay , the xxmaj king will not say no . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj england . a castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup hubert and xxup executioners 

▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj heat me these irons hot ; and look thou stand 
▁ xxmaj within the arras . xxmaj when i strike my foot 
▁ xxmaj upon the bosom of the ground , rush forth 
▁ xxmaj and bind the boy which you shall find with me 
▁ xxmaj fast to the chair . xxmaj be heedful ; hence , and watch . 
▁ xxup executioner . i hope your warrant will bear out the deed . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj uncleanly scruples ! xxmaj fear not you . xxmaj look to't . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup executioners 
▁ xxmaj young lad , come forth ; i have to say with you . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup arthur 

▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj hubert . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj good morrow , little xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj as little prince , having so great a tide 
▁ xxmaj to be more prince , as may be . xxmaj you are sad . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj indeed i have been merrier . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj mercy on me ! 
▁ xxmaj methinks no body should be sad but xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , i remember , when i was in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj young gentlemen would be as sad as night , 
▁ xxmaj only for wantonness . xxmaj by my christendom , 
▁ xxmaj so i were out of prison and kept sheep , 
▁ i should be as merry as the day is long ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i would be here but that i doubt 
▁ xxmaj my uncle practises more harm to me ; 
▁ xxmaj he is afraid of me , and i of him . 
▁ xxmaj is it my fault that i was xxmaj geffrey 's son ? 
▁ xxmaj no , indeed , ist not ; and i would to heaven 
▁ i were your son , so you would love me , xxmaj hubert . 
▁ xxup hubert . [ aside ] xxmaj if i talk to him , with his innocent prate 
▁ xxmaj he will awake my mercy , which lies dead ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore i will be sudden and dispatch . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj are you sick , xxmaj hubert ? xxmaj you look pale to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj in sooth , i would you were a little sick , 
▁ xxmaj that i might sit all night and watch with you . 
▁ i warrant i love you more than you do me . 
▁ xxup hubert . [ aside ] xxmaj his words do take possession of my bosom.- 
▁ xxmaj read here , young xxmaj arthur . [ showing a paper ] 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj how now , foolish rheum ! 
▁ xxmaj turning dispiteous torture out of door ! 
▁ i must be brief , lest resolution drop 
▁ xxmaj out at mine eyes in tender womanish tears.- 
▁ xxmaj can you not read it ? xxmaj is it not fair writ ? 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj too fairly , xxmaj hubert , for so foul effect . 
▁ xxmaj must you with hot irons burn out both mine eyes ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj young boy , i must . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj and will you ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj and i will . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj have you the heart ? xxmaj when your head did but ache , 
▁ i knit my handkerchief about your brows- 
▁ xxmaj the best i had , a princess wrought it me- 
▁ xxmaj and i did never ask it you again ; 
▁ xxmaj and with my hand at midnight held your head ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like the watchful minutes to the hour , 
▁ xxmaj still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time , 
▁ xxmaj saying ' what lack you ? ' and ' where lies your grief ? ' 
▁ xxmaj or ' what good love may i perform for you ? ' 
▁ xxmaj many a poor man 's son would have lyen still , 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er have spoke a loving word to you ; 
▁ xxmaj but you at your sick service had a prince . 
▁ xxmaj nay , you may think my love was crafty love , 
▁ xxmaj and call it cunning . xxmaj do , an if you will . 
▁ xxmaj if heaven be pleas'd that you must use me ill , 
▁ xxmaj why , then you must . xxmaj will you put out mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj these eyes that never did nor never shall 
▁ xxmaj so much as frown on you ? 
▁ xxup hubert . i have sworn to do it ; 
▁ xxmaj and with hot irons must i burn them out . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj ah , none but in this iron age would do it ! 
▁ xxmaj the iron of itself , though heat red - hot , 
▁ xxmaj approaching near these eyes would drink my tears , 
▁ xxmaj and quench his fiery indignation 
▁ xxmaj even in the matter of mine innocence ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , after that , consume away in rust 
▁ xxmaj but for containing fire to harm mine eye . 
▁ xxmaj are you more stubborn - hard than hammer'd iron ? 
▁ xxmaj an if an angel should have come to me 
▁ xxmaj and told me xxmaj hubert should put out mine eyes , 
▁ i would not have believ'd him - no tongue but xxmaj hubert 's . 
▁ xxup hubert . [ stamps ] xxmaj come forth . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup executioners , xxmaj with cord , irons , etc . 

▁ xxmaj do as i bid you do . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxup o , save me , xxmaj hubert , save me ! xxmaj my eyes are out 
▁ xxmaj even with the fierce looks of these bloody men . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj give me the iron , i say , and bind him here . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj alas , what need you be so boist'rous rough ? 
▁ i will not struggle , i will stand stone - still . 
▁ xxmaj for heaven sake , xxmaj hubert , let me not be bound ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , hear me , xxmaj hubert ! xxmaj drive these men away , 
▁ xxmaj and i will sit as quiet as a lamb ; 
▁ i will not stir , nor wince , nor speak a word , 
▁ xxmaj nor look upon the iron angrily ; 
▁ xxmaj thrust but these men away , and xxmaj i 'll forgive you , 
▁ xxmaj whatever torment you do put me to . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj go , stand within ; let me alone with him . 
▁ xxup executioner . i am best pleas'd to be from such a deed . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup executioners 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj alas , i then have chid away my friend ! 
▁ xxmaj he hath a stern look but a gentle heart . 
▁ xxmaj let him come back , that his compassion may 
▁ xxmaj give life to yours . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj come , boy , prepare yourself . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj is there no remedy ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj none , but to lose your eyes . 
▁ xxup arthur . o heaven , that there were but a mote in yours , 
▁ a grain , a dust , a gnat , a wandering hair , 
▁ xxmaj any annoyance in that precious sense ! 
▁ xxmaj then , feeling what small things are boisterous there , 
▁ xxmaj your vile intent must needs seem horrible . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj is this your promise ? xxmaj go to , hold your tongue . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj hubert , the utterance of a brace of tongues 
▁ xxmaj must needs want pleading for a pair of eyes . 
▁ xxmaj let me not hold my tongue , let me not , xxmaj hubert ; 
▁ xxmaj or , xxmaj hubert , if you will , cut out my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj so i may keep mine eyes . xxup o , spare mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj though to no use but still to look on you ! 
▁ xxmaj lo , by my troth , the instrument is cold 
▁ xxmaj and would not harm me . 
▁ xxup hubert . i can heat it , boy . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj no , in good sooth ; the fire is dead with grief , 
▁ xxmaj being create for comfort , to be us'd 
▁ xxmaj in undeserved extremes . xxmaj see else yourself : 
▁ xxmaj there is no malice in this burning coal ; 
▁ xxmaj the breath of heaven hath blown his spirit out , 
▁ xxmaj and strew'd repentant ashes on his head . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj but with my breath i can revive it , boy . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj an if you do , you will but make it blush 
▁ xxmaj and glow with shame of your proceedings , xxmaj hubert . 
▁ xxmaj nay , it perchance will sparkle in your eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and , like a dog that is compell'd to fight , 
▁ xxmaj snatch at his master that doth tarre him on . 
▁ xxmaj all things that you should use to do me wrong 
▁ xxmaj deny their office ; only you do lack 
▁ xxmaj that mercy which fierce fire and iron extends , 
▁ xxmaj creatures of note for mercy - lacking uses . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj well , see to live ; i will not touch thine eye 
▁ xxmaj for all the treasure that thine uncle owes . 
▁ xxmaj yet i am sworn , and i did purpose , boy , 
▁ xxmaj with this same very iron to burn them out . 
▁ xxup arthur . xxup o , now you look like xxmaj hubert ! xxmaj all this while 
▁ xxmaj you were disguis'd . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj peace ; no more . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ xxmaj your uncle must not know but you are dead : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fill these dogged spies with false reports ; 
▁ xxmaj and , pretty child , sleep doubtless and secure 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj hubert , for the wealth of all the world , 
▁ xxmaj will not offend thee . 
▁ xxup arthur . o heaven ! i thank you , xxmaj hubert . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj silence ; no more . xxmaj go closely in with me . 
▁ xxmaj much danger do i undergo for thee . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj england . xxup king xxup john 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup pembroke , xxup salisbury , and other xxup lords 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj here once again we sit , once again crown'd , 
▁ xxmaj and look'd upon , i hope , with cheerful eyes . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj this once again , but that your xxmaj highness pleas'd , 
▁ xxmaj was once superfluous : you were crown'd before , 
▁ xxmaj and that high royalty was ne'er pluck'd off , 
▁ xxmaj the faiths of men ne'er stained with revolt ; 
▁ xxmaj fresh expectation troubled not the land 
▁ xxmaj with any long'd - for change or better state . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj therefore , to be possess'd with double pomp , 
▁ xxmaj to guard a title that was rich before , 
▁ xxmaj to gild refined gold , to paint the lily , 
▁ xxmaj to throw a perfume on the violet , 
▁ xxmaj to smooth the ice , or add another hue 
▁ xxmaj unto the rainbow , or with taper - light 
▁ xxmaj to seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish , 
▁ xxmaj is wasteful and ridiculous excess . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj but that your royal pleasure must be done , 
▁ xxmaj this act is as an ancient tale new told 
▁ xxmaj and , in the last repeating , troublesome , 
▁ xxmaj being urged at a time unseasonable . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj in this the antique and well - noted face 
▁ xxmaj of plain old form is much disfigured ; 
▁ xxmaj and like a shifted wind unto a sail 
▁ xxmaj it makes the course of thoughts to fetch about , 
▁ xxmaj startles and frights consideration , 
▁ xxmaj makes sound opinion sick , and truth suspected , 
▁ xxmaj for putting on so new a fashion'd robe . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj when workmen strive to do better than well , 
▁ xxmaj they do confound their skill in covetousness ; 
▁ xxmaj and oftentimes excusing of a fault 
▁ xxmaj doth make the fault the worse by th ' excuse , 
▁ xxmaj as patches set upon a little breach 
▁ xxmaj discredit more in hiding of the fault 
▁ xxmaj than did the fault before it was so patch'd . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj to this effect , before you were new - crown'd , 
▁ xxmaj we breath'd our counsel ; but it pleas'd your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj to overbear it ; and we are all well pleas'd , 
▁ xxmaj since all and every part of what we would 
▁ xxmaj doth make a stand at what your xxmaj highness will . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj some reasons of this double coronation 
▁ i have possess'd you with , and think them strong ; 
▁ xxmaj and more , more strong , when lesser is my fear , 
▁ i shall indue you with . xxmaj meantime but ask 
▁ xxmaj what you would have reform'd that is not well , 
▁ xxmaj and well shall you perceive how willingly 
▁ i will both hear and grant you your requests . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj then xxup i , as one that am the tongue of these , 
▁ xxmaj to sound the purposes of all their hearts , 
▁ xxmaj both for myself and them- but , chief of all , 
▁ xxmaj your safety , for the which myself and them 
▁ xxmaj bend their best studies , heartily request 
▁ xxmaj th ' enfranchisement of xxmaj arthur , whose restraint 
▁ xxmaj doth move the murmuring lips of discontent 
▁ xxmaj to break into this dangerous argument : 
▁ xxmaj if what in rest you have in right you hold , 
▁ xxmaj why then your fears - which , as they say , attend 
▁ xxmaj the steps of wrong - should move you to mew up 
▁ xxmaj your tender kinsman , and to choke his days 
▁ xxmaj with barbarous ignorance , and deny his youth 
▁ xxmaj the rich advantage of good exercise ? 
▁ xxmaj that the time 's enemies may not have this 
▁ xxmaj to grace occasions , let it be our suit 
▁ xxmaj that you have bid us ask his liberty ; 
▁ xxmaj which for our goods we do no further ask 
▁ xxmaj than whereupon our weal , on you depending , 
▁ xxmaj counts it your weal he have his liberty . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj let it be so . i do commit his youth 
▁ xxmaj to your direction . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hubert 

▁ [ aside ] xxmaj hubert , what news with you ? 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj this is the man should do the bloody deed : 
▁ xxmaj he show'd his warrant to a friend of mine ; 
▁ xxmaj the image of a wicked heinous fault 
▁ xxmaj lives in his eye ; that close aspect of his 
▁ xxmaj doth show the mood of a much troubled breast , 
▁ xxmaj and i do fearfully believe ' tis done 
▁ xxmaj what we so fear'd he had a charge to do . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj the colour of the xxmaj king doth come and go 
▁ xxmaj between his purpose and his conscience , 
▁ xxmaj like heralds ' twixt two dreadful battles set . 
▁ xxmaj his passion is so ripe it needs must break . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj and when it breaks , i fear will issue thence 
▁ xxmaj the foul corruption of a sweet child 's death . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj we can not hold mortality 's strong hand . 
▁ xxmaj good lords , although my will to give is living , 
▁ xxmaj the suit which you demand is gone and dead : 
▁ xxmaj he tells us xxmaj arthur is deceas'd to - night . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj indeed , we fear'd his sickness was past cure . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj indeed , we heard how near his death he was , 
▁ xxmaj before the child himself felt he was sick . 
▁ xxmaj this must be answer'd either here or hence . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj why do you bend such solemn brows on me ? 
▁ xxmaj think you i bear the shears of destiny ? 
▁ xxmaj have i commandment on the pulse of life ? 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj it is apparent foul - play ; and ' tis shame 
▁ xxmaj that greatness should so grossly offer it . 
▁ xxmaj so thrive it in your game ! and so , farewell . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj stay yet , xxmaj lord xxmaj salisbury , xxmaj i 'll go with thee 
▁ xxmaj and find th ' inheritance of this poor child , 
▁ xxmaj his little kingdom of a forced grave . 
▁ xxmaj that blood which ow'd the breadth of all this isle 
▁ xxmaj three foot of it doth hold - bad world the while ! 
▁ xxmaj this must not be thus borne : this will break out 
▁ xxmaj to all our sorrows , and ere long i doubt . xxmaj exeunt xxup lords 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj they burn in indignation . i repent . 
▁ xxmaj there is no sure foundation set on blood , 
▁ xxmaj no certain life achiev'd by others ' death . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ a fearful eye thou hast ; where is that blood 
▁ xxmaj that i have seen inhabit in those cheeks ? 
▁ xxmaj so foul a sky clears not without a storm . 
▁ xxmaj pour down thy weather - how goes all in xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj from xxmaj france to xxmaj england . xxmaj never such a pow'r 
▁ xxmaj for any foreign preparation 
▁ xxmaj was levied in the body of a land . 
▁ xxmaj the copy of your speed is learn'd by them , 
▁ xxmaj for when you should be told they do prepare , 
▁ xxmaj the tidings comes that they are all arriv'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxup o , where hath our intelligence been drunk ? 
▁ xxmaj where hath it slept ? xxmaj where is my mother 's care , 
▁ xxmaj that such an army could be drawn in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and she not hear of it ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my liege , her ear 
▁ xxmaj is stopp'd with dust : the first of xxmaj april died 
▁ xxmaj your noble mother ; and as i hear , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lady xxmaj constance in a frenzy died 
▁ xxmaj three days before ; but this from rumour 's tongue 
▁ i idly heard - if true or false i know not . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj withhold thy speed , dreadful occasion ! 
▁ xxup o , make a league with me , till i have pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj my discontented peers ! xxmaj what ! mother dead ! 
▁ xxmaj how wildly then walks my estate in xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxmaj under whose conduct came those pow'rs of xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj that thou for truth giv'st out are landed here ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj under the xxmaj dauphin . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj thou hast made me giddy 
▁ xxmaj with these in tidings . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup bastard and xxup peter xxup of xxup pomfret 

▁ xxmaj now ! xxmaj what says the world 
▁ xxmaj to your proceedings ? xxmaj do not seek to stuff 
▁ xxmaj my head with more ill news , for it is fun . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj but if you be afear'd to hear the worst , 
▁ xxmaj then let the worst , unheard , fall on your head . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj bear with me , cousin , for i was amaz'd 
▁ xxmaj under the tide ; but now i breathe again 
▁ xxmaj aloft the flood , and can give audience 
▁ xxmaj to any tongue , speak it of what it will . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj how i have sped among the clergymen 
▁ xxmaj the sums i have collected shall express . 
▁ xxmaj but as i travell'd hither through the land , 
▁ i find the people strangely fantasied ; 
▁ xxmaj possess'd with rumours , full of idle dreams . 
▁ xxmaj not knowing what they fear , but full of fear ; 
▁ xxmaj and here 's a prophet that i brought with me 
▁ xxmaj from forth the streets of xxmaj pomfret , whom i found 
▁ xxmaj with many hundreds treading on his heels ; 
▁ xxmaj to whom he sung , in rude harsh - sounding rhymes , 
▁ xxmaj that , ere the next xxmaj ascension - day at noon , 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness should deliver up your crown . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj thou idle dreamer , wherefore didst thou so ? 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj foreknowing that the truth will fall out so . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj hubert , away with him ; imprison him ; 
▁ xxmaj and on that day at noon whereon he says 
▁ i shall yield up my crown let him be hang'd . 
▁ xxmaj deliver him to safety ; and return , 
▁ xxmaj for i must use thee . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup hubert with xxup peter 
▁ o my gentle cousin , 
▁ xxmaj hear'st thou the news abroad , who are arriv'd ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj the xxmaj french , my lord ; men 's mouths are full of it ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , i met xxmaj lord xxmaj bigot and xxmaj lord xxmaj salisbury , 
▁ xxmaj with eyes as red as new - enkindled fire , 
▁ xxmaj and others more , going to seek the grave 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj arthur , whom they say is kill'd to - night 
▁ xxmaj on your suggestion . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj gentle kinsman , go 
▁ xxmaj and thrust thyself into their companies . 
▁ i have a way to will their loves again ; 
▁ xxmaj bring them before me . 
▁ xxup bastard . i xxmaj will seek them out . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj nay , but make haste ; the better foot before . 
▁ xxup o , let me have no subject enemies 
▁ xxmaj when adverse foreigners affright my towns 
▁ xxmaj with dreadful pomp of stout invasion ! 
▁ xxmaj be xxmaj mercury , set feathers to thy heels , 
▁ xxmaj and fly like thought from them to me again . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj the spirit of the time shall teach me speed . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj spoke like a sprightful noble gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup bastard 
▁ xxmaj go after him ; for he perhaps shall need 
▁ xxmaj some messenger betwixt me and the peers ; 
▁ xxmaj and be thou he . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj with all my heart , my liege . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj my mother dead ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup hubert 

▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj my lord , they say five moons were seen to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj four fixed , and the fifth did whirl about 
▁ xxmaj the other four in wondrous motion . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj five moons ! 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj old men and beldams in the streets 
▁ xxmaj do prophesy upon it dangerously ; 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj arthur 's death is common in their mouths ; 
▁ xxmaj and when they talk of him , they shake their heads , 
▁ xxmaj and whisper one another in the ear ; 
▁ xxmaj and he that speaks doth gripe the hearer 's wrist , 
▁ xxmaj whilst he that hears makes fearful action 
▁ xxmaj with wrinkled brows , with nods , with rolling eyes . 
▁ i saw a smith stand with his hammer , thus , 
▁ xxmaj the whilst his iron did on the anvil cool , 
▁ xxmaj with open mouth swallowing a tailor 's news ; 
▁ xxmaj who , with his shears and measure in his hand , 
▁ xxmaj standing on slippers , which his nimble haste 
▁ xxmaj had falsely thrust upon contrary feet , 
▁ xxmaj told of a many thousand warlike xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj that were embattailed and rank'd in xxmaj kent . 
▁ xxmaj another lean unwash'd artificer 
▁ xxmaj cuts off his tale , and talks of xxmaj arthur 's death . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj why seek'st thou to possess me with these fears ? 
▁ xxmaj why urgest thou so oft young xxmaj arthur 's death ? 
▁ xxmaj thy hand hath murd'red him . i had a mighty cause 
▁ xxmaj to wish him dead , but thou hadst none to kill him . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj no had , my lord ! xxmaj why , did you not provoke me ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj it is the curse of kings to be attended 
▁ xxmaj by slaves that take their humours for a warrant 
▁ xxmaj to break within the bloody house of life , 
▁ xxmaj and on the winking of authority 
▁ xxmaj to understand a law ; to know the meaning 
▁ xxmaj of dangerous majesty , when perchance it frowns 
▁ xxmaj more upon humour than advis'd respect . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj here is your hand and seal for what i did . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxup o , when the last account ' twixt heaven and earth 
▁ xxmaj is to be made , then shall this hand and seal 
▁ xxmaj witness against us to damnation ! 
▁ xxmaj how oft the sight of means to do ill deeds 
▁ xxmaj make deeds ill done ! xxmaj hadst not thou been by , 
▁ a fellow by the hand of nature mark'd , 
▁ xxmaj quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame , 
▁ xxmaj this murder had not come into my mind ; 
▁ xxmaj but , taking note of thy abhorr'd aspect , 
▁ xxmaj finding thee fit for bloody villainy , 
▁ xxmaj apt , liable to be employ'd in danger , 
▁ i faintly broke with thee of xxmaj arthur 's death ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou , to be endeared to a king , 
▁ xxmaj made it no conscience to destroy a prince . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj hadst thou but shook thy head or made pause , 
▁ xxmaj when i spake darkly what i purposed , 
▁ xxmaj or turn'd an eye of doubt upon my face , 
▁ xxmaj as bid me tell my tale in express words , 
▁ xxmaj deep shame had struck me dumb , made me break off , 
▁ xxmaj and those thy fears might have wrought fears in me . 
▁ xxmaj but thou didst understand me by my signs , 
▁ xxmaj and didst in signs again parley with sin ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , without stop , didst let thy heart consent , 
▁ xxmaj and consequently thy rude hand to act 
▁ xxmaj the deed which both our tongues held vile to name . 
▁ xxmaj out of my sight , and never see me more ! 
▁ xxmaj my nobles leave me ; and my state is braved , 
▁ xxmaj even at my gates , with ranks of foreign pow'rs ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , in the body of the fleshly land , 
▁ xxmaj this kingdom , this confine of blood and breath , 
▁ xxmaj hostility and civil tumult reigns 
▁ xxmaj between my conscience and my cousin 's death . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj arm you against your other enemies , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make a peace between your soul and you . 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj arthur is alive . xxmaj this hand of mine 
▁ xxmaj is yet a maiden and an innocent hand , 
▁ xxmaj not painted with the crimson spots of blood . 
▁ xxmaj within this bosom never ent'red yet 
▁ xxmaj the dreadful motion of a murderous thought 
▁ xxmaj and you have slander'd nature in my form , 
▁ xxmaj which , howsoever rude exteriorly , 
▁ xxmaj is yet the cover of a fairer mind 
▁ xxmaj than to be butcher of an innocent child . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj doth xxmaj arthur live ? xxup o , haste thee to the peers , 
▁ xxmaj throw this report on their incensed rage 
▁ xxmaj and make them tame to their obedience ! 
▁ xxmaj forgive the comment that my passion made 
▁ xxmaj upon thy feature ; for my rage was blind , 
▁ xxmaj and foul imaginary eyes of blood 
▁ xxmaj presented thee more hideous than thou art . 
▁ xxup o , answer not ; but to my closet bring 
▁ xxmaj the angry lords with all expedient haste . 
▁ i conjure thee but slowly ; run more fast . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj england . xxmaj before the castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup arthur , on the walls 

▁ xxup arthur . xxmaj the wall is high , and yet will i leap down . 
▁ xxmaj good ground , be pitiful and hurt me not ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's few or none do know me ; if they did , 
▁ xxmaj this ship - boy 's semblance hath disguis'd me quite . 
▁ i am afraid ; and yet xxmaj i 'll venture it . 
▁ xxmaj if i get down and do not break my limbs , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find a thousand shifts to get away . 
▁ xxmaj as good to die and go , as die and stay . [ leaps down ] 
▁ o me ! my uncle 's spirit is in these stones . 
▁ xxmaj heaven take my soul , and xxmaj england keep my bones ! 
▁ [ dies ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pembroke , xxup salisbury , and xxup bigot 

▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj lords , i will meet him at xxmaj saint xxmaj edmundsbury ; 
▁ xxmaj it is our safety , and we must embrace 
▁ xxmaj this gentle offer of the perilous time . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj who brought that letter from the xxmaj cardinal ? 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj the xxmaj count xxmaj melun , a noble lord of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj whose private with me of the xxmaj dauphin 's love 
▁ xxmaj is much more general than these lines import . 
▁ xxup bigot . xxmaj to - morrow morning let us meet him then . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj or rather then set forward ; for ' twill be 
▁ xxmaj two long days ' journey , lords , or ere we meet . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup bastard 

▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj once more to - day well met , distemper'd lords ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king by me requests your presence straight . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath dispossess'd himself of us . 
▁ xxmaj we will not line his thin bestained cloak 
▁ xxmaj with our pure honours , nor attend the foot 
▁ xxmaj that leaves the print of blood where'er it walks . 
▁ xxmaj return and tell him so . xxmaj we know the worst . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj whate'er you think , good words , i think , were best . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj our griefs , and not our manners , reason now . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj but there is little reason in your grief ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore ' twere reason you had manners now . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj sir , sir , impatience hath his privilege . 
▁ xxup bastard . ' tis true - to hurt his master , no man else . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj this is the prison . xxmaj what is he lies here ? 
▁ xxup pembroke . o death , made proud with pure and princely beauty ! 
▁ xxmaj the earth had not a hole to hide this deed . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj murder , as hating what himself hath done , 
▁ xxmaj doth lay it open to urge on revenge . 
▁ xxup bigot . xxmaj or , when he doom'd this beauty to a grave , 
▁ xxmaj found it too precious - princely for a grave . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj sir xxmaj richard , what think you ? xxmaj have you beheld , 
▁ xxmaj or have you read or heard , or could you think ? 
▁ xxmaj or do you almost think , although you see , 
▁ xxmaj that you do see ? xxmaj could thought , without this object , 
▁ xxmaj form such another ? xxmaj this is the very top , 
▁ xxmaj the height , the crest , or crest unto the crest , 
▁ xxmaj of murder 's arms ; this is the bloodiest shame , 
▁ xxmaj the wildest savagery , the vilest stroke , 
▁ xxmaj that ever wall - ey'd wrath or staring rage 
▁ xxmaj presented to the tears of soft remorse . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj all murders past do stand excus'd in this ; 
▁ xxmaj and this , so sole and so unmatchable , 
▁ xxmaj shall give a holiness , a purity , 
▁ xxmaj to the yet unbegotten sin of times , 
▁ xxmaj and prove a deadly bloodshed but a jest , 
▁ xxmaj exampled by this heinous spectacle . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj it is a damned and a bloody work ; 
▁ xxmaj the graceless action of a heavy hand , 
▁ xxmaj if that it be the work of any hand . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj if that it be the work of any hand ! 
▁ xxmaj we had a kind of light what would ensue . 
▁ xxmaj it is the shameful work of xxmaj hubert 's hand ; 
▁ xxmaj the practice and the purpose of the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj from whose obedience i forbid my soul 
▁ xxmaj kneeling before this ruin of sweet life , 
▁ xxmaj and breathing to his breathless excellence 
▁ xxmaj the incense of a vow , a holy vow , 
▁ xxmaj never to taste the pleasures of the world , 
▁ xxmaj never to be infected with delight , 
▁ xxmaj nor conversant with ease and idleness , 
▁ xxmaj till i have set a glory to this hand 
▁ xxmaj by giving it the worship of revenge . 
▁ xxup pembroke . and xxup bigot . xxmaj our souls religiously confirm thy words . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hubert 

▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj lords , i am hot with haste in seeking you . 
▁ xxmaj arthur doth live ; the xxmaj king hath sent for you . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxup o , he is bold , and blushes not at death ! 
▁ xxmaj avaunt , thou hateful villain , get thee gone ! 
▁ xxup hubert . i am no villain . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj must i rob the law ? [ drawing his sword ] 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj your sword is bright , sir ; put it up again . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj not till i sheathe it in a murderer 's skin . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj stand back , xxmaj lord xxmaj salisbury , stand back , i say ; 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i think my sword 's as sharp as yours . 
▁ i would not have you , lord , forget yourself , 
▁ xxmaj nor tempt the danger of my true defence ; 
▁ xxmaj lest xxup i , by marking of your rage , forget 
▁ xxmaj your worth , your greatness and nobility . 
▁ xxup bigot . xxmaj out , dunghill ! xxmaj dar'st thou brave a nobleman ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj not for my life ; but yet i dare defend 
▁ xxmaj my innocent life against an emperor . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj thou art a murderer . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj do not prove me so . 
▁ xxmaj yet i am none . xxmaj whose tongue soe'er speaks false , 
▁ xxmaj not truly speaks ; who speaks not truly , lies . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj cut him to pieces . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj keep the peace , i say . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj stand by , or i shall gall you , xxmaj faulconbridge . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj thou wert better gall the devil , xxmaj salisbury . 
▁ xxmaj if thou but frown on me , or stir thy foot , 
▁ xxmaj or teach thy hasty spleen to do me shame , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll strike thee dead . xxmaj put up thy sword betime ; 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj i 'll so maul you and your toasting - iron 
▁ xxmaj that you shall think the devil is come from hell . 
▁ xxup bigot . xxmaj what wilt thou do , renowned xxmaj faulconbridge ? 
▁ xxmaj second a villain and a murderer ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj lord xxmaj bigot , i am none . 
▁ xxup bigot . xxmaj who kill'd this prince ? 
▁ xxup hubert . ' tis not an hour since i left him well . 
▁ i honour'd him , i lov'd him , and will weep 
▁ xxmaj my date of life out for his sweet life 's loss . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj trust not those cunning waters of his eyes , 
▁ xxmaj for villainy is not without such rheum ; 
▁ xxmaj and he , long traded in it , makes it seem 
▁ xxmaj like rivers of remorse and innocency . 
▁ xxmaj away with me , all you whose souls abhor 
▁ xxmaj th ' uncleanly savours of a slaughter - house ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am stifled with this smell of sin . 
▁ xxup bigot . xxmaj away toward xxmaj bury , to the xxmaj dauphin there ! 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj there tell the xxmaj king he may inquire us out . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lords 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj here 's a good world ! xxmaj knew you of this fair work ? 
▁ xxmaj beyond the infinite and boundless reach 
▁ xxmaj of mercy , if thou didst this deed of death , 
▁ xxmaj art thou damn'd , xxmaj hubert . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj do but hear me , sir . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj i 'll tell thee what : 
▁ xxmaj thou'rt damn'd as black - nay , nothing is so black- 
▁ xxmaj thou art more deep damn'd than xxmaj prince xxmaj lucifer ; 
▁ xxmaj there is not yet so ugly a fiend of hell 
▁ xxmaj as thou shalt be , if thou didst kill this child . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj upon my soul- 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj if thou didst but consent 
▁ xxmaj to this most cruel act , do but despair ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thou want'st a cord , the smallest thread 
▁ xxmaj that ever spider twisted from her womb 
▁ xxmaj will serve to strangle thee ; a rush will be a beam 
▁ xxmaj to hang thee on ; or wouldst thou drown thyself , 
▁ xxmaj put but a little water in a spoon 
▁ xxmaj and it shall be as all the ocean , 
▁ xxmaj enough to stifle such a villain up 
▁ i do suspect thee very grievously . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj if i in act , consent , or sin of thought , 
▁ xxmaj be guilty of the stealing that sweet breath 
▁ xxmaj which was embounded in this beauteous clay , 
▁ xxmaj let hell want pains enough to torture me ! 
▁ i left him well . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj go , bear him in thine arms . 
▁ i am amaz'd , methinks , and lose my way 
▁ xxmaj among the thorns and dangers of this world . 
▁ xxmaj how easy dost thou take all xxmaj england up ! 
▁ xxmaj from forth this morsel of dead royalty 
▁ xxmaj the life , the right , and truth of all this realm 
▁ xxmaj is fled to heaven ; and xxmaj england now is left 
▁ xxmaj to tug and scamble , and to part by th ' teeth 
▁ xxmaj the unowed interest of proud - swelling state . 
▁ xxmaj now for the bare - pick'd bone of majesty 
▁ xxmaj doth dogged war bristle his angry crest 
▁ xxmaj and snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace ; 
▁ xxmaj now powers from home and discontents at home 
▁ xxmaj meet in one line ; and vast confusion waits , 
▁ xxmaj as doth a raven on a sick - fall'n beast , 
▁ xxmaj the imminent decay of wrested pomp . 
▁ xxmaj now happy he whose cloak and cincture can 
▁ xxmaj hold out this tempest . xxmaj bear away that child , 
▁ xxmaj and follow me with speed . xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj king ; 
▁ a thousand businesses are brief in hand , 
▁ xxmaj and heaven itself doth frown upon the land . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj england . xxup king xxup john 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john , xxup pandulph , and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj thus have i yielded up into your hand 
▁ xxmaj the circle of my glory . 
▁ xxup pandulph . [ gives back the crown ] xxmaj take again 
▁ xxmaj from this my hand , as holding of the xxmaj pope , 
▁ xxmaj your sovereign greatness and authority . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj now keep your holy word ; go meet the xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj and from his xxmaj holiness use all your power 
▁ xxmaj to stop their marches fore we are inflam'd . 
▁ xxmaj our discontented counties do revolt ; 
▁ xxmaj our people quarrel with obedience , 
▁ xxmaj swearing allegiance and the love of soul 
▁ xxmaj to stranger blood , to foreign royalty . 
▁ xxmaj this inundation of mistemp'red humour 
▁ xxmaj rests by you only to be qualified . 
▁ xxmaj then pause not ; for the present time 's so sick 
▁ xxmaj that present med'cine must be minist'red 
▁ xxmaj or overthrow incurable ensues . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj it was my breath that blew this tempest up , 
▁ xxmaj upon your stubborn usage of the xxmaj pope ; 
▁ xxmaj but since you are a gentle convertite , 
▁ xxmaj my tongue shall hush again this storm of war 
▁ xxmaj and make fair weather in your blust'ring land . 
▁ xxmaj on this xxmaj ascension - day , remember well , 
▁ xxmaj upon your oath of service to the xxmaj pope , 
▁ xxmaj go i to make the xxmaj french lay down their arms . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj is this xxmaj ascension - day ? xxmaj did not the prophet 
▁ xxmaj say that before xxmaj ascension - day at noon 
▁ xxmaj my crown i should give off ? xxmaj even so i have . 
▁ i did suppose it should be on constraint ; 
▁ xxmaj but , heaven be thank'd , it is but voluntary . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup bastard 

▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj all xxmaj kent hath yielded ; nothing there holds out 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj dover xxmaj castle . xxmaj london hath receiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj like a kind host , the xxmaj dauphin and his powers . 
▁ xxmaj your nobles will not hear you , but are gone 
▁ xxmaj to offer service to your enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj and wild amazement hurries up and down 
▁ xxmaj the little number of your doubtful friends . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj would not my lords return to me again 
▁ xxmaj after they heard young xxmaj arthur was alive ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj they found him dead , and cast into the streets , 
▁ xxmaj an empty casket , where the jewel of life 
▁ xxmaj by some damn'd hand was robbed and ta'en away . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj that villain xxmaj hubert told me he did live . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj so , on my soul , he did , for aught he knew . 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore do you droop ? xxmaj why look you sad ? 
▁ xxmaj be great in act , as you have been in thought ; 
▁ xxmaj let not the world see fear and sad distrust 
▁ xxmaj govern the motion of a kingly eye . 
▁ xxmaj be stirring as the time ; be fire with fire ; 
▁ xxmaj threaten the threat'ner , and outface the brow 
▁ xxmaj of bragging horror ; so shall inferior eyes , 
▁ xxmaj that borrow their behaviours from the great , 
▁ xxmaj grow great by your example and put on 
▁ xxmaj the dauntless spirit of resolution . 
▁ xxmaj away , and glister like the god of war 
▁ xxmaj when he intendeth to become the field ; 
▁ xxmaj show boldness and aspiring confidence . 
▁ xxmaj what , shall they seek the lion in his den , 
▁ xxmaj and fright him there , and make him tremble there ? 
▁ xxup o , let it not be said ! xxmaj forage , and run 
▁ xxmaj to meet displeasure farther from the doors 
▁ xxmaj and grapple with him ere he come so nigh . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj the legate of the xxmaj pope hath been with me , 
▁ xxmaj and i have made a happy peace with him ; 
▁ xxmaj and he hath promis'd to dismiss the powers 
▁ xxmaj led by the xxmaj dauphin . 
▁ xxup bastard . o inglorious league ! 
▁ xxmaj shall we , upon the footing of our land , 
▁ xxmaj send fair - play orders , and make compromise , 
▁ xxmaj insinuation , parley , and base truce , 
▁ xxmaj to arms invasive ? xxmaj shall a beardless boy , 
▁ a cock'red silken wanton , brave our fields 
▁ xxmaj and flesh his spirit in a warlike soil , 
▁ xxmaj mocking the air with colours idly spread , 
▁ xxmaj and find no check ? xxmaj let us , my liege , to arms . 
▁ xxmaj perchance the xxmaj cardinal can not make your peace ;