xxbos xxmaj or , if he do , let it at least be said 
▁ xxmaj they saw we had a purpose of defence . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj have thou the ordering of this present time . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj away , then , with good courage ! 
▁ xxmaj yet , i know 
▁ xxmaj our party may well meet a prouder foe . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj england . xxmaj the xxup dauphin 's camp at xxmaj saint xxmaj edmundsbury 

 xxmaj enter , in arms , xxup lewis , xxup salisbury , xxup melun , xxup pembroke , xxup bigot , and soldiers 

▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj melun , let this be copied out 
▁ xxmaj and keep it safe for our remembrance ; 
▁ xxmaj return the precedent to these lords again , 
▁ xxmaj that , having our fair order written down , 
▁ xxmaj both they and we , perusing o'er these notes , 
▁ xxmaj may know wherefore we took the sacrament , 
▁ xxmaj and keep our faiths firm and inviolable . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj upon our sides it never shall be broken . 
▁ xxmaj and , noble xxmaj dauphin , albeit we swear 
▁ a voluntary zeal and an unurg'd faith 
▁ xxmaj to your proceedings ; yet , believe me , xxmaj prince , 
▁ i am not glad that such a sore of time 
▁ xxmaj should seek a plaster by contemn'd revolt , 
▁ xxmaj and heal the inveterate canker of one wound 
▁ xxmaj by making many . xxup o , it grieves my soul 
▁ xxmaj that i must draw this metal from my side 
▁ xxmaj to be a widow - maker ! xxup o , and there 
▁ xxmaj where honourable rescue and defence 
▁ xxmaj cries out upon the name of xxmaj salisbury ! 
▁ xxmaj but such is the infection of the time 
▁ xxmaj that , for the health and physic of our right , 
▁ xxmaj we can not deal but with the very hand 
▁ xxmaj of stern injustice and confused wrong . 
▁ xxmaj and is't not pity , o my grieved friends ! 
▁ xxmaj that we , the sons and children of this isle , 
▁ xxmaj were born to see so sad an hour as this ; 
▁ xxmaj wherein we step after a stranger - march 
▁ xxmaj upon her gentle bosom , and fill up 
▁ xxmaj her enemies ' ranks - i must withdraw and weep 
▁ xxmaj upon the spot of this enforced cause- 
▁ xxmaj to grace the gentry of a land remote 
▁ xxmaj and follow unacquainted colours here ? 
▁ xxmaj what , here ? o nation , that thou couldst remove ! 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj neptune 's arms , who clippeth thee about , 
▁ xxmaj would bear thee from the knowledge of thyself 
▁ xxmaj and grapple thee unto a pagan shore , 
▁ xxmaj where these two xxmaj christian armies might combine 
▁ xxmaj the blood of malice in a vein of league , 
▁ xxmaj and not to spend it so unneighbourly ! 
▁ xxup lewis . a noble temper dost thou show in this ; 
▁ xxmaj and great affections wrestling in thy bosom 
▁ xxmaj doth make an earthquake of nobility . 
▁ xxup o , what a noble combat hast thou fought 
▁ xxmaj between compulsion and a brave respect ! 
▁ xxmaj let me wipe off this honourable dew 
▁ xxmaj that silverly doth progress on thy cheeks . 
▁ xxmaj my heart hath melted at a lady 's tears , 
▁ xxmaj being an ordinary inundation ; 
▁ xxmaj but this effusion of such manly drops , 
▁ xxmaj this show'r , blown up by tempest of the soul , 
▁ xxmaj startles mine eyes and makes me more amaz'd 
▁ xxmaj than had i seen the vaulty top of heaven 
▁ xxmaj figur'd quite o'er with burning meteors . 
▁ xxmaj lift up thy brow , renowned xxmaj salisbury , 
▁ xxmaj and with a great heart heave away this storm ; 
▁ xxmaj commend these waters to those baby eyes 
▁ xxmaj that never saw the giant world enrag'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor met with fortune other than at feasts , 
▁ xxmaj full of warm blood , of mirth , of gossiping . 
▁ xxmaj come , come ; for thou shalt thrust thy hand as deep 
▁ xxmaj into the purse of rich prosperity 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj lewis himself . xxmaj so , nobles , shall you all , 
▁ xxmaj that knit your sinews to the strength of mine . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pandulph 

▁ xxmaj and even there , methinks , an angel spake : 
▁ xxmaj look where the holy legate comes apace , 
▁ xxmaj to give us warrant from the hand of heaven 
▁ xxmaj and on our actions set the name of right 
▁ xxmaj with holy breath . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj hail , noble prince of xxmaj france ! 
▁ xxmaj the next is this : xxmaj king xxmaj john hath reconcil'd 
▁ xxmaj himself to xxmaj rome ; his spirit is come in , 
▁ xxmaj that so stood out against the holy xxmaj church , 
▁ xxmaj the great metropolis and see of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj therefore thy threat'ning colours now wind up 
▁ xxmaj and tame the savage spirit of wild war , 
▁ xxmaj that , like a lion fostered up at hand , 
▁ xxmaj it may lie gently at the foot of peace 
▁ xxmaj and be no further harmful than in show . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj your xxmaj grace shall pardon me , i will not back : 
▁ i am too high - born to be propertied , 
▁ xxmaj to be a secondary at control , 
▁ xxmaj or useful serving - man and instrument 
▁ xxmaj to any sovereign state throughout the world . 
▁ xxmaj your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars 
▁ xxmaj between this chastis'd kingdom and myself 
▁ xxmaj and brought in matter that should feed this fire ; 
▁ xxmaj and now ' tis far too huge to be blown out 
▁ xxmaj with that same weak wind which enkindled it . 
▁ xxmaj you taught me how to know the face of right , 
▁ xxmaj acquainted me with interest to this land , 
▁ xxmaj yea , thrust this enterprise into my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and come ye now to tell me xxmaj john hath made 
▁ xxmaj his peace with xxmaj rome ? xxmaj what is that peace to me ? 
▁ xxup i , by the honour of my marriage - bed , 
▁ xxmaj after young xxmaj arthur , claim this land for mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and , now it is half - conquer'd , must i back 
▁ xxmaj because that xxmaj john hath made his peace with xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxmaj am i xxmaj rome 's slave ? xxmaj what penny hath xxmaj rome borne , 
▁ xxmaj what men provided , what munition sent , 
▁ xxmaj to underprop this action ? xxmaj is ' t not i 
▁ xxmaj that undergo this charge ? xxmaj who else but xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj and such as to my claim are liable , 
▁ xxmaj sweat in this business and maintain this war ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not heard these islanders shout out 
▁ ' vive le roi ! ' as i have bank'd their towns ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not here the best cards for the game 
▁ xxmaj to will this easy match , play'd for a crown ? 
▁ xxmaj and shall i now give o'er the yielded set ? 
▁ xxmaj no , no , on my soul , it never shall be said . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj you look but on the outside of this work . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj outside or inside , i will not return 
▁ xxmaj till my attempt so much be glorified 
▁ xxmaj as to my ample hope was promised 
▁ xxmaj before i drew this gallant head of war , 
▁ xxmaj and cull'd these fiery spirits from the world 
▁ xxmaj to outlook conquest , and to will renown 
▁ xxmaj even in the jaws of danger and of death . 
▁ [ trumpet sounds ] 
▁ xxmaj what lusty trumpet thus doth summon us ? 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup bastard , attended 

▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj according to the fair play of the world , 
▁ xxmaj let me have audience : i am sent to speak . 
▁ xxmaj my holy lord of xxmaj milan , from the xxmaj king 
▁ i come , to learn how you have dealt for him ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as you answer , i do know the scope 
▁ xxmaj and warrant limited unto my tongue . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin is too wilful - opposite , 
▁ xxmaj and will not temporize with my entreaties ; 
▁ xxmaj he flatly says he 'll not lay down his arms . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj by all the blood that ever fury breath'd , 
▁ xxmaj the youth says well . xxmaj now hear our xxmaj english xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj for thus his royalty doth speak in me . 
▁ xxmaj he is prepar'd , and reason too he should . 
▁ xxmaj this apish and unmannerly approach , 
▁ xxmaj this harness'd masque and unadvised revel 
▁ xxmaj this unhair'd sauciness and boyish troops , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king doth smile at ; and is well prepar'd 
▁ xxmaj to whip this dwarfish war , these pigmy arms , 
▁ xxmaj from out the circle of his territories . 
▁ xxmaj that hand which had the strength , even at your door . 
▁ xxmaj to cudgel you and make you take the hatch , 
▁ xxmaj to dive like buckets in concealed wells , 
▁ xxmaj to crouch in litter of your stable planks , 
▁ xxmaj to lie like pawns lock'd up in chests and trunks , 
▁ xxmaj to hug with swine , to seek sweet safety out 
▁ xxmaj in vaults and prisons , and to thrill and shake 
▁ xxmaj even at the crying of your nation 's crow , 
▁ xxmaj thinking this voice an armed xxmaj englishman- 
▁ xxmaj shall that victorious hand be feebled here 
▁ xxmaj that in your chambers gave you chastisement ? 
▁ xxmaj no . xxmaj know the gallant monarch is in arms 
▁ xxmaj and like an eagle o'er his aery tow'rs 
▁ xxmaj to souse annoyance that comes near his nest . 
▁ xxmaj and you degenerate , you ingrate revolts , 
▁ xxmaj you bloody xxmaj neroes , ripping up the womb 
▁ xxmaj of your dear mother xxmaj england , blush for shame ; 
▁ xxmaj for your own ladies and pale - visag'd maids , 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj amazons , come tripping after drums , 
▁ xxmaj their thimbles into armed gauntlets change , 
▁ xxmaj their needles to lances , and their gentle hearts 
▁ xxmaj to fierce and bloody inclination . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj there end thy brave , and turn thy face in peace ; 
▁ xxmaj we grant thou canst outscold us . xxmaj fare thee well ; 
▁ xxmaj we hold our time too precious to be spent 
▁ xxmaj with such a brabbler . 
▁ xxup pandulph . xxmaj give me leave to speak . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj no , i will speak . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj we will attend to neither . 
▁ xxmaj strike up the drums ; and let the tongue of war , 
▁ xxmaj plead for our interest and our being here . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj indeed , your drums , being beaten , will cry out ; 
▁ xxmaj and so shall you , being beaten . xxmaj do but start 
▁ xxmaj and echo with the clamour of thy drum , 
▁ xxmaj and even at hand a drum is ready brac'd 
▁ xxmaj that shall reverberate all as loud as thine : 
▁ xxmaj sound but another , and another shall , 
▁ xxmaj as loud as thine , rattle the welkin 's ear 
▁ xxmaj and mock the deep - mouth'd thunder ; for at hand- 
▁ xxmaj not trusting to this halting legate here , 
▁ xxmaj whom he hath us'd rather for sport than need- 
▁ xxmaj is warlike xxmaj john ; and in his forehead sits 
▁ a bare - ribb'd death , whose office is this day 
▁ xxmaj to feast upon whole thousands of the xxmaj french . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj strike up our drums to find this danger out . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj and thou shalt find it , xxmaj dauphin , do not doubt . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj england . xxmaj the field of battle 

 xxmaj alarums . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup john and xxup hubert 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj how goes the day with us ? xxup o , tell me , xxmaj hubert . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj badly , i fear . xxmaj how fares your xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj this fever that hath troubled me so long 
▁ xxmaj lies heavy on me . xxup o , my heart is sick ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord , your valiant kinsman , xxmaj faulconbridge , 
▁ xxmaj desires your xxmaj majesty to leave the field 
▁ xxmaj and send him word by me which way you go . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj tell him , toward xxmaj swinstead , to the abbey there . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj be of good comfort ; for the great supply 
▁ xxmaj that was expected by the xxmaj dauphin here 
▁ xxmaj are wreck'd three nights ago on xxmaj goodwin xxmaj sands ; 
▁ xxmaj this news was brought to xxmaj richard but even now . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french fight coldly , and retire themselves . 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj ay me , this tyrant fever burns me up 
▁ xxmaj and will not let me welcome this good news . 
▁ xxmaj set on toward xxmaj swinstead ; to my litter straight ; 
▁ xxmaj weakness possesseth me , and i am faint . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj england . xxmaj another part of the battlefield 

 xxmaj enter xxup salisbury , xxup pembroke , and xxup bigot 

▁ xxup salisbury . i did not think the xxmaj king so stor'd with friends . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj up once again ; put spirit in the xxmaj french ; 
▁ xxmaj if they miscarry , we miscarry too . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj that misbegotten devil , xxmaj faulconbridge , 
▁ xxmaj in spite of spite , alone upholds the day . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj they say xxmaj king xxmaj john , sore sick , hath left the field . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup melun , wounded 

▁ xxup melun . xxmaj lead me to the revolts of xxmaj england here . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj when we were happy we had other names . 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj it is the xxmaj count xxmaj melun . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj wounded to death . 
▁ xxup melun . xxmaj fly , noble xxmaj english , you are bought and sold ; 
▁ xxmaj unthread the rude eye of rebellion , 
▁ xxmaj and welcome home again discarded faith . 
▁ xxmaj seek out xxmaj king xxmaj john , and fall before his feet ; 
▁ xxmaj for if the xxmaj french be lords of this loud day , 
▁ xxmaj he means to recompense the pains you take 
▁ xxmaj by cutting off your heads . xxmaj thus hath he sworn , 
▁ xxmaj and i with him , and many moe with me , 
▁ xxmaj upon the altar at xxmaj saint xxmaj edmundsbury ; 
▁ xxmaj even on that altar where we swore to you 
▁ xxmaj dear amity and everlasting love . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj may this be possible ? xxmaj may this be true ? 
▁ xxup melun . xxmaj have i not hideous death within my view , 
▁ xxmaj retaining but a quantity of life , 
▁ xxmaj which bleeds away even as a form of wax 
▁ xxmaj resolveth from his figure ' gainst the fire ? 
▁ xxmaj what in the world should make me now deceive , 
▁ xxmaj since i must lose the use of all deceit ? 
▁ xxmaj why should i then be false , since it is true 
▁ xxmaj that i must die here , and live hence by truth ? 
▁ i say again , if xxmaj lewis do will the day , 
▁ xxmaj he is forsworn if e'er those eyes of yours 
▁ xxmaj behold another day break in the east ; 
▁ xxmaj but even this night , whose black contagious breath 
▁ xxmaj already smokes about the burning crest 
▁ xxmaj of the old , feeble , and day - wearied sun , 
▁ xxmaj even this ill night , your breathing shall expire , 
▁ xxmaj paying the fine of rated treachery 
▁ xxmaj even with a treacherous fine of all your lives . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj lewis by your assistance win the day . 
▁ xxmaj commend me to one xxmaj hubert , with your xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj the love of him - and this respect besides , 
▁ xxmaj for that my grandsire was an xxmaj englishman- 
▁ xxmaj awakes my conscience to confess all this . 
▁ xxmaj in lieu whereof , i pray you , bear me hence 
▁ xxmaj from forth the noise and rumour of the field , 
▁ xxmaj where i may think the remnant of my thoughts 
▁ xxmaj in peace , and part this body and my soul 
▁ xxmaj with contemplation and devout desires . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj we do believe thee ; and beshrew my soul 
▁ xxmaj but i do love the favour and the form 
▁ xxmaj of this most fair occasion , by the which 
▁ xxmaj we will untread the steps of damned flight , 
▁ xxmaj and like a bated and retired flood , 
▁ xxmaj leaving our rankness and irregular course , 
▁ xxmaj stoop low within those bounds we have o'erlook'd , 
▁ xxmaj and calmly run on in obedience 
▁ xxmaj even to our ocean , to great xxmaj king xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj my arm shall give thee help to bear thee hence ; 
▁ xxmaj for i do see the cruel pangs of death 
▁ xxmaj right in thine eye . xxmaj away , my friends ! xxmaj new flight , 
▁ xxmaj and happy newness , that intends old right . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt , leading off xxup melun 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj england . xxmaj the xxmaj french camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup lewis and his train 

▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj the sun of heaven , methought , was loath to set , 
▁ xxmaj but stay'd and made the western welkin blush , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj english measure backward their own ground 
▁ xxmaj in faint retire . xxup o , bravely came we off , 
▁ xxmaj when with a volley of our needless shot , 
▁ xxmaj after such bloody toil , we bid good night ; 
▁ xxmaj and wound our tott'ring colours clearly up , 
▁ xxmaj last in the field and almost lords of it ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj where is my prince , the xxmaj dauphin ? 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj here ; what news ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj count xxmaj melun is slain ; the xxmaj english lords 
▁ xxmaj by his persuasion are again fall'n off , 
▁ xxmaj and your supply , which you have wish'd so long , 
▁ xxmaj are cast away and sunk on xxmaj goodwin xxmaj sands . 
▁ xxup lewis . xxmaj ah , foul shrewd news ! xxmaj beshrew thy very heart ! 
▁ i did not think to be so sad to - night 
▁ xxmaj as this hath made me . xxmaj who was he that said 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj john did fly an hour or two before 
▁ xxmaj the stumbling night did part our weary pow'rs ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj whoever spoke it , it is true , my lord . 
▁ xxup lewis . keep good quarter and good care to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj the day shall not be up so soon as i 
▁ xxmaj to try the fair adventure of to - morrow . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 6 . 

 xxmaj an open place wear xxmaj swinstead xxmaj abbey 

 xxmaj enter the xxup bastard and xxup hubert , severally 

▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj speak , ho ! speak quickly , or i shoot . 
▁ xxup bastard . a friend . xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj of the part of xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj whither dost thou go ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj what 's that to thee ? xxmaj why may i not demand 
▁ xxmaj of thine affairs as well as thou of mine ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj hubert , i think . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj thou hast a perfect thought . 
▁ i will upon all hazards well believe 
▁ xxmaj thou art my friend that know'st my tongue so well . 
▁ xxmaj who art thou ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj who thou wilt . xxmaj and if thou please , 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst befriend me so much as to think 
▁ i come one way of the xxmaj plantagenets . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj unkind remembrance ! thou and eyeless night 
▁ xxmaj have done me shame . xxmaj brave soldier , pardon me 
▁ xxmaj that any accent breaking from thy tongue 
▁ xxmaj should scape the true acquaintance of mine ear . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj come , come ; sans compliment , what news abroad ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj why , here walk i in the black brow of night 
▁ xxmaj to find you out . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj brief , then ; and what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxup o , my sweet sir , news fitting to the night , 
▁ xxmaj black , fearful , comfortless , and horrible . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj show me the very wound of this ill news ; 
▁ i am no woman , xxmaj i 'll not swoon at it . 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj the xxmaj king , i fear , is poison'd by a monk ; 
▁ i left him almost speechless and broke out 
▁ xxmaj to acquaint you with this evil , that you might 
▁ xxmaj the better arm you to the sudden time 
▁ xxmaj than if you had at leisure known of this . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj how did he take it ; who did taste to him ? 
▁ xxup hubert . a monk , i tell you ; a resolved villain , 
▁ xxmaj whose bowels suddenly burst out . xxmaj the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj yet speaks , and peradventure may recover . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj who didst thou leave to tend his xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup hubert . xxmaj why , know you not ? xxmaj the lords are all come back , 
▁ xxmaj and brought xxmaj prince xxmaj henry in their company ; 
▁ xxmaj at whose request the xxmaj king hath pardon'd them , 
▁ xxmaj and they are all about his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj withhold thine indignation , mighty heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and tempt us not to bear above our power ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell thee , xxmaj hubert , half my power this night , 
▁ xxmaj passing these flats , are taken by the tide- 
▁ xxmaj these xxmaj lincoln xxmaj washes have devoured them ; 
▁ xxmaj myself , well - mounted , hardly have escap'd . 
▁ xxmaj away , before ! conduct me to the xxmaj king ; 
▁ i doubt he will be dead or ere i come . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 7 . 

 xxmaj the orchard at xxmaj swinstead xxmaj abbey 

 xxmaj enter xxup prince xxup henry , xxup salisbury , and xxup bigot 

▁ xxup prince xxup henry . xxmaj it is too late ; the life of all his blood 
▁ xxmaj is touch'd corruptibly , and his pure brain . 
▁ xxmaj which some suppose the soul 's frail dwelling - house , 
▁ xxmaj doth by the idle comments that it makes 
▁ xxmaj foretell the ending of mortality . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pembroke 

▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj his xxmaj highness yet doth speak , and holds belief 
▁ xxmaj that , being brought into the open air , 
▁ xxmaj it would allay the burning quality 
▁ xxmaj of that fell poison which assaileth him . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . xxmaj let him be brought into the orchard here . 
▁ xxmaj doth he still rage ? xxmaj exit xxup bigot 
▁ xxup pembroke . xxmaj he is more patient 
▁ xxmaj than when you left him ; even now he sung . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . o vanity of sickness ! xxmaj fierce extremes 
▁ xxmaj in their continuance will not feel themselves . 
▁ xxmaj death , having prey'd upon the outward parts , 
▁ xxmaj leaves them invisible , and his siege is now 
▁ xxmaj against the mind , the which he pricks and wounds 
▁ xxmaj with many legions of strange fantasies , 
▁ xxmaj which , in their throng and press to that last hold , 
▁ xxmaj confound themselves . ' tis strange that death should sing . 
▁ i am the cygnet to this pale faint swan 
▁ xxmaj who chants a doleful hymn to his own death , 
▁ xxmaj and from the organ - pipe of frailty sings 
▁ xxmaj his soul and body to their lasting rest . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj be of good comfort , xxmaj prince ; for you are born 
▁ xxmaj to set a form upon that indigest 
▁ xxmaj which he hath left so shapeless and so rude . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup bigot and attendants , who bring in 
▁ xxup king xxup john in a chair 

▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj ay , marry , now my soul hath elbow - room ; 
▁ xxmaj it would not out at windows nor at doors . 
▁ xxmaj there is so hot a summer in my bosom 
▁ xxmaj that all my bowels crumble up to dust . 
▁ i am a scribbled form drawn with a pen 
▁ xxmaj upon a parchment , and against this fire 
▁ xxmaj do i shrink up . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . xxmaj how fares your xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj poison'd - ill - fare ! xxmaj dead , forsook , cast off ; 
▁ xxmaj and none of you will bid the winter come 
▁ xxmaj to thrust his icy fingers in my maw , 
▁ xxmaj nor let my kingdom 's rivers take their course 
▁ xxmaj through my burn'd bosom , nor entreat the north 
▁ xxmaj to make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips 
▁ xxmaj and comfort me with cold . i do not ask you much ; 
▁ i beg cold comfort ; and you are so strait 
▁ xxmaj and so ingrateful you deny me that . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . o that there were some virtue in my tears , 
▁ xxmaj that might relieve you ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . xxmaj the salt in them is hot . 
▁ xxmaj within me is a hell ; and there the poison 
▁ xxmaj is as a fiend confin'd to tyrannize 
▁ xxmaj on unreprievable condemned blood . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup bastard 

▁ xxup bastard . xxup o , i am scalded with my violent motion 
▁ xxmaj and spleen of speed to see your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup king xxup john . o cousin , thou art come to set mine eye ! 
▁ xxmaj the tackle of my heart is crack'd and burnt , 
▁ xxmaj and all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail 
▁ xxmaj are turned to one thread , one little hair ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart hath one poor string to stay it by , 
▁ xxmaj which holds but till thy news be uttered ; 
▁ xxmaj and then all this thou seest is but a clod 
▁ xxmaj and module of confounded royalty . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin is preparing hitherward , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj god xxmaj he knows how we shall answer him ; 
▁ xxmaj for in a night the best part of my pow'r , 
▁ xxmaj as i upon advantage did remove , 
▁ xxmaj were in the xxmaj washes all unwarily 
▁ xxmaj devoured by the unexpected flood . [ the xxup king dies ] 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj you breathe these dead news in as dead an ear . 
▁ xxmaj my liege ! my lord ! xxmaj but now a king - now thus . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . xxmaj even so must i run on , and even so stop . 
▁ xxmaj what surety of the world , what hope , what stay , 
▁ xxmaj when this was now a king , and now is clay ? 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj art thou gone so ? i do but stay behind 
▁ xxmaj to do the office for thee of revenge , 
▁ xxmaj and then my soul shall wait on thee to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj as it on earth hath been thy servant still . 
▁ xxmaj now , now , you stars that move in your right spheres , 
▁ xxmaj where be your pow'rs ? xxmaj show now your mended faiths , 
▁ xxmaj and instantly return with me again 
▁ xxmaj to push destruction and perpetual shame 
▁ xxmaj out of the weak door of our fainting land . 
▁ xxmaj straight let us seek , or straight we shall be sought ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj dauphin rages at our very heels . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj it seems you know not , then , so much as we : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj cardinal xxmaj pandulph is within at rest , 
▁ xxmaj who half an hour since came from the xxmaj dauphin , 
▁ xxmaj and brings from him such offers of our peace 
▁ xxmaj as we with honour and respect may take , 
▁ xxmaj with purpose presently to leave this war . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj he will the rather do it when he sees 
▁ xxmaj ourselves well sinewed to our defence . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj nay , ' tis in a manner done already ; 
▁ xxmaj for many carriages he hath dispatch'd 
▁ xxmaj to the sea - side , and put his cause and quarrel 
▁ xxmaj to the disposing of the xxmaj cardinal ; 
▁ xxmaj with whom yourself , myself , and other lords , 
▁ xxmaj if you think meet , this afternoon will post 
▁ xxmaj to consummate this business happily . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj let it be so . xxmaj and you , my noble xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj with other princes that may best be spar'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall wait upon your father 's funeral . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . xxmaj at xxmaj worcester must his body be interr'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for so he will'd it . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxmaj thither shall it , then ; 
▁ xxmaj and happily may your sweet self put on 
▁ xxmaj the lineal state and glory of the land ! 
▁ xxmaj to whom , with all submission , on my knee 
▁ i do bequeath my faithful services 
▁ xxmaj and true subjection everlastingly . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj and the like tender of our love we make , 
▁ xxmaj to rest without a spot for evermore . 
▁ xxup prince xxup henry . i have a kind soul that would give you thanks , 
▁ xxmaj and knows not how to do it but with tears . 
▁ xxup bastard . xxup o , let us pay the time but needful woe , 
▁ xxmaj since it hath been beforehand with our griefs . 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj england never did , nor never shall , 
▁ xxmaj lie at the proud foot of a conqueror , 
▁ xxmaj but when it first did help to wound itself . 
▁ xxmaj now these her princes are come home again , 
▁ xxmaj come the three corners of the world in arms , 
▁ xxmaj and we shall shock them . xxmaj nought shall make us rue , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj england to itself do rest but true . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 






 1599 


 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup julius xxup caesar 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup julius xxup caesar , xxmaj roman statesman and general 
▁ xxup octavius , xxmaj triumvir after xxmaj caesar 's death , later xxmaj augustus xxmaj caesar , 
▁ first emperor of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxup mark xxup antony , general and friend of xxmaj caesar , a xxmaj triumvir after his death 
▁ xxup lepidus , third member of the xxmaj triumvirate 
▁ xxup marcus xxup brutus , leader of the conspiracy against xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup cassius , instigator of the conspiracy 
▁ xxup casca , conspirator against xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup trebonius , " " " 
▁ xxup caius xxup ligarius , " " " 
▁ xxup decius xxup brutus , " " " 
▁ xxup metellus xxup cimber , " " " 
▁ xxup cinna , " " " 
▁ xxup calpurnia , wife of xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxup portia , wife of xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxup cicero , senator 
▁ xxup popilius , " 
▁ xxup popilius xxup lena , " 
▁ xxup flavius , tribune 
▁ xxup marullus , tribune 
▁ xxup cato , supportor of xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxup lucilius , " " " 
▁ xxup titinius , " " " 
▁ xxup messala , " " " 
▁ xxup volumnius , " " " 
▁ xxup artemidorus , a teacher of rhetoric 
▁ xxup cinna , a poet 
▁ xxup varro , servant to xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxup clitus , " " " 
▁ xxup claudio , " " " 
▁ xxup strato , " " " 
▁ xxup lucius , " " " 
▁ xxup dardanius , " " " 
▁ xxup pindarus , servant to xxmaj cassius 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj ghost of xxmaj caesar 
▁ a xxmaj soothsayer 
▁ a xxmaj poet 
▁ xxmaj senators , xxmaj citizens , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj commoners , xxmaj messengers , and xxmaj servants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : xxmaj rome , the conspirators ' camp near xxmaj sardis , and the plains of xxmaj philippi . 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj flavius , xxmaj marullus , and certain xxmaj commoners . 

▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj hence , home , you idle creatures , get you home . 
▁ xxmaj is this a holiday ? xxmaj what , know you not , 
▁ xxmaj being mechanical , you ought not walk 
▁ xxmaj upon a laboring day without the sign 
▁ xxmaj of your profession ? xxmaj speak , what trade art thou ? 
▁ xxup first xxup commoner . xxmaj why , sir , a carpenter . 
▁ xxup marullus . xxmaj where is thy leather apron and thy rule ? 
▁ xxmaj what dost thou with thy best apparel on ? 
▁ xxmaj you , sir , what trade are you ? 
▁ xxup second xxup commoner . xxmaj truly , sir , in respect of a fine workman , i am 
▁ but , as you would say , a cobbler . 
▁ xxup marullus . xxmaj but what trade art thou ? xxmaj answer me directly . 
▁ xxup second xxup commoner . a trade , sir , that , i hope , i may use with a safe 
▁ conscience , which is indeed , sir , a mender of bad soles . 
▁ xxup marullus . xxmaj what trade , thou knave ? xxmaj thou naughty knave , what trade ? 
▁ xxup second xxup commoner . xxmaj nay , i beseech you , sir , be not out with me ; yet , 
▁ if you be out , sir , i can mend you . 
▁ xxup marullus . xxmaj what mean'st thou by that ? xxmaj mend me , thou saucy fellow ! 
▁ xxup second xxup commoner . xxmaj why , sir , cobble you . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj thou art a cobbler , art thou ? 
▁ xxup second xxup commoner . xxmaj truly , xxmaj sir , all that i live by is with the awl ; i 
▁ meddle with no tradesman 's matters , nor women 's matters , but with 
▁ awl . i am indeed , sir , a surgeon to old shoes ; when they are in 
▁ great danger , i recover them . xxmaj as proper men as ever trod upon 
▁ neat 's leather have gone upon my handiwork . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj but wherefore art not in thy shop today ? 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou lead these men about the streets ? 
▁ xxup second xxup commoner . xxmaj truly , sir , to wear out their shoes to get myself 
▁ into more work . xxmaj but indeed , sir , we make holiday to see xxmaj caesar 
▁ and to rejoice in his triumph . 
▁ xxup marullus . xxmaj wherefore rejoice ? xxmaj what conquest brings he home ? 
▁ xxmaj what tributaries follow him to xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj to grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels ? 
▁ xxmaj you blocks , you stones , you worse than senseless things ! 
▁ o you hard hearts , you cruel men of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj knew you not xxmaj pompey ? xxmaj many a time and oft 
▁ xxmaj have you climb'd up to walls and battlements , 
▁ xxmaj to towers and windows , yea , to chimney tops , 
▁ xxmaj your infants in your arms , and there have sat 
▁ xxmaj the livelong day with patient expectation 
▁ xxmaj to see great xxmaj pompey pass the streets of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj and when you saw his chariot but appear , 
▁ xxmaj have you not made an universal shout 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj tiber trembled underneath her banks 
▁ xxmaj to hear the replication of your sounds 
▁ xxmaj made in her concave shores ? 
▁ xxmaj and do you now put on your best attire ? 
▁ xxmaj and do you now cull out a holiday ? 
▁ xxmaj and do you now strew flowers in his way 
▁ xxmaj that comes in triumph over xxmaj pompey 's blood ? 
▁ xxmaj be gone ! 
▁ xxmaj run to your houses , fall upon your knees , 
▁ xxmaj pray to the gods to intermit the plague 
▁ xxmaj that needs must light on this ingratitude . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj go , go , good countrymen , and , for this fault , 
▁ xxmaj assemble all the poor men of your sort , 
▁ xxmaj draw them to xxmaj tiber banks , and weep your tears 
▁ xxmaj into the channel , till the lowest stream 
▁ xxmaj do kiss the most exalted shores of all . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all xxmaj commoners . 
▁ xxmaj see whether their basest metal be not moved ; 
▁ xxmaj they vanish tongue - tied in their guiltiness . 
▁ xxmaj go you down that way towards the xxmaj capitol ; 
▁ xxmaj this way will xxup i. xxmaj disrobe the images 
▁ xxmaj if you do find them deck'd with ceremonies . 
▁ xxup marullus . xxmaj may we do so ? 
▁ xxmaj you know it is the feast of xxmaj lupercal . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj it is no matter ; let no images 
▁ xxmaj be hung with xxmaj caesar 's trophies . xxmaj i 'll about 
▁ xxmaj and drive away the vulgar from the streets ; 
▁ xxmaj so do you too , where you perceive them thick . 
▁ xxmaj these growing feathers pluck'd from xxmaj caesar 's wing 
▁ xxmaj will make him fly an ordinary pitch , 
▁ xxmaj who else would soar above the view of men 
▁ xxmaj and keep us all in servile fearfulness . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a public place . 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxmaj caesar ; xxmaj antony , for the course ; xxmaj calpurnia , xxmaj portia , 
 xxmaj decius , xxmaj cicero , xxmaj brutus , xxmaj cassius , and xxmaj casca ; a great crowd follows , 
 among them a xxmaj soothsayer . 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj calpurnia ! 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj peace , ho ! xxmaj caesar speaks . 
▁ xxmaj music ceases . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj calpurnia ! 
▁ xxup calpurnia . xxmaj here , my lord . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj stand you directly in xxmaj antonio 's way , 
▁ xxmaj when he doth run his course . xxmaj antonio ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj caesar , my lord ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj forget not in your speed , xxmaj antonio , 
▁ xxmaj to touch xxmaj calpurnia , for our elders say 
▁ xxmaj the barren , touched in this holy chase , 
▁ xxmaj shake off their sterile curse . 
▁ xxup antony . i shall remember . 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj caesar says " do this , " it is perform'd . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj set on , and leave no ceremony out . xxmaj flourish . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj who calls ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj bid every noise be still . xxmaj peace yet again ! 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj who is it in the press that calls on me ? 
▁ i hear a tongue , shriller than all the music , 
▁ xxmaj cry " caesar . " xxmaj speak , xxmaj caesar is turn'd to hear . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj beware the ides of xxmaj march . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what man is that ? 
▁ xxup brutus . a soothsayer you beware the ides of xxmaj march . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj set him before me let me see his face . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj fellow , come from the throng ; look upon xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what say'st thou to me now ? xxmaj speak once again . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj beware the ides of xxmaj march . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj he is a dreamer ; let us leave him . xxmaj pass . 
▁ xxmaj sennet . xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj brutus and xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj will you go see the order of the course ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxup cassius . i pray you , do . 
▁ xxup brutus . i am not gamesome ; i do lack some part 
▁ xxmaj of that quick spirit that is in xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj let me not hinder , xxmaj cassius , your desires ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave you . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj brutus , i do observe you now of late ; 
▁ i have not from your eyes that gentleness 
▁ xxmaj and show of love as i was wo nt to have ; 
▁ xxmaj you bear too stubborn and too strange a hand 
▁ xxmaj over your friend that loves you . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj be not deceived ; if i have veil'd my look , 
▁ i turn the trouble of my countenance 
▁ xxmaj merely upon myself . xxmaj vexed i am 
▁ xxmaj of late with passions of some difference , 
▁ xxmaj conceptions only proper to myself , 
▁ xxmaj which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors ; 
▁ xxmaj but let not therefore my good friends be grieved- 
▁ xxmaj among which number , xxmaj cassius , be you one- 
▁ xxmaj nor construe any further my neglect 
▁ xxmaj than that poor xxmaj brutus with himself at war 
▁ xxmaj forgets the shows of love to other men . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj then , xxmaj brutus , i have much mistook your passion , 
▁ xxmaj by means whereof this breast of mine hath buried 
▁ xxmaj thoughts of great value , worthy cogitations . 
▁ xxmaj tell me , good xxmaj brutus , can you see your face ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no , xxmaj cassius , for the eye sees not itself 
▁ xxmaj but by reflection , by some other things . 
▁ xxup cassius . ' tis just , 
▁ xxmaj and it is very much lamented , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj that you have no such mirrors as will turn 
▁ xxmaj your hidden worthiness into your eye 
▁ xxmaj that you might see your shadow . i have heard 
▁ xxmaj where many of the best respect in xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj except immortal xxmaj caesar , speaking of xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxmaj and groaning underneath this age 's yoke , 
▁ xxmaj have wish'd that noble xxmaj brutus had his eyes . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj into what dangers would you lead me , xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj that you would have me seek into myself 
▁ xxmaj for that which is not in me ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj therefore , good xxmaj brutus , be prepared to hear , 
▁ xxmaj and since you know you can not see yourself 
▁ xxmaj so well as by reflection , i your glass 
▁ xxmaj will modestly discover to yourself 
▁ xxmaj that of yourself which you yet know not of . 
▁ xxmaj and be not jealous on me , gentle xxmaj brutus ; 
▁ xxmaj were i a common laugher , or did use 
▁ xxmaj to stale with ordinary oaths my love 
▁ xxmaj to every new protester , if you know 
▁ xxmaj that i do fawn on men and hug them hard 
▁ xxmaj and after scandal them , or if you know 
▁ xxmaj that i profess myself in banqueting 
▁ xxmaj to all the rout , then hold me dangerous . 
▁ xxmaj flourish and shout . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what means this shouting ? i do fear the people 
▁ xxmaj choose xxmaj caesar for their king . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj ay , do you fear it ? 
▁ xxmaj then must i think you would not have it so . 
▁ xxup brutus . i would not , xxmaj cassius , yet i love him well . 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore do you hold me here so long ? 
▁ xxmaj what is it that you would impart to me ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be aught toward the general good , 
▁ xxmaj set honor in one eye and death i ' the other 
▁ xxmaj and i will look on both indifferently . 
▁ xxmaj for let the gods so speed me as i love 
▁ xxmaj the name of honor more than i fear death . 
▁ xxup cassius . i know that virtue to be in you , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj as well as i do know your outward favor . 
▁ xxmaj well , honor is the subject of my story . 
▁ i can not tell what you and other men 
▁ xxmaj think of this life , but , for my single self , 
▁ i had as lief not be as live to be 
▁ xxmaj in awe of such a thing as i myself . 
▁ i was born free as xxmaj caesar , so were you ; 
▁ xxmaj we both have fed as well , and we can both 
▁ xxmaj endure the winter 's cold as well as he . 
▁ xxmaj for once , upon a raw and gusty day , 
▁ xxmaj the troubled xxmaj tiber chafing with her shores , 
▁ xxmaj caesar said to me , " darest thou , xxmaj cassius , now 
▁ xxmaj leap in with me into this angry flood 
▁ xxmaj and swim to yonder point ? " xxmaj upon the word , 
▁ xxmaj accoutred as i was , i plunged in 
▁ xxmaj and bade him follow . xxmaj so indeed he did . 
▁ xxmaj the torrent roar'd , and we did buffet it 
▁ xxmaj with lusty sinews , throwing it aside 
▁ xxmaj and stemming it with hearts of controversy . 
▁ xxmaj but ere we could arrive the point proposed , 
▁ xxmaj caesar cried , " help me , xxmaj cassius , or i sink ! 
▁ xxup i , as xxmaj aeneas our great ancestor 
▁ xxmaj did from the flames of xxmaj troy upon his shoulder 
▁ xxmaj the old xxmaj anchises bear , so from the waves of xxmaj tiber 
▁ xxmaj did i the tired xxmaj caesar . xxmaj and this man 
▁ xxmaj is now become a god , and xxmaj cassius is 
▁ a wretched creature and must bend his body 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj caesar carelessly but nod on him . 
▁ xxmaj he had a fever when he was in xxmaj spain , 
▁ xxmaj and when the fit was on him i did mark 
▁ xxmaj how he did shake . ' tis true , this god did shake ; 
▁ xxmaj his coward lips did from their color fly , 
▁ xxmaj and that same eye whose bend doth awe the world 
▁ xxmaj did lose his luster . i did hear him groan . 
▁ xxmaj ay , and that tongue of his that bade the xxmaj romans 
▁ xxmaj mark him and write his speeches in their books , 
▁ xxmaj alas , it cried , " give me some drink , xxmaj titinius , " 
▁ xxmaj as a sick girl . xxmaj ye gods ! xxmaj it doth amaze me 
▁ a man of such a feeble temper should 
▁ xxmaj so get the start of the majestic world 
▁ xxmaj and bear the palm alone . xxmaj shout . xxmaj flourish . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj another general shout ! 
▁ i do believe that these applauses are 
▁ xxmaj for some new honors that are heap'd on xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj why , man , he doth bestride the narrow world 
▁ xxmaj like a xxmaj colossus , and we petty men 
▁ xxmaj walk under his huge legs and peep about 
▁ xxmaj to find ourselves dishonorable graves . 
▁ xxmaj men at some time are masters of their fates : 
▁ xxmaj the fault , dear xxmaj brutus , is not in our stars , 
▁ xxmaj but in ourselves that we are underlings . 
▁ xxmaj brutus and xxmaj caesar : what should be in that " caesar " ? 
▁ xxmaj why should that name be sounded more than yours ? 
▁ xxmaj write them together , yours is as fair a name ; 
▁ xxmaj sound them , it doth become the mouth as well ; 
▁ xxmaj weigh them , it is as heavy ; conjure with 'em , 
▁ " brutus " will start a spirit as soon as " caesar . " 
▁ xxmaj now , in the names of all the gods at once , 
▁ xxmaj upon what meat doth this our xxmaj caesar feed 
▁ xxmaj that he is grown so great ? xxmaj age , thou art shamed ! 
▁ xxmaj rome , thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods ! 
▁ xxmaj when went there by an age since the great flood 
▁ xxmaj but it was famed with more than with one man ? 
▁ xxmaj when could they say till now that talk'd of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj that her wide walls encompass'd but one man ? 
▁ xxmaj now is it xxmaj rome indeed , and room enough , 
▁ xxmaj when there is in it but one only man . 
▁ xxup o , you and i have heard our fathers say 
▁ xxmaj there was a xxmaj brutus once that would have brook'd 
▁ xxmaj the eternal devil to keep his state in xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj as easily as a king . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj that you do love me , i am nothing jealous ; 
▁ xxmaj what you would work me to , i have some aim . 
▁ xxmaj how i have thought of this and of these times , 
▁ i shall recount hereafter ; for this present , 
▁ i would not , so with love i might entreat you , 
▁ xxmaj be any further moved . xxmaj what you have said 
▁ i will consider ; what you have to say 
▁ i will with patience hear , and find a time 
▁ xxmaj both meet to hear and answer such high things . 
▁ xxmaj till then , my noble friend , chew upon this : 
▁ xxmaj brutus had rather be a villager 
▁ xxmaj than to repute himself a son of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj under these hard conditions as this time 
▁ xxmaj is like to lay upon us . 
▁ xxup cassius . i am glad that my weak words 
▁ xxmaj have struck but thus much show of fire from xxmaj brutus . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj caesar and his xxmaj train . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the games are done , and xxmaj caesar is returning . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj as they pass by , pluck xxmaj casca by the sleeve , 
▁ xxmaj and he will , after his sour fashion , tell you 
▁ xxmaj what hath proceeded worthy note today . 
▁ xxup brutus . i will do so . xxmaj but , look you , xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj the angry spot doth glow on xxmaj caesar 's brow , 
▁ xxmaj and all the rest look like a chidden train : 
▁ xxmaj calpurnia 's cheek is pale , and xxmaj cicero 
▁ xxmaj looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes 
▁ xxmaj as we have seen him in the xxmaj capitol , 
▁ xxmaj being cross'd in conference by some senators . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj casca will tell us what the matter is . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj antonio ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj caesar ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj let me have men about me that are fat , 
▁ xxmaj sleek - headed men , and such as sleep o ' nights : 
▁ xxmaj yond xxmaj cassius has a lean and hungry look ; 
▁ xxmaj he thinks too much ; such men are dangerous . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj fear him not , xxmaj caesar ; he 's not dangerous ; 
▁ xxmaj he is a noble xxmaj roman and well given . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj would he were fatter ! xxmaj but i fear him not , 
▁ xxmaj yet if my name were liable to fear , 
▁ i do not know the man i should avoid 
▁ xxmaj so soon as that spare xxmaj cassius . xxmaj he reads much , 
▁ xxmaj he is a great observer , and he looks 
▁ xxmaj quite through the deeds of men . xxmaj he loves no plays , 
▁ xxmaj as thou dost , xxmaj antony ; he hears no music ; 
▁ xxmaj seldom he smiles , and smiles in such a sort 
▁ xxmaj as if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit 
▁ xxmaj that could be moved to smile at anything . 
▁ xxmaj such men as he be never at heart 's ease 
▁ xxmaj whiles they behold a greater than themselves , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore are they very dangerous . 
▁ i rather tell thee what is to be fear'd 
▁ xxmaj than what i fear , for always i am xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxmaj come on my right hand , for this ear is deaf , 
▁ xxmaj and tell me truly what thou think'st of him . 
▁ xxmaj sennet . xxmaj exeunt xxmaj caesar and all his xxmaj train but xxmaj casca . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj you pull'd me by the cloak ; would you speak with me ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj ay , xxmaj casca , tell us what hath chanced today 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj caesar looks so sad . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj why , you were with him , were you not ? 
▁ xxup brutus . i should not then ask xxmaj casca what had chanced . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj why , there was a crown offered him , and being offered him , 
▁ he put it by with the back of his hand , thus , and then the 
▁ people fell ashouting . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what was the second noise for ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj why , for that too . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj they shouted thrice . xxmaj what was the last cry for ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj why , for that too . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj was the crown offered him thrice ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj ay , marry , wast , and he put it by thrice , every time gentler 
▁ than other , and at every putting by mine honest neighbors 
▁ shouted . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj who offered him the crown ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj why , xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj tell us the manner of it , gentle xxmaj casca . 
▁ xxup casca . i can as well be hang'd as tell the manner of it . xxmaj it was 
▁ mere foolery ; i did not mark it . i saw xxmaj mark xxmaj antony offer him a 
▁ crown ( yet ' twas not a crown neither , ' twas one of these 
▁ coronets ) and , as i told you , he put it by once . xxmaj but for all 
▁ that , to my thinking , he would fain have had it . xxmaj then he offered 
▁ it to him again ; then he put it by again . xxmaj but , to my thinking , he 
▁ was very loath to lay his fingers off it . xxmaj and then he offered it 
▁ the third time ; he put it the third time by ; and still as he 
▁ refused it , the rabblement hooted and clapped their chopped hands 
▁ and threw up their sweaty nightcaps and uttered such a deal of 
▁ stinking breath because xxmaj caesar refused the crown that it had 
▁ almost choked xxmaj caesar , for he swounded and fell down at it . xxmaj and 
▁ for mine own part , i durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips 
▁ and receiving the bad air . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj but , soft , i pray you , what , did xxmaj caesars wound ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj he fell down in the marketplace and foamed at mouth and was 
▁ speechless . 
▁ xxup brutus . ' tis very like . xxmaj he hath the falling sickness . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj no , xxmaj caesar hath it not , but you , and xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj and honest xxmaj casca , we have the falling sickness . 
▁ xxup casca . i know not what you mean by that , but i am sure xxmaj caesar fell 
▁ down . xxmaj if the tagrag people did not clap him and hiss him 
▁ according as he pleased and displeased them , as they use to do 
▁ the players in the theatre , i am no true man . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what said he when he came unto himself ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj marry , before he fell down , when he perceived the common 
▁ herd was glad he refused the crown , he plucked me ope his doublet 
▁ and offered them his throat to cut . xxmaj an had been a man of any 
▁ occupation , if i would not have taken him at a word , i would i