xxbos might go to hell among the rogues . xxmaj and so he fell . xxmaj when he came 
▁ to himself again , he said , if he had done or said anything amiss , 
▁ he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity . xxmaj three or 
▁ four wenches where i stood cried , " alas , good soul ! " and forgave 
▁ him with all their hearts . xxmaj but there 's no heed to be taken of 
▁ them ; if xxmaj caesar had stabbed their mothers , they would have done 
▁ no less . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj and after that he came , thus sad , away ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj did xxmaj cicero say anything ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj ay , he spoke xxmaj greek . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj to what effect ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj nay , an i tell you that , xxmaj i 'll ne'er look you i ' the face 
▁ again ; but those that understood him smiled at one another and 
▁ shook their heads ; but for mine own part , it was xxmaj greek to me . i 
▁ could tell you more news too : xxmaj marullus and xxmaj flavius , for pulling 
▁ scarfs off xxmaj caesar 's images , are put to silence . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj there was more foolery yet , if could remember it . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj will you sup with me tonight , xxmaj casca ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj no , i am promised forth . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj will you dine with me tomorrow ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj ay , if i be alive , and your mind hold , and your dinner worth 
▁ the eating . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj good , i will expect you . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj do so , farewell , both . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what a blunt fellow is this grown to be ! 
▁ xxmaj he was quick mettle when he went to school . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj so is he now in execution 
▁ xxmaj of any bold or noble enterprise , 
▁ xxmaj however he puts on this tardy form . 
▁ xxmaj this rudeness is a sauce to his good wit , 
▁ xxmaj which gives men stomach to digest his words 
▁ xxmaj with better appetite . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj and so it is . xxmaj for this time i will leave you . 
▁ xxmaj tomorrow , if you please to speak with me , 
▁ i will come home to you , or , if you will , 
▁ xxmaj come home to me and i will wait for you . 
▁ xxup cassius . i will do so . xxmaj till then , think of the world . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxmaj well , xxmaj brutus , thou art noble ; yet , i see 
▁ xxmaj thy honorable mettle may be wrought 
▁ xxmaj from that it is disposed ; therefore it is meet 
▁ xxmaj that noble minds keep ever with their likes ; 
▁ xxmaj for who so firm that can not be seduced ? 
▁ xxmaj caesar doth bear me hard , but he loves xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxmaj if i were xxmaj brutus now and he were xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj he should not humor me . i will this night , 
▁ xxmaj in several hands , in at his windows throw , 
▁ xxmaj as if they came from several citizens , 
▁ xxmaj writings , all tending to the great opinion 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj rome holds of his name , wherein obscurely 
▁ xxmaj caesar 's ambition shall be glanced at . 
▁ xxmaj and after this let xxmaj caesar seat him sure ; 
▁ xxmaj for we will shake him , or worse days endure . xxmaj exit . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a street . xxmaj thunder and lightning . 

 xxmaj enter , from opposite sides , xxmaj casca , with his sword drawn , and xxmaj cicero . 

▁ xxup cicero . xxmaj good even , xxmaj casca . xxmaj brought you xxmaj caesar home ? 
▁ xxmaj why are you breathless , and why stare you so ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj are not you moved , when all the sway of earth 
▁ xxmaj shakes like a thing unfirm ? o xxmaj cicero , 
▁ i have seen tempests when the scolding winds 
▁ xxmaj have rived the knotty oaks , and i have seen 
▁ xxmaj the ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam 
▁ xxmaj to be exalted with the threatening clouds , 
▁ xxmaj but never till tonight , never till now , 
▁ xxmaj did i go through a tempest dropping fire . 
▁ xxmaj either there is a civil strife in heaven , 
▁ xxmaj or else the world too saucy with the gods 
▁ xxmaj incenses them to send destruction . 
▁ xxup cicero . xxmaj why , saw you anything more wonderful ? 
▁ xxup casca . a common slave- you know him well by sight- 
▁ xxmaj held up his left hand , which did flame and burn 
▁ xxmaj like twenty torches join'd , and yet his hand 
▁ xxmaj not sensible of fire remain'd unscorch'd . 
▁ xxmaj besides- i ha ' not since put up my sword- 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj capitol i met a lion , 
▁ xxmaj who glaz'd upon me and went surly by 
▁ xxmaj without annoying me . xxmaj and there were drawn 
▁ xxmaj upon a heap a hundred ghastly women 
▁ xxmaj transformed with their fear , who swore they saw 
▁ xxmaj men all in fire walk up and down the streets . 
▁ xxmaj and yesterday the bird of night did sit 
▁ xxmaj even at noonday upon the marketplace , 
▁ xxmaj howling and shrieking . xxmaj when these prodigies 
▁ xxmaj do so conjointly meet , let not men say 
▁ " these are their reasons ; they are natural " : 
▁ xxmaj for i believe they are portentous things 
▁ xxmaj unto the climate that they point upon . 
▁ xxup cicero . xxmaj indeed , it is a strange - disposed time . 
▁ xxmaj but men may construe things after their fashion , 
▁ xxmaj clean from the purpose of the things themselves . 
▁ xxmaj comes xxmaj caesar to the xxmaj capitol tomorrow ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj he doth , for he did bid xxmaj antonio 
▁ xxmaj send word to you he would be there tomorrow . 
▁ xxup cicero . xxmaj good then , xxmaj casca . xxmaj this disturbed sky 
▁ xxmaj is not to walk in . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj cicero . xxmaj exit xxmaj cicero . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassius . 

▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup casca . a xxmaj roman . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj casca , by your voice . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj your ear is good . xxmaj cassius , what night is this ! 
▁ xxup cassius . a very pleasing night to honest men . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj who ever knew the heavens menace so ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj those that have known the earth so full of faults . 
▁ xxmaj for my part , i have walk'd about the streets , 
▁ xxmaj submitting me unto the perilous night , 
▁ xxmaj and thus unbraced , xxmaj casca , as you see , 
▁ xxmaj have bared my bosom to the thunderstone ; 
▁ xxmaj and when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open 
▁ xxmaj the breast of heaven , i did present myself 
▁ xxmaj even in the aim and very flash of it . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj but wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens ? 
▁ xxmaj it is the part of men to fear and tremble 
▁ xxmaj when the most mighty gods by tokens send 
▁ xxmaj such dreadful heralds to astonish us . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj you are dull , xxmaj casca , and those sparks of life 
▁ xxmaj that should be in a xxmaj roman you do want , 
▁ xxmaj or else you use not . xxmaj you look pale and gaze 
▁ xxmaj and put on fear and cast yourself in wonder 
▁ xxmaj to see the strange impatience of the heavens . 
▁ xxmaj but if you would consider the true cause 
▁ xxmaj why all these fires , why all these gliding ghosts , 
▁ xxmaj why birds and beasts from quality and kind , 
▁ xxmaj why old men , fools , and children calculate , 
▁ xxmaj why all these things change from their ordinance , 
▁ xxmaj their natures , and preformed faculties 
▁ xxmaj to monstrous quality , why , you shall find 
▁ xxmaj that heaven hath infused them with these spirits 
▁ xxmaj to make them instruments of fear and warning 
▁ xxmaj unto some monstrous state . 
▁ xxmaj now could xxup i , xxmaj casca , name to thee a man 
▁ xxmaj most like this dreadful night , 
▁ xxmaj that thunders , lightens , opens graves , and roars 
▁ xxmaj as doth the lion in the xxmaj capitol , 
▁ a man no mightier than thyself or me 
▁ xxmaj in personal action , yet prodigious grown 
▁ xxmaj and fearful , as these strange eruptions are . 
▁ xxup casca . ' tis xxmaj caesar that you mean , is it not , xxmaj cassius ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj let it be who it is , for xxmaj romans now 
▁ xxmaj have thews and limbs like to their ancestors . 
▁ xxmaj but , woe the while ! xxmaj our fathers ' minds are dead , 
▁ xxmaj and we are govern'd with our mothers ' spirits ; 
▁ xxmaj our yoke and sufferance show us womanish . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj indeed they say the senators tomorrow 
▁ xxmaj mean to establish xxmaj caesar as a king , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall wear his crown by sea and land 
▁ xxmaj in every place save here in xxmaj italy . 
▁ xxup cassius . i know where i will wear this dagger then : 
▁ xxmaj cassius from bondage will deliver xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxmaj therein , ye gods , you make the weak most strong ; 
▁ xxmaj therein , ye gods , you tyrants do defeat . 
▁ xxmaj nor stony tower , nor walls of beaten brass , 
▁ xxmaj nor airless dungeon , nor strong links of iron 
▁ xxmaj can be retentive to the strength of spirit ; 
▁ xxmaj but life , being weary of these worldly bars , 
▁ xxmaj never lacks power to dismiss itself . 
▁ xxmaj if i know this , know all the world besides , 
▁ xxmaj that part of tyranny that i do bear 
▁ i can shake off at pleasure . xxmaj thunder still . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj so can xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj so every bondman in his own hand bears 
▁ xxmaj the power to cancel his captivity . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj and why should xxmaj caesar be a tyrant then ? 
▁ xxmaj poor man ! i know he would not be a wolf 
▁ xxmaj but that he sees the xxmaj romans are but sheep . 
▁ xxmaj he were no lion , were not xxmaj romans hinds . 
▁ xxmaj those that with haste will make a mighty fire 
▁ xxmaj begin it with weak straws . xxmaj what trash is xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj what rubbish , and what offal , when it serves 
▁ xxmaj for the base matter to illuminate 
▁ xxmaj so vile a thing as xxmaj caesar ? xxmaj but , o grief , 
▁ xxmaj where hast thou led me ? i perhaps speak this 
▁ xxmaj before a willing bondman ; then i know 
▁ xxmaj my answer must be made . xxmaj but i am arm'd , 
▁ xxmaj and dangers are to me indifferent . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj you speak to xxmaj casca , and to such a man 
▁ xxmaj that is no fleering tell - tale . xxmaj hold , my hand . 
▁ xxmaj be factious for redress of all these griefs , 
▁ xxmaj and i will set this foot of mine as far 
▁ xxmaj as who goes farthest . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj there 's a bargain made . 
▁ xxmaj now know you , xxmaj casca , i have moved already 
▁ xxmaj some certain of the noblest - minded xxmaj romans 
▁ xxmaj to undergo with me an enterprise 
▁ xxmaj of honorable - dangerous consequence ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do know by this , they stay for me 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj pompey 's xxmaj porch . xxmaj for now , this fearful night , 
▁ xxmaj there is no stir or walking in the streets , 
▁ xxmaj and the complexion of the element 
▁ xxmaj in favor 's like the work we have in hand , 
▁ xxmaj most bloody , fiery , and most terrible . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cinna . 

▁ xxup casca . xxmaj stand close awhile , for here comes one in haste . 
▁ xxup cassius . ' tis xxmaj cinna , i do know him by his gait ; 
▁ xxmaj he is a friend . xxmaj cinna , where haste you so ? 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj to find out you . xxmaj who 's that ? xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj no , it is xxmaj casca , one incorporate 
▁ xxmaj to our attempts . xxmaj am i not stay'd for , xxmaj cinna ? 
▁ xxup cinna . i am glad on't . xxmaj what a fearful night is this ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's two or three of us have seen strange sights . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj am i not stay'd for ? xxmaj tell me . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj yes , you are . 
▁ o xxmaj cassius , if you could 
▁ xxmaj but win the noble xxmaj brutus to our party- 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj be you content . xxmaj good xxmaj cinna , take this paper , 
▁ xxmaj and look you lay it in the praetor 's chair , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj brutus may but find it ; and throw this 
▁ xxmaj in at his window ; set this up with wax 
▁ xxmaj upon old xxmaj brutus ' statue . xxmaj all this done , 
▁ xxmaj repair to xxmaj pompey 's xxmaj porch , where you shall find us . 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj decius xxmaj brutus and xxmaj trebonius there ? 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj all but xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber , and he 's gone 
▁ xxmaj to seek you at your house . xxmaj well , i will hie 
▁ xxmaj and so bestow these papers as you bade me . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj that done , repair to xxmaj pompey 's xxmaj theatre . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj cinna . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj casca , you and i will yet ere day 
▁ xxmaj see xxmaj brutus at his house . xxmaj three parts of him 
▁ xxmaj is ours already , and the man entire 
▁ xxmaj upon the next encounter yields him ours . 
▁ xxup casca . xxup o , he sits high in all the people 's hearts , 
▁ xxmaj and that which would appear offense in us , 
▁ xxmaj his countenance , like richest alchemy , 
▁ xxmaj will change to virtue and to worthiness . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj him and his worth and our great need of him 
▁ xxmaj you have right well conceited . xxmaj let us go , 
▁ xxmaj for it is after midnight , and ere day 
▁ xxmaj we will awake him and be sure of him . xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus in his orchard . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what , xxmaj lucius , ho ! 
▁ i can not , by the progress of the stars , 
▁ xxmaj give guess how near to day . xxmaj lucius , i say ! 
▁ i would it were my fault to sleep so soundly . 
▁ xxmaj when , xxmaj lucius , when ? xxmaj awake , i say ! xxmaj what , xxmaj lucius ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj call'd you , my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj get me a taper in my study , xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxmaj when it is lighted , come and call me here . 
▁ xxup lucius . i will , my lord . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj it must be by his death , and , for my part , 
▁ i know no personal cause to spurn at him , 
▁ xxmaj but for the general . xxmaj he would be crown'd : 
▁ xxmaj how that might change his nature , there 's the question . 
▁ xxmaj it is the bright day that brings forth the adder 
▁ xxmaj and that craves wary walking . xxmaj crown him that , 
▁ xxmaj and then , i grant , we put a sting in him 
▁ xxmaj that at his will he may do danger with . 
▁ xxmaj the abuse of greatness is when it disjoins 
▁ xxmaj remorse from power , and , to speak truth of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ i have not known when his affections sway'd 
▁ xxmaj more than his reason . xxmaj but ' tis a common proof 
▁ xxmaj that lowliness is young ambition 's ladder , 
▁ xxmaj whereto the climber - upward turns his face ; 
▁ xxmaj but when he once attains the upmost round , 
▁ xxmaj he then unto the ladder turns his back , 
▁ xxmaj looks in the clouds , scorning the base degrees 
▁ xxmaj by which he did ascend . xxmaj so xxmaj caesar may ; 
▁ xxmaj then , lest he may , prevent . xxmaj and , since the quarrel 
▁ xxmaj will bear no color for the thing he is , 
▁ xxmaj fashion it thus , that what he is , augmented , 
▁ xxmaj would run to these and these extremities ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore think him as a serpent 's egg 
▁ xxmaj which hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous , 
▁ xxmaj and kill him in the shell . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj the taper burneth in your closet , sir . 
▁ xxmaj searching the window for a flint i found 
▁ xxmaj this paper thus seal'd up , and i am sure 
▁ xxmaj it did not lie there when i went to bed . 
▁ xxmaj gives him the letter . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj get you to bed again , it is not day . 
▁ xxmaj is not tomorrow , boy , the ides of xxmaj march ? 
▁ xxup lucius . i know not , sir . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj look in the calendar and bring me word . 
▁ xxup lucius . i will , sir . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the exhalations whizzing in the air 
▁ xxmaj give so much light that i may read by them . 
▁ xxmaj opens the letter and reads . 
▁ " brutus , thou sleep'st : awake and see thyself ! 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj rome , etc . xxmaj speak , strike , redress ! " 

▁ " brutus , thou sleep'st : awake ! " 
▁ xxmaj such instigations have been often dropp'd 
▁ xxmaj where i have took them up . 
▁ " shall xxmaj rome , etc . " xxmaj thus must i piece it out . 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj rome stand under one man 's awe ? xxmaj what , xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxmaj my ancestors did from the streets of xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj tarquin drive , when he was call'd a king . 
▁ " speak , strike , redress ! " xxmaj am i entreated 
▁ xxmaj to speak and strike ? o xxmaj rome , i make thee promise , 
▁ xxmaj if the redress will follow , thou receivest 
▁ xxmaj thy full petition at the hand of xxmaj brutus ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sir , xxmaj march is wasted fifteen days . 
▁ xxmaj knocking within . 
▁ xxup brutus . ' tis good . xxmaj go to the gate , somebody knocks . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxmaj since xxmaj cassius first did whet me against xxmaj caesar 
▁ i have not slept . 
▁ xxmaj between the acting of a dreadful thing 
▁ xxmaj and the first motion , all the interim is 
▁ xxmaj like a phantasma or a hideous dream ; 
▁ xxmaj the genius and the mortal instruments 
▁ xxmaj are then in council , and the state of man , 
▁ xxmaj like to a little kingdom , suffers then 
▁ xxmaj the nature of an insurrection . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sir , ' tis your brother xxmaj cassius at the door , 
▁ xxmaj who doth desire to see you . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj is he alone ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj no , sir , there are more with him . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj do you know them ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj no , sir , their hats are pluck'd about their ears , 
▁ xxmaj and half their faces buried in their cloaks , 
▁ xxmaj that by no means i may discover them 
▁ xxmaj by any mark of favor . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj let 'em enter . xxmaj exit xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxmaj they are the faction . o xxmaj conspiracy , 
▁ xxmaj shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night , 
▁ xxmaj when evils are most free ? xxup o , then , by day 
▁ xxmaj where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough 
▁ xxmaj to mask thy monstrous visage ? xxmaj seek none , xxmaj conspiracy ; 
▁ xxmaj hide it in smiles and affability ; 
▁ xxmaj for if thou path , thy native semblance on , 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj erebus itself were dim enough 
▁ xxmaj to hide thee from prevention . 

▁ xxmaj enter the conspirators , xxmaj cassius , xxmaj casca , xxmaj decius , xxmaj cinna , 
▁ xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber , and xxmaj trebonius . 

▁ xxup cassius . i think we are too bold upon your rest . 
▁ xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj brutus , do we trouble you ? 
▁ xxup brutus . i have been up this hour , awake all night . 
▁ xxmaj know i these men that come along with you ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj yes , every man of them , and no man here 
▁ xxmaj but honors you , and every one doth wish 
▁ xxmaj you had but that opinion of yourself 
▁ xxmaj which every noble xxmaj roman bears of you . 
▁ xxmaj this is xxmaj trebonius . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he is welcome hither . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj this , xxmaj decius xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he is welcome too . 
 xxup cassius . xxmaj this , xxmaj casca ; this , xxmaj cinna ; and this , xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj they are all welcome . 
▁ xxmaj what watchful cares do interpose themselves 
▁ xxmaj betwixt your eyes and night ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj shall i entreat a word ? xxmaj they whisper . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj here lies the east . xxmaj doth not the day break here ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxup o , pardon , sir , it doth , and yongrey lines 
▁ xxmaj that fret the clouds are messengers of day . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj you shall confess that you are both deceived . 
▁ xxmaj here , as i point my sword , the sun arises , 
▁ xxmaj which is a great way growing on the south , 
▁ xxmaj weighing the youthful season of the year . 
▁ xxmaj some two months hence up higher toward the north 
▁ xxmaj he first presents his fire , and the high east 
▁ xxmaj stands as the xxmaj capitol , directly here . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj give me your hands all over , one by one . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj and let us swear our resolution . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no , not an oath . xxmaj if not the face of men , 
▁ xxmaj the sufferance of our souls , the time 's abuse- 
▁ xxmaj if these be motives weak , break off betimes , 
▁ xxmaj and every man hence to his idle bed ; 
▁ xxmaj so let high - sighted tyranny range on 
▁ xxmaj till each man drop by lottery . xxmaj but if these , 
▁ xxmaj as i am sure they do , bear fire enough 
▁ xxmaj to kindle cowards and to steel with valor 
▁ xxmaj the melting spirits of women , then , countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj what need we any spur but our own cause 
▁ xxmaj to prick us to redress ? xxmaj what other bond 
▁ xxmaj than secret xxmaj romans that have spoke the word 
▁ xxmaj and will not palter ? xxmaj and what other oath 
▁ xxmaj than honesty to honesty engaged 
▁ xxmaj that this shall be or we will fall for it ? 
▁ xxmaj swear priests and cowards and men cautelous , 
▁ xxmaj old feeble carrions and such suffering souls 
▁ xxmaj that welcome wrongs ; unto bad causes swear 
▁ xxmaj such creatures as men doubt ; but do not stain 
▁ xxmaj the even virtue of our enterprise , 
▁ xxmaj nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits , 
▁ xxmaj to think that or our cause or our performance 
▁ xxmaj did need an oath ; when every drop of blood 
▁ xxmaj that every xxmaj roman bears , and nobly bears , 
▁ xxmaj is guilty of a several bastardy 
▁ xxmaj if he do break the smallest particle 
▁ xxmaj of any promise that hath pass'd from him . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj but what of xxmaj cicero ? xxmaj shall we sound him ? 
▁ i think he will stand very strong with us . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj let us not leave him out . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj no , by no means . 
▁ xxup metellus . xxup o , let us have him , for his silver hairs 
▁ xxmaj will purchase us a good opinion , 
▁ xxmaj and buy men 's voices to commend our deeds . 
▁ xxmaj it shall be said his judgement ruled our hands ; 
▁ xxmaj our youths and wildness shall no whit appear , 
▁ xxmaj but all be buried in his gravity . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxup o , name him not ; let us not break with him , 
▁ xxmaj for he will never follow anything 
▁ xxmaj that other men begin . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj then leave him out . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj indeed he is not fit . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj shall no man else be touch'd but only xxmaj caesar ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj decius , well urged . i think it is not meet 
▁ xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , so well beloved of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj should outlive xxmaj caesar . xxmaj we shall find of him 
▁ a shrewd contriver ; and you know his means , 
▁ xxmaj if he improve them , may well stretch so far 
▁ xxmaj as to annoy us all , which to prevent , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj antony and xxmaj caesar fall together . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj our course will seem too bloody , xxmaj caius xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj to cut the head off and then hack the limbs 
▁ xxmaj like wrath in death and envy afterwards ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj antony is but a limb of xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxmaj let us be sacrificers , but not butchers , xxmaj caius . 
▁ xxmaj we all stand up against the spirit of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj and in the spirit of men there is no blood . 
▁ xxup o , that we then could come by xxmaj caesar 's spirit , 
▁ xxmaj and not dismember xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj but , alas , 
▁ xxmaj caesar must bleed for it ! xxmaj and , gentle friends , 
▁ xxmaj let 's kill him boldly , but not wrathfully ; 
▁ xxmaj let 's carve him as a dish fit for the gods , 
▁ xxmaj not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds ; 
▁ xxmaj and let our hearts , as subtle masters do , 
▁ xxmaj stir up their servants to an act of rage 
▁ xxmaj and after seem to chide 'em . xxmaj this shall make 
▁ xxmaj our purpose necessary and not envious , 
▁ xxmaj which so appearing to the common eyes , 
▁ xxmaj we shall be call'd purgers , not murderers . 
▁ xxmaj and for xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , think not of him , 
▁ xxmaj for he can do no more than xxmaj caesar 's arm 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj caesar 's head is off . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj yet i fear him , 
▁ xxmaj for in the ingrated love he bears to xxmaj caesar- 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj alas , good xxmaj cassius , do not think of him . 
▁ xxmaj if he love xxmaj caesar , all that he can do 
▁ xxmaj is to himself , take thought and die for xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxmaj and that were much he should , for he is given 
▁ xxmaj to sports , to wildness , and much company . 
▁ xxup trebonius . xxmaj there is no fear in him - let him not die , 
▁ xxmaj for he will live and laugh at this hereafter . 
▁ xxmaj clock strikes . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj peace , count the clock . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj the clock hath stricken three . 
▁ xxup trebonius . ' tis time to part . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj but it is doubtful yet 
▁ xxmaj whether xxmaj caesar will come forth today or no , 
▁ xxmaj for he is superstitious grown of late , 
▁ xxmaj quite from the main opinion he held once 
▁ xxmaj of fantasy , of dreams , and ceremonies . 
▁ xxmaj it may be these apparent prodigies , 
▁ xxmaj the unaccustom'd terror of this night , 
▁ xxmaj and the persuasion of his augurers 
▁ xxmaj may hold him from the xxmaj capitol today . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj never fear that . xxmaj if he be so resolved , 
▁ i can o'ersway him , for he loves to hear 
▁ xxmaj that unicorns may be betray'd with trees , 
▁ xxmaj and bears with glasses , elephants with holes , 
▁ xxmaj lions with toils , and men with flatterers ; 
▁ xxmaj but when i tell him he hates flatterers , 
▁ xxmaj he says he does , being then most flattered . 
▁ xxmaj let me work ; 
▁ xxmaj for i can give his humor the true bent , 
▁ xxmaj and i will bring him to the xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj nay , we will all of us be there to fetch him . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj by the eighth hour . xxmaj is that the utter most ? 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj be that the uttermost , and fail not then . 
▁ xxup metellus . xxmaj caius xxmaj ligarius doth bear xxmaj caesar hard , 
▁ xxmaj who rated him for speaking well of xxmaj pompey . 
▁ i wonder none of you have thought of him . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj now , good xxmaj metellus , go along by him . 
▁ xxmaj he loves me well , and i have given him reasons ; 
▁ xxmaj send him but hither , and xxmaj i 'll fashion him . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj the morning comes upon ' s. xxmaj we 'll leave you , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj and , friends , disperse yourselves , but all remember 
▁ xxmaj what you have said and show yourselves true xxmaj romans . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj good gentlemen , look fresh and merrily ; 
▁ xxmaj let not our looks put on our purposes , 
▁ xxmaj but bear it as our xxmaj roman actors do , 
▁ xxmaj with untired spirits and formal constancy . 
▁ xxmaj and so , good morrow to you every one . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxmaj boy ! xxmaj lucius ! xxmaj fast asleep ? xxmaj it is no matter . 
▁ xxmaj enjoy the honey - heavy dew of slumber ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast no figures nor no fantasies , 
▁ xxmaj which busy care draws in the brains of men ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore thou sleep'st so sound . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj portia . 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj brutus , my lord ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj portia , what mean you ? xxmaj wherefore rise you now ? 
▁ xxmaj it is not for your health thus to commit 
▁ xxmaj your weak condition to the raw cold morning . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj nor for yours neither . have ungently , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj stole from my bed ; and yesternight at supper 
▁ xxmaj you suddenly arose and walk'd about , 
▁ xxmaj musing and sighing , with your arms across ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i ask'd you what the matter was , 
▁ xxmaj you stared upon me with ungentle looks . 
▁ i urged you further ; then you scratch'd your head , 
▁ xxmaj and too impatiently stamp'd with your foot . 
▁ xxmaj yet i insisted , yet you answer'd not , 
▁ xxmaj but with an angry waiter of your hand 
▁ xxmaj gave sign for me to leave you . xxmaj so i did , 
▁ xxmaj fearing to strengthen that impatience 
▁ xxmaj which seem'd too much enkindled , and withal 
▁ xxmaj hoping it was but an effect of humor , 
▁ xxmaj which sometime hath his hour with every man . 
▁ xxmaj it will not let you eat , nor talk , nor sleep , 
▁ xxmaj and , could it work so much upon your shape 
▁ xxmaj as it hath much prevail'd on your condition , 
▁ i should not know you , xxmaj brutus . xxmaj dear my lord , 
▁ xxmaj make me acquainted with your cause of grief . 
▁ xxup brutus . i am not well in health , and that is all . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj brutus is wise , and , were he not in health , 
▁ xxmaj he would embrace the means to come by it . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why , so i do . xxmaj good xxmaj portia , go to bed . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj is xxmaj brutus sick , and is it physical 
▁ xxmaj to walk unbraced and suck up the humors 
▁ xxmaj of the dank morning ? xxmaj what , is xxmaj brutus sick , 
▁ xxmaj and will he steal out of his wholesome bed 
▁ xxmaj to dare the vile contagion of the night 
▁ xxmaj and tempt the rheumy and unpurged air 
▁ xxmaj to add unto his sickness ? xxmaj no , my xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj you have some sick offense within your mind , 
▁ xxmaj which by the right and virtue of my place 
▁ i ought to know of ; and , upon my knees , 
▁ i charm you , by my once commended beauty , 
▁ xxmaj by all your vows of love and that great vow 
▁ xxmaj which did incorporate and make us one , 
▁ xxmaj that you unfold to me , yourself , your half , 
▁ xxmaj why you are heavy and what men tonight 
▁ xxmaj have had resort to you ; for here have been 
▁ xxmaj some six or seven , who did hide their faces 
▁ xxmaj even from darkness . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj kneel not , gentle xxmaj portia . 
▁ xxup portia . i should not need , if you were gentle xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxmaj within the bond of marriage , tell me , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj is it excepted i should know no secrets 
▁ xxmaj that appertain to you ? xxmaj am i yourself 
▁ xxmaj but , as it were , in sort or limitation , 
▁ xxmaj to keep with you at meals , comfort your bed , 
▁ xxmaj and talk to you sometimes ? xxmaj dwell i but in the suburbs 
▁ xxmaj of your good pleasure ? xxmaj if it be no more , 
▁ xxmaj portia is xxmaj brutus ' harlot , not his wife . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you are my true and honorable wife , 
▁ xxmaj as dear to me as are the ruddy drops 
▁ xxmaj that visit my sad heart . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj if this were true , then should i know this secret . 
▁ i grant i am a woman , but withal 
▁ a woman that xxmaj lord xxmaj brutus took to wife . 
▁ i grant i am a woman , but withal 
▁ a woman well reputed , xxmaj cato 's daughter . 
▁ xxmaj think you i am no stronger than my sex , 
▁ xxmaj being so father'd and so husbanded ? 
▁ xxmaj tell me your counsels , i will not disclose 'em . 
▁ i have made strong proof of my constancy , 
▁ xxmaj giving myself a voluntary wound 
▁ xxmaj here in the thigh . xxmaj can i bear that with patience 
▁ xxmaj and not my husband 's secrets ? 
▁ xxup brutus . o ye gods , 
▁ xxmaj render me worthy of this noble wife ! xxmaj knocking within . 
▁ xxmaj hark , hark , one knocks . xxmaj portia , go in awhile , 
▁ xxmaj and by and by thy bosom shall partake 
▁ xxmaj the secrets of my heart . 
▁ xxmaj all my engagements i will construe to thee , 
▁ xxmaj all the charactery of my sad brows . 
▁ xxmaj leave me with haste . [ exit xxmaj portia . ] xxmaj lucius , who 's that knocks ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius with xxmaj ligarius . 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj here is a sick man that would speak with you . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj caius xxmaj ligarius , that xxmaj metellus spake of . 
▁ xxmaj boy , stand aside . xxmaj caius xxmaj ligarius , how ? 
▁ xxup ligarius . xxmaj vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxup o , what a time have you chose out , brave xxmaj caius , 
▁ xxmaj to wear a kerchief ! xxmaj would you were not sick ! 
▁ xxup ligarius . i am not sick , if xxmaj brutus have in hand 
▁ xxmaj any exploit worthy the name of honor . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj such an exploit have i in hand , xxmaj ligarius , 
▁ xxmaj had you a healthful ear to hear of it . 
▁ xxup ligarius . xxmaj by all the gods that xxmaj romans bow before , 
▁ i here discard my sickness ! xxmaj soul of xxmaj rome ! 
▁ xxmaj brave son , derived from honorable loins ! 
▁ xxmaj thou , like an exorcist , hast conjured up 
▁ xxmaj my mortified spirit . xxmaj now bid me run , 
▁ xxmaj and i will strive with things impossible , 
▁ xxmaj yea , get the better of them . xxmaj what 's to do ? 
▁ xxup brutus . a piece of work that will make sick men whole . 
▁ xxup ligarius . xxmaj but are not some whole that we must make sick ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj that must we also . xxmaj what it is , my xxmaj caius , 
▁ i shall unfold to thee , as we are going 
▁ xxmaj to whom it must be done . 
▁ xxup ligarius . xxmaj set on your foot , 
▁ xxmaj and with a heart new - fired i follow you , 
▁ xxmaj to do i know not what ; but it sufficeth 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj brutus leads me on . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj follow me then . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj caesar 's house . xxmaj thunder and lightning . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj caesar , in his nightgown . 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight . 
▁ xxmaj thrice hath xxmaj calpurnia in her sleep cried out , 
▁ " help , ho ! xxmaj they murther xxmaj caesar ! " xxmaj who 's within ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj go bid the priests do present sacrifice , 
▁ xxmaj and bring me their opinions of success . 
▁ xxup servant . i will , my lord . xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj calpurnia . 

▁ xxup calpurnia . xxmaj what mean you , xxmaj caesar ? xxmaj think you to walk forth ? 
▁ xxmaj you shall not stir out of your house today . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj caesar shall forth : the things that threaten'd me 
▁ xxmaj ne'er look'd but on my back ; when they shall see 
▁ xxmaj the face of xxmaj caesar , they are vanished . 
▁ xxup calpurnia . xxmaj caesar , i i stood on ceremonies , 
▁ xxmaj yet now they fright me . xxmaj there is one within , 
▁ xxmaj besides the things that we have heard and seen , 
▁ xxmaj recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch . 
▁ a lioness hath whelped in the streets ; 
▁ xxmaj and graves have yawn'd , and yielded up their dead ; 
▁ xxmaj fierce fiery warriors fight upon the clouds , 
▁ xxmaj in ranks and squadrons and right form of war , 
▁ xxmaj which drizzled blood upon the xxmaj capitol ; 
▁ xxmaj the noise of battle hurtled in the air , 
▁ xxmaj horses did neigh and dying men did groan , 
▁ xxmaj and ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets . 
▁ o xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj these things are beyond all use , 
▁ xxmaj and i do fear them . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what can be avoided 
▁ xxmaj whose end is purposed by the mighty gods ? 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj caesar shall go forth , for these predictions 
▁ xxmaj are to the world in general as to xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup calpurnia . xxmaj when beggars die , there are no comets seen ; 
▁ xxmaj the heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj cowards die many times before their deaths ; 
▁ xxmaj the valiant never taste of death but once . 
▁ xxmaj of all the wonders that i yet have heard , 
▁ xxmaj it seems to me most strange that men should fear 
▁ xxmaj seeing that death , a necessary end , 
▁ xxmaj will come when it will come . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxmaj what say the augurers ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj they would not have you to stir forth today . 
▁ xxmaj plucking the entrails of an offering forth , 
▁ xxmaj they could not find a heart within the beast . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the gods do this in shame of cowardice . 
▁ xxmaj caesar should be a beast without a heart 
▁ xxmaj if he should stay at home today for fear . 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj caesar shall not . xxmaj danger knows full well 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj caesar is more dangerous than he . 
▁ xxmaj we are two lions litter'd in one day , 
▁ xxmaj and i the elder and more terrible . 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj caesar shall go forth . 
▁ xxup calpurnia . xxmaj alas , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj your wisdom is consumed in confidence . 
▁ xxmaj do not go forth today . xxmaj call it my fear 
▁ xxmaj that keeps you in the house and not your own . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll send xxmaj mark xxmaj antony to the xxmaj senate xxmaj house , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall say you are not well today . 
▁ xxmaj let me , upon my knee , prevail in this . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj mark xxmaj antony shall say i am not well , 
▁ xxmaj and , for thy humor , i will stay at home . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj decius . 

▁ xxmaj here 's xxmaj decius xxmaj brutus , he shall tell them so . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj caesar , all hail ! xxmaj good morrow , worthy xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ i come to fetch you to the xxmaj senate xxmaj house . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj and you are come in very happy time 
▁ xxmaj to bear my greeting to the senators 
▁ xxmaj and tell them that i will not come today . 
▁ xxmaj can not , is false , and that i dare not , falser : 
▁ i will not come today . xxmaj tell them so , xxmaj decius . 
▁ xxup calpurnia . xxmaj say he is sick . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj shall xxmaj caesar send a lie ? 
▁ xxmaj have i in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far 
▁ xxmaj to be afeard to tell greybeards the truth ? 
▁ xxmaj decius , go tell them xxmaj caesar will not come . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj most mighty xxmaj caesar , let me know some cause , 
▁ xxmaj lest i be laugh'd at when i tell them so . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the cause is in my will : i will not come , 
▁ xxmaj that is enough to satisfy the xxmaj senate . 
▁ xxmaj but , for your private satisfaction , 
▁ xxmaj because i love you , i will let you know . 
▁ xxmaj calpurnia here , my wife , stays me at home ; 
▁ xxmaj she dreamt tonight she saw my statue , 
▁ xxmaj which , like a fountain with an hundred spouts , 
▁ xxmaj did run pure blood , and many lusty xxmaj romans 
▁ xxmaj came smiling and did bathe their hands in it . 
▁ xxmaj and these does she apply for warnings and portents 
▁ xxmaj and evils imminent , and on her knee 
▁ xxmaj hath begg'd that i will stay at home today . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj this dream is all amiss interpreted ; 
▁ xxmaj it was a vision fair and fortunate . 
▁ xxmaj your statue spouting blood in many pipes , 
▁ xxmaj in which so many smiling xxmaj romans bathed , 
▁ xxmaj signifies that from you great xxmaj rome shall suck 
▁ xxmaj reviving blood , and that great men shall press 
▁ xxmaj for tinctures , stains , relics , and cognizance . 
▁ xxmaj this by xxmaj calpurnia 's dream is signified . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj and this way have you well expounded it . 
▁ xxup decius . i have , when you have heard what i can say . 
▁ xxmaj and know it now , the xxmaj senate have concluded 
▁ xxmaj to give this day a crown to mighty xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxmaj if you shall send them word you will not come , 
▁ xxmaj their minds may change . xxmaj besides , it were a mock 
▁ xxmaj apt to be render'd , for someone to say 
▁ " break up the xxmaj senate till another time , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj caesar 's wife shall meet with better dreams . " 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj caesar hide himself , shall they not whisper 
▁ " lo , xxmaj caesar is afraid " ? 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj caesar , for my dear dear love 
▁ xxmaj to your proceeding bids me tell you this , 
▁ xxmaj and reason to my love is liable . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj how foolish do your fears seem now , xxmaj calpurnia ! 
▁ i am ashamed i did yield to them . 
▁ xxmaj give me my robe , for i will go . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj publius , xxmaj brutus , xxmaj ligarius , xxmaj metellus , xxmaj casca , 
▁ xxmaj trebonius , and xxmaj cinna . 

▁ xxmaj and look where xxmaj publius is come to fetch me . 
▁ xxup publius . xxmaj good morrow , caesar . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj publius . 
▁ xxmaj what , xxmaj brutus , are you stirr'd so early too ? 
▁ xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj casca . xxmaj caius xxmaj ligarius , 
▁ xxmaj caesar was ne'er so much your enemy 
▁ xxmaj as that same ague which hath made you lean . 
▁ xxmaj what is't o'clock ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj caesar , ' tis strucken eight . 
▁ xxup caesar . i thank you for your pains and courtesy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj antony . 

▁ xxmaj see , xxmaj antony , that revels long o ' nights , 
▁ xxmaj is notwithstanding up . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj so to most noble xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj bid them prepare within . 
▁ i am to blame to be thus waited for . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj cinna ; now , xxmaj metellus ; what , xxmaj trebonius , 
▁ i have an hour 's talk in store for you ; 
▁ xxmaj remember that you call on me today ; 
▁ xxmaj be near me , that i may remember you . 
▁ xxup trebonius . xxmaj caesar , i will . [ aside . ] xxmaj and so near will i be 
▁ xxmaj that your best friends shall wish i had been further . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj good friends , go in and taste some wine with me , 
▁ xxmaj and we like friends will straightway go together . 
▁ xxup brutus . [ aside . ] xxmaj that every like is not the same , o xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj the heart of xxmaj brutus yearns to think upon ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a street near the xxmaj capitol . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj artemidorus , reading paper . 

▁ xxup artemidorus . " caesar , beware of xxmaj brutus ; take heed of xxmaj cassius ; come 
▁ not near xxmaj casca ; have an eye to xxmaj cinna ; trust not xxmaj trebonius ; mark 
▁ well xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber ; xxmaj decius xxmaj brutus loves thee not ; thou hast 
▁ wronged xxmaj caius xxmaj ligarius . xxmaj there is but one mind in all these men , 
▁ and it is bent against xxmaj caesar . xxmaj if thou beest not immortal , look 
▁ about you . xxmaj security gives way to conspiracy . xxmaj the mighty gods 
▁ defend thee ! 
▁ xxmaj thy lover , xxmaj artemidorus . " 
▁ xxmaj here will i stand till xxmaj caesar pass along , 
▁ xxmaj and as a suitor will i give him this . 
▁ xxmaj my heart laments that virtue can not live 
▁ xxmaj out of the teeth of emulation . 
▁ xxmaj if thou read this , o xxmaj caesar , thou mayest live ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , the xxmaj fates with traitors do contrive . xxmaj exit . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the same street , before the house of xxmaj brutus . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj portia and xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxup portia . i prithee , boy , run to the xxmaj senate xxmaj house ; 
▁ xxmaj stay not to answer me , but get thee gone . 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou stay ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj to know my errand , madam . 
▁ xxup portia . i would have had thee there , and here again , 
▁ xxmaj ere i can tell thee what thou shouldst do there . 
▁ o constancy , be strong upon my side ! 
▁ xxmaj set a huge mountain ' tween my heart and tongue ! 
▁ i have a man 's mind , but a woman 's might . 
▁ xxmaj how hard it is for women to keep counsel ! 
▁ xxmaj art thou here yet ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj madam , what should i do ? 
▁ xxmaj run to the xxmaj capitol , and nothing else ? 
▁ xxmaj and so return to you , and nothing else ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj yes , bring me word , boy , if thy lord look well , 
▁ xxmaj for he went sickly forth ; and take good note 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj caesar doth , what suitors press to him . 
▁ xxmaj hark , boy , what noise is that ? 
▁ xxup lucius . i hear none , madam . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj prithee , listen well . 
▁ i heard a bustling rumor like a fray , 
▁ xxmaj and the wind brings it from the xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sooth , madam , i hear nothing . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj soothsayer . 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj come hither , fellow ; 
▁ xxmaj which way hast thou been ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj at mine own house , good lady . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj what is't o'clock ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj about the ninth hour , lady . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj is xxmaj caesar yet gone to the xxmaj capitol ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj madam , not yet . i go to take my stand 
▁ xxmaj to see him pass on to the xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj thou hast some suit to xxmaj caesar , hast thou not ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj that i have , lady . xxmaj if it will please xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj to be so good to xxmaj caesar as to hear me , 
▁ i shall beseech him to befriend himself . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj why , know'st thou any harm 's intended towards him ? 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj none that i know will be , much that i fear may chance . 
▁ xxmaj good morrow to you . xxmaj here the street is narrow , 
▁ xxmaj the throng that follows xxmaj caesar at the heels , 
▁ xxmaj of senators , of praetors , common suitors , 
▁ xxmaj will crowd a feeble man almost to death . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll get me to a place more void and there 
▁ xxmaj speak to great xxmaj caesar as he comes along . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup portia . i must go in . xxmaj ay me , how weak a thing 
▁ xxmaj the heart of woman is ! o xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj the heavens speed thee in thine enterprise ! 
▁ xxmaj sure , the boy heard me . xxmaj brutus hath a suit 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj caesar will not grant . xxup o , i grow faint . 
▁ xxmaj run , xxmaj lucius , and commend me to my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj say i am merry . xxmaj come to me again , 
▁ xxmaj and bring me word what he doth say to thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj before the xxmaj capitol ; the xxmaj senate sitting above . 
 a crowd of people , among them xxmaj artemidorus and the xxmaj soothsayer . 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxmaj caesar , xxmaj brutus , xxmaj cassius , xxmaj casca , xxmaj decius , xxmaj metellus , 
 xxmaj trebonius , xxmaj cinna , xxmaj antony , xxmaj lepidus , xxmaj popilius , xxmaj publius , and others . 

▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj the ides of xxmaj march are come . 
▁ xxup soothsayer . xxmaj ay , xxmaj caesar , but not gone . 
▁ a xxmaj hail , xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj read this schedule . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj trebonius doth desire you to o'er read , 
▁ xxmaj at your best leisure , this his humble suit . 
▁ xxup artemidorus . o xxmaj caesar , read mine first , for mine 's a suit 
▁ xxmaj that touches xxmaj caesar nearer . xxmaj read it , great xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what touches us ourself shall be last served . 
▁ xxup artemidorus . xxmaj delay not , xxmaj caesar ; read it instantly . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what , is the fellow mad ? 
▁ xxup publius . xxmaj sirrah , give place . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj what , urge you your petitions in the street ? 
▁ xxmaj come to the xxmaj capitol . 
▁
▁ xxmaj caesar goes up to the xxmaj senate xxmaj house , the rest follow . 

▁ xxup popilius . i wish your enterprise today may thrive . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj what enterprise , xxmaj popilius ? 
▁ xxup popilius . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj advances to xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what said xxmaj popilius xxmaj lena ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj he wish'd today our enterprise might thrive . 
▁ i fear our purpose is discovered . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj look , how he makes to xxmaj caesar . xxmaj mark him . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj casca , 
▁ xxmaj be sudden , for we fear prevention . 
▁ xxmaj brutus , what shall be done ? xxmaj if this be known , 
▁ xxmaj cassius or xxmaj caesar never shall turn back , 
▁ xxmaj for i will slay myself . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj cassius , be constant . 
▁ xxmaj popilius xxmaj lena speaks not of our purposes ; 
▁ xxmaj for , look , he smiles , and xxmaj caesar doth not change . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj trebonius knows his time , for , look you , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj he draws xxmaj mark xxmaj antony out of the way . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj antony and xxmaj trebonius . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj where is xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber ? xxmaj let him 
▁ xxmaj and presently prefer his suit to xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he is address'd ; press near and second him . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj casca , you are the first that rears your hand . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj are we all ready ? xxmaj what is now amiss 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj caesar and his xxmaj senate must redress ? 
▁ xxup metellus . xxmaj most high , most mighty , and most puissant xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj metellus xxmaj cimber throws before thy seat 
▁ xxmaj an humble heart . xxmaj kneels . 
▁ xxup caesar . i must prevent thee , xxmaj cimber . 
▁ xxmaj these couchings and these lowly courtesies 
▁ xxmaj might fire the blood of ordinary men 
▁ xxmaj and turn preordinance and first decree 
▁ xxmaj into the law of children . xxmaj be not fond 
▁ xxmaj to think that xxmaj caesar bears such rebel blood 
▁ xxmaj that will be thaw'd from the true quality 
▁ xxmaj with that which melteth fools- i mean sweet words , 
▁ xxmaj low - crooked court'sies , and base spaniel - fawning . 
▁ xxmaj thy brother by decree is banished . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him , 
▁ i spurn thee like a cur out of my way . 
▁ xxmaj know , xxmaj caesar doth not wrong , nor without cause 
▁ xxmaj will he be satisfied . 
▁ xxup metellus . xxmaj is there no voice more worthy than my own , 
▁ xxmaj to sound more sweetly in great xxmaj caesar 's ear 
▁ xxmaj for the repealing of my banish'd brother ? 
▁ xxup brutus . i kiss thy hand , but not in flattery , xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj desiring thee that xxmaj publius xxmaj cimber may 
▁ xxmaj have an immediate freedom of repeal . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj what , xxmaj brutus ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj pardon , xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj caesar , pardon ! 
▁ xxmaj as low as to thy foot doth xxmaj cassius fall 
▁ xxmaj to beg enfranchisement for xxmaj publius xxmaj cimber . 
▁ xxup caesar . i could be well moved , if i were as you ; 
▁ xxmaj if i could pray to move , prayers would move me ; 
▁ xxmaj but i am constant as the northern star , 
▁ xxmaj of whose true - fix'd and resting quality 
▁ xxmaj there is no fellow in the firmament . 
▁ xxmaj the skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks ; 
▁ xxmaj they are all fire and every one doth shine ; 
▁ xxmaj but there 's but one in all doth hold his place . 
▁ xxmaj so in the world , ' tis furnish'd well with men , 
▁ xxmaj and men are flesh and blood , and apprehensive ; 
▁ xxmaj yet in the number i do know but one 
▁ xxmaj that unassailable holds on his rank , 
▁ xxmaj unshaked of motion ; and that i am he , 
▁ xxmaj let me a little show it , even in this ; 
▁ xxmaj that i was constant xxmaj cimber should be banish'd , 
▁ xxmaj and constant do remain to keep him so . 
▁ xxup cinna . o xxmaj caesar- 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj hence ! xxmaj wilt thou lift up xxmaj olympus ? 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj great xxmaj caesar- 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj doth not xxmaj brutus bootless kneel ? 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj speak , hands , for me ! 
▁ xxmaj casca first , then the other xxmaj conspirators