xxbos and xxmaj marcus xxmaj brutus stab xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup caesar . xxmaj et tu , xxmaj brute?- xxmaj then fall , xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj liberty ! xxmaj freedom ! xxmaj tyranny is dead ! 
▁ xxmaj run hence , proclaim , cry it about the streets . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj some to the common pulpits and cry out 
▁ " liberty , freedom , and enfranchisement ! " 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj people and senators , be not affrighted , 
▁ xxmaj fly not , stand still ; ambition 's debt is paid . 
▁ xxup casca . xxmaj go to the pulpit , xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj and xxmaj cassius too . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj where 's xxmaj publius ? 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj here , quite confounded with this mutiny . 
▁ xxup metellus . xxmaj stand fast together , lest some friend of xxmaj caesar 's 
▁ xxmaj should chance- 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj talk not of standing . xxmaj publius , good cheer , 
▁ xxmaj there is no harm intended to your person , 
▁ xxmaj nor to no xxmaj roman else . xxmaj so tell them , xxmaj publius . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj and leave us , xxmaj publius , lest that the people 
▁ xxmaj rushing on us should do your age some mischief . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj do so , and let no man abide this deed 
▁ xxmaj but we the doers . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj trebonius . 
▁
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj where is xxmaj antony ? 
▁ xxup trebonius . xxmaj fled to his house amazed . 
▁ xxmaj men , wives , and children stare , cry out , and run 
▁ xxmaj as it were doomsday . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj fates , we will know your pleasures . 
▁ xxmaj that we shall die , we know ; ' tis but the time 
▁ xxmaj and drawing days out that men stand upon . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj why , he that cuts off twenty years of life 
▁ xxmaj cuts off so many years of fearing death . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj grant that , and then is death a benefit ; 
▁ xxmaj so are we xxmaj caesar 's friends that have abridged 
▁ xxmaj his time of fearing death . xxmaj stoop , xxmaj romans , stoop , 
▁ xxmaj and let us bathe our hands in xxmaj caesar 's blood 
▁ xxmaj up to the elbows , and besmear our swords ; 
▁ xxmaj then walk we forth , even to the marketplace , 
▁ xxmaj and waving our red weapons o'er our heads , 
▁ xxmaj let 's all cry , " peace , freedom , and liberty ! " 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj stoop then , and wash . xxmaj how many ages hence 
▁ xxmaj shall this our lofty scene be acted over 
▁ xxmaj in states unborn and accents yet unknown ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj how many times shall xxmaj caesar bleed in sport , 
▁ xxmaj that now on xxmaj pompey 's basis lies along 
▁ xxmaj no worthier than the dust ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj so oft as that shall be , 
▁ xxmaj so often shall the knot of us be call'd 
▁ xxmaj the men that gave their country liberty . 
▁ xxup decius . xxmaj what , shall we forth ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj ay , every man away . 
▁ xxmaj brutus shall lead , and we will grace his heels 
▁ xxmaj with the most boldest and best hearts of xxmaj rome . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj soft , who comes here ? a friend of xxmaj antony 's . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj thus , xxmaj brutus , did my master bid me kneel , 
▁ xxmaj thus did xxmaj mark xxmaj antony bid me fall down , 
▁ xxmaj and , being prostrate , thus he bade me say : 
▁ xxmaj brutus is noble , wise , valiant , and honest ; 
▁ xxmaj caesar was mighty , bold , royal , and loving . 
▁ xxmaj say i love xxmaj brutus and i honor him ; 
▁ xxmaj say i fear'd xxmaj caesar , honor'd him , and loved him . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj brutus will vouchsafe that xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj may safely come to him and be resolved 
▁ xxmaj how xxmaj caesar hath deserved to lie in death , 
▁ xxmaj mark xxmaj antony shall not love xxmaj caesar dead 
▁ xxmaj so well as xxmaj brutus living , but will follow 
▁ xxmaj the fortunes and affairs of noble xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxmaj thorough the hazards of this untrod state 
▁ xxmaj with all true faith . xxmaj so says my master xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj thy master is a wise and valiant xxmaj roman ; 
▁ i never thought him worse . 
▁ xxmaj tell him , so please him come unto this place , 
▁ xxmaj he shall be satisfied and , by my honor , 
▁ xxmaj depart untouch'd . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj i 'll fetch him presently . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup brutus . i know that we shall have him well to friend . 
▁ xxup cassius . i wish we may , but yet have i a mind 
▁ xxmaj that fears him much , and my misgiving still 
▁ xxmaj falls shrewdly to the purpose . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj antony . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj but here comes xxmaj antony . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup antony . o mighty xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj dost thou lie so low ? 
▁ xxmaj are all thy conquests , glories , triumphs , spoils , 
▁ xxmaj shrunk to this little measure ? xxmaj fare thee well . 
▁ i know not , gentlemen , what you intend , 
▁ xxmaj who else must be let blood , who else is rank . 
▁ xxmaj if i myself , there is no hour so fit 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj caesar 's death 's hour , nor no instrument 
▁ xxmaj of half that worth as those your swords , made rich 
▁ xxmaj with the most noble blood of all this world . 
▁ i do beseech ye , if you bear me hard , 
▁ xxmaj now , whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke , 
▁ xxmaj fulfill your pleasure . xxmaj live a thousand years , 
▁ i shall not find myself so apt to die ; 
▁ xxmaj no place will please me so , no means of death , 
▁ xxmaj as here by xxmaj caesar , and by you cut off , 
▁ xxmaj the choice and master spirits of this age . 
▁ xxup brutus . o xxmaj antony , beg not your death of us ! 
▁ xxmaj though now we must appear bloody and cruel , 
▁ xxmaj as , by our hands and this our present act 
▁ xxmaj you see we do , yet see you but our hands 
▁ xxmaj and this the bleeding business they have done . 
▁ xxmaj our hearts you see not ; they are pitiful ; 
▁ xxmaj and pity to the general wrong of xxmaj rome- 
▁ xxmaj as fire drives out fire , so pity pity- 
▁ xxmaj hath done this deed on xxmaj caesar . xxmaj for your part , 
▁ xxmaj to you our swords have leaden points , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony ; 
▁ xxmaj our arms in strength of malice , and our hearts 
▁ xxmaj of brothers ' temper , do receive you in 
▁ xxmaj with all kind love , good thoughts , and reverence . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj your voice shall be as strong as any man 's 
▁ xxmaj in the disposing of new dignities . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj only be patient till we have appeased 
▁ xxmaj the multitude , beside themselves with fear , 
▁ xxmaj and then we will deliver you the cause 
▁ xxmaj why xxup i , that did love xxmaj caesar when i struck him , 
▁ xxmaj have thus proceeded . 
▁ xxup antony . i doubt not of your wisdom . 
▁ xxmaj let each man render me his bloody hand . 
▁ xxmaj first , xxmaj marcus xxmaj brutus , will i shake with you ; 
▁ xxmaj next , xxmaj caius xxmaj cassius , do i take your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj decius xxmaj brutus , yours ; now yours , xxmaj metellus ; 
▁ xxmaj yours , xxmaj cinna ; and , my valiant xxmaj casca , yours ; 
▁ xxmaj though last , not least in love , yours , good xxmaj trebonius . 
▁ xxmaj gentlemen all- alas , what shall i say ? 
▁ xxmaj my credit now stands on such slippery ground , 
▁ xxmaj that one of two bad ways you must conceit me , 
▁ xxmaj either a coward or a flatterer . 
▁ xxmaj that i did love thee , xxmaj caesar , xxup o , ' tis true ! 
▁ xxmaj if then thy spirit look upon us now , 
▁ xxmaj shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death 
▁ xxmaj to see thy xxmaj antony making his peace , 
▁ xxmaj shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes , 
▁ xxmaj most noble ! xxmaj in the presence of thy corse ? 
▁ xxmaj had i as many eyes as thou hast wounds , 
▁ xxmaj weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood , 
▁ xxmaj it would become me better than to close 
▁ xxmaj in terms of friendship with thine enemies . 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj julius ! xxmaj here wast thou bay'd , brave hart , 
▁ xxmaj here didst thou fall , and here thy hunters stand , 
▁ xxmaj sign'd in thy spoil , and crimson'd in thy xxmaj lethe . 
▁ o world , thou wast the forest to this hart , 
▁ xxmaj and this , indeed , o world , the heart of thee . 
▁ xxmaj how like a deer strucken by many princes 
▁ xxmaj dost thou here lie ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj mark xxmaj antony- 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj caius xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxmaj the enemies of xxmaj caesar shall say this : 
▁ xxmaj then , in a friend , it is cold modesty . 
▁ xxup cassius . i blame you not for praising xxmaj caesar so ; 
▁ xxmaj but what compact mean you to have with us ? 
▁ xxmaj will you be prick'd in number of our friends , 
▁ xxmaj or shall we on , and not depend on you ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj therefore i took your hands , but was indeed 
▁ xxmaj sway'd from the point by looking down on xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxmaj friends am i with you all and love you all , 
▁ xxmaj upon this hope that you shall give me reasons 
▁ xxmaj why and wherein xxmaj caesar was dangerous . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj or else were this a savage spectacle . 
▁ xxmaj our reasons are so full of good regard 
▁ xxmaj that were you , xxmaj antony , the son of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj you should be satisfied . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj that 's all i seek ; 
▁ xxmaj and am moreover suitor that i may 
▁ xxmaj produce his body to the marketplace , 
▁ xxmaj and in the pulpit , as becomes a friend , 
▁ xxmaj speak in the order of his funeral . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you shall , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj brutus , a word with you . 
▁ [ aside to xxmaj brutus . ] xxmaj you know not what you do . xxmaj do not consent 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj antony speak in his funeral . 
▁ xxmaj know you how much the people may be moved 
▁ xxmaj by that which he will utter ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj by your pardon , 
▁ i will myself into the pulpit first , 
▁ xxmaj and show the reason of our xxmaj caesar 's death . 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj antony shall speak , i will protest 
▁ xxmaj he speaks by leave and by permission , 
▁ xxmaj and that we are contented xxmaj caesar shall 
▁ xxmaj have all true rites and lawful ceremonies . 
▁ xxmaj it shall advantage more than do us wrong . 
▁ xxup cassius . i know not what may fall ; i like it not . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , here , take you xxmaj caesar 's body . 
▁ xxmaj you shall not in your funeral speech blame us , 
▁ xxmaj but speak all good you can devise of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj and say you do't by our permission , 
▁ xxmaj else shall you not have any hand at all 
▁ xxmaj about his funeral . xxmaj and you shall speak 
▁ xxmaj in the same pulpit whereto i am going , 
▁ xxmaj after my speech is ended . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj be it so , 
▁ i do desire no more . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj prepare the body then , and follow us . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup antony . xxup o , pardon me , thou bleeding piece of earth , 
▁ xxmaj that i am meek and gentle with these butchers ! 
▁ xxmaj thou art the ruins of the noblest man 
▁ xxmaj that ever lived in the tide of times . 
▁ xxmaj woe to the hand that shed this costly blood ! 
▁ xxmaj over thy wounds now do i prophesy 
▁ ( which like dumb mouths do ope their ruby lips 
▁ xxmaj to beg the voice and utterance of my tongue ) 
▁ a curse shall light upon the limbs of men ; 
▁ xxmaj domestic fury and fierce civil strife 
▁ xxmaj shall cumber all the parts of xxmaj italy ; 
▁ xxmaj blood and destruction shall be so in use , 
▁ xxmaj and dreadful objects so familiar , 
▁ xxmaj that mothers shall but smile when they behold 
▁ xxmaj their infants quarter'd with the hands of war ; 
▁ xxmaj all pity choked with custom of fell deeds , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj caesar 's spirit ranging for revenge , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj ate by his side come hot from hell , 
▁ xxmaj shall in these confines with a monarch 's voice 
▁ xxmaj cry " havoc ! " and let slip the dogs of war , 
▁ xxmaj that this foul deed shall smell above the earth 
▁ xxmaj with carrion men , groaning for burial . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxmaj you serve xxmaj octavius xxmaj caesar , do you not ? 
▁ xxup servant . i do , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj caesar did write for him to come to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he did receive his letters , and is coming , 
▁ xxmaj and bid me say to you by word of mouth- 
▁ o xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj sees the body . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj thy heart is big ; get thee apart and weep . 
▁ xxmaj passion , i see , is catching , for mine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine , 
▁ xxmaj began to water . xxmaj is thy master coming ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he lies tonight within seven leagues of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj post back with speed and tell him what hath chanced . 
▁ xxmaj here is a mourning xxmaj rome , a dangerous xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj no xxmaj rome of safety for xxmaj octavius yet ; 
▁ xxmaj hie hence , and tell him so . xxmaj yet stay awhile , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt not back till i have borne this corse 
▁ xxmaj into the marketplace . xxmaj there shall i try , 
▁ xxmaj in my oration , how the people take 
▁ xxmaj the cruel issue of these bloody men , 
▁ xxmaj according to the which thou shalt discourse 
▁ xxmaj to young xxmaj octavius of the state of things . 
▁ xxmaj lend me your hand . xxmaj exeunt with xxmaj caesar 's body . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj forum . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus and xxmaj cassius , and a throng of xxmaj citizens . 

▁ xxup citizens . xxmaj we will be satisfied ! xxmaj let us be satisfied ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj then follow me and give me audience , friends . 
▁ xxmaj cassius , go you into the other street 
▁ xxmaj and part the numbers . 
▁ xxmaj those that will hear me speak , let 'em stay here ; 
▁ xxmaj those that will follow xxmaj cassius , go with him ; 
▁ xxmaj and public reasons shall be rendered 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj caesar 's death . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . i will hear xxmaj brutus speak . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . i will hear xxmaj cassius and compare their reasons , 
▁ xxmaj when severally we hear them rendered . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj cassius , with some xxmaj citizens . 
▁ xxmaj brutus goes into the pulpit . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj the noble xxmaj brutus is ascended . xxmaj silence ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj be patient till the last . 
▁ xxmaj romans , countrymen , and lovers ! xxmaj hear me for my cause , and be 
▁ silent , that you may hear . xxmaj believe me for mine honor , and have 
▁ respect to mine honor , that you may believe . xxmaj censure me in your 
▁ wisdom , and awake your senses , that you may the better judge . xxmaj if 
▁ there be any in this assembly , any dear friend of xxmaj caesar 's , to 
▁ him i say that xxmaj brutus ' love to xxmaj caesar was no less than his . xxmaj if 
▁ then that friend demand why xxmaj brutus rose against xxmaj caesar , this is 
▁ my answer : xxmaj not that i loved xxmaj caesar less , but that i loved xxmaj rome 
▁ more . xxmaj had you rather xxmaj caesar were living and die all slaves , than 
▁ that xxmaj caesar were dead to live all freemen ? xxmaj as xxmaj caesar loved me , i 
▁ weep for him ; as he was fortunate , i rejoice at it ; as he was 
▁ valiant , i honor him ; but as he was ambitious , i slew him . xxmaj there 
▁ is tears for his love , joy for his fortune , honor for his valor , 
▁ and death for his ambition . xxmaj who is here so base that would be a 
▁ bondman ? xxmaj if any , speak , for him have i offended . xxmaj who is here so 
▁ rude that would not be a xxmaj roman ? xxmaj if any , speak , for him have i 
▁ offended . xxmaj who is here so vile that will not love his country ? xxmaj if 
▁ any , speak , for him have i offended . i pause for a reply . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj none , xxmaj brutus , none . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj then none have i offended . i have done no more to xxmaj caesar 
▁ than you shall do to xxmaj brutus . xxmaj the question of his death is 
▁ enrolled in the xxmaj capitol , his glory not extenuated , wherein he was 
▁ worthy , nor his offenses enforced , for which he suffered death . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj antony and others , with xxmaj caesar 's body . 

▁ xxmaj here comes his body , mourned by xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , who , though he had 
▁ no hand in his death , shall receive the benefit of his dying , a 
▁ place in the commonwealth , as which of you shall not ? xxmaj with this i 
▁ depart- that , as i slew my best lover for the good of xxmaj rome , i 
▁ have the same dagger for myself , when it shall please my country 
▁ to need my death . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj live , xxmaj brutus , live , live ! 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj bring him with triumph home unto his house . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj give him a statue with his ancestors . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj let him be xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj caesar 's better parts 
▁ xxmaj shall be crown'd in xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj we 'll bring him to his house with shouts and 
▁ clamors . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj my countrymen- 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj peace ! xxmaj silence ! xxmaj brutus speaks . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj peace , ho ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj good countrymen , let me depart alone , 
▁ xxmaj and , for my sake , stay here with xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj do grace to xxmaj caesar 's corse , and grace his speech 
▁ xxmaj tending to xxmaj caesar 's glories , which xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj by our permission , is allow'd to make . 
▁ i do entreat you , not a man depart , 
▁ xxmaj save i alone , till xxmaj antony have spoke . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj stay , ho , and let us hear xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj let him go up into the public chair ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll hear him . xxmaj noble xxmaj antony , go up . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj for xxmaj brutus ' sake , i am beholding to you . 
▁ xxmaj goes into the pulpit . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj what does he say of xxmaj brutus ? 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj he says , for xxmaj brutus ' sake , 
▁ xxmaj he finds himself beholding to us all . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . ' twere best he speak no harm of xxmaj brutus here . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj this xxmaj caesar was a tyrant . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj nay , that 's certain . 
▁ xxmaj we are blest that xxmaj rome is rid of him . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj peace ! xxmaj let us hear what xxmaj antony can say . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you gentle xxmaj romans- 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj peace , ho ! xxmaj let us hear him . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj friends , xxmaj romans , countrymen , lend me your ears ! 
▁ i come to bury xxmaj caesar , not to praise him . 
▁ xxmaj the evil that men do lives after them , 
▁ xxmaj the good is oft interred with their bones ; 
▁ xxmaj so let it be with xxmaj caesar . xxmaj the noble xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxmaj hath told you xxmaj caesar was ambitious ; 
▁ xxmaj if it were so , it was a grievous fault , 
▁ xxmaj and grievously hath xxmaj caesar answer'd it . 
▁ xxmaj here , under leave of xxmaj brutus and the rest- 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj brutus is an honorable man ; 
▁ xxmaj so are they all , all honorable men- 
▁ xxmaj come i to speak in xxmaj caesar 's funeral . 
▁ xxmaj he was my friend , faithful and just to me ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj brutus says he was ambitious , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj brutus is an honorable man . 
▁ xxmaj he hath brought many captives home to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj whose ransoms did the general coffers fill . 
▁ xxmaj did this in xxmaj caesar seem ambitious ? 
▁ xxmaj when that the poor have cried , xxmaj caesar hath wept ; 
▁ xxmaj ambition should be made of sterner stuff : 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj brutus says he was ambitious , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj brutus is an honorable man . 
▁ xxmaj you all did see that on the xxmaj lupercal 
▁ i thrice presented him a kingly crown , 
▁ xxmaj which he did thrice refuse . xxmaj was this ambition ? 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj brutus says he was ambitious , 
▁ xxmaj and sure he is an honorable man . 
▁ i speak not to disprove what xxmaj brutus spoke , 
▁ xxmaj but here i am to speak what i do know . 
▁ xxmaj you all did love him once , not without cause ; 
▁ xxmaj what cause withholds you then to mourn for him ? 
▁ o judgement , thou art fled to brutish beasts , 
▁ xxmaj and men have lost their reason . xxmaj bear with me ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart is in the coffin there with xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj and i must pause till it come back to me . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj methinks there is much reason in his sayings . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj if thou consider rightly of the matter , 
▁ xxmaj caesar has had great wrong . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj has he , masters ? 
▁ i fear there will a worse come in his place . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj mark'd ye his words ? xxmaj he would not take the crown ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore ' tis certain he was not ambitious . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj if it be found so , some will dear abide it . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj poor soul , his eyes are red as fire with weeping . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj there 's not a nobler man in xxmaj rome than xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj now mark him , he begins again to speak . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj but yesterday the word of xxmaj caesar might 
▁ xxmaj have stood against the world . xxmaj now lies he there , 
▁ xxmaj and none so poor to do him reverence . 
▁ o masters ! xxmaj if i were disposed to stir 
▁ xxmaj your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage , 
▁ i should do xxmaj brutus wrong and xxmaj cassius wrong , 
▁ xxmaj who , you all know , are honorable men . 
▁ i will not do them wrong ; i rather choose 
▁ xxmaj to wrong the dead , to wrong myself and you , 
▁ xxmaj than i will wrong such honorable men . 
▁ xxmaj but here 's a parchment with the seal of xxmaj caesar ; 
▁ i found it in his closet , ' tis his will . 
▁ xxmaj let but the commons hear this testament- 
▁ xxmaj which , pardon me , i do not mean to read- 
▁ xxmaj and they would go and kiss dead xxmaj caesar 's wounds 
▁ xxmaj and dip their napkins in his sacred blood , 
▁ xxmaj yea , beg a hair of him for memory , 
▁ xxmaj and , dying , mention it within their wills , 
▁ xxmaj bequeathing it as a rich legacy 
▁ xxmaj unto their issue . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj we 'll hear the will . xxmaj read it , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj the will , the will ! xxmaj we will hear xxmaj caesar 's will . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj have patience , gentle friends , i must not read it ; 
▁ xxmaj it is not meet you know how xxmaj caesar loved you . 
▁ xxmaj you are not wood , you are not stones , but men ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being men , hearing the will of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj it will inflame you , it will make you mad . 
▁ ' tis good you know not that you are his heirs , 
▁ xxmaj for if you should , xxup o , what would come of it ! 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj read the will ; we 'll hear it , xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxmaj you shall read us the will , xxmaj caesar 's will . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj will you be patient ? xxmaj will you stay awhile ? 
▁ i have o'ershot myself to tell you of it . 
▁ i fear i wrong the honorable men 
▁ xxmaj whose daggers have stabb'd xxmaj caesar ; i do fear it . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj they were traitors . xxmaj honorable men ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj the will ! xxmaj the testament ! 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj they were villains , murtherers . xxmaj the will ! 
▁ xxmaj read the will ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj you will compel me then to read the will ? 
▁ xxmaj then make a ring about the corse of xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj and let me show you him that made the will . 
▁ xxmaj shall i descend ? xxmaj and will you give me leave ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj come down . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj descend . 
▁ xxmaj he comes down from the pulpit . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj you shall have leave . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . a ring , stand round . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj stand from the hearse , stand from the body . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj room for xxmaj antony , most noble xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj nay , press not so upon me , stand far off . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj stand back ; room , bear back ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj if you have tears , prepare to shed them now . 
▁ xxmaj you all do know this mantle . i remember 
▁ xxmaj the first time ever xxmaj caesar put it on ; 
▁ ' twas on a summer 's evening , in his tent , 
▁ xxmaj that day he overcame the xxmaj nervii . 
▁ xxmaj look , in this place ran xxmaj cassius ' dagger through ; 
▁ xxmaj see what a rent the envious xxmaj casca made ; 
▁ xxmaj through this the well - beloved xxmaj brutus stabb'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and as he pluck'd his cursed steel away , 
▁ xxmaj mark how the blood of xxmaj caesar follow'd it , 
▁ xxmaj as rushing out of doors , to be resolved 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj brutus so unkindly knock'd , or no ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj brutus , as you know , was xxmaj caesar 's angel . 
▁ xxmaj judge , o you gods , how dearly xxmaj caesar loved him ! 
▁ xxmaj this was the most unkindest cut of all ; 
▁ xxmaj for when the noble xxmaj caesar saw him stab , 
▁ xxmaj ingratitude , more strong than traitors ' arms , 
▁ xxmaj quite vanquish'd him . xxmaj then burst his mighty heart , 
▁ xxmaj and , in his mantle muffling up his face , 
▁ xxmaj even at the base of xxmaj pompey 's statue , 
▁ xxmaj which all the while ran blood , great xxmaj caesar fell . 
▁ xxup o , what a fall was there , my countrymen ! 
▁ xxmaj then xxup i , and you , and all of us fell down , 
▁ xxmaj whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us . 
▁ xxup o , now you weep , and i perceive you feel 
▁ xxmaj the dint of pity . xxmaj these are gracious drops . 
▁ xxmaj kind souls , what weep you when you but behold 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj caesar 's vesture wounded ? xxmaj look you here , 
▁ xxmaj here is himself , marr'd , as you see , with traitors . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . o piteous spectacle ! 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . o noble xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . o woeful day ! 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . o traitors villains ! 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . o most bloody sight ! 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj we will be revenged . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj revenge ! xxmaj about ! xxmaj seek ! xxmaj burn ! xxmaj fire ! xxmaj kill ! 
▁ xxmaj slay ! xxmaj let not a traitor live ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj stay , countrymen . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj peace there ! xxmaj hear the noble xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj we 'll hear him , we 'll follow him , we 'll die with 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj good friends , sweet friends , let me not stir you up 
▁ xxmaj to such a sudden flood of mutiny . 
▁ xxmaj they that have done this deed are honorable . 
▁ xxmaj what private griefs they have , alas , i know not , 
▁ xxmaj that made them do it . xxmaj they are wise and honorable , 
▁ xxmaj and will , no doubt , with reasons answer you . 
▁ i come not , friends , to steal away your hearts . 
▁ i am no orator , as xxmaj brutus is ; 
▁ xxmaj but , as you know me all , a plain blunt man , 
▁ xxmaj that love my friend , and that they know full well 
▁ xxmaj that gave me public leave to speak of him . 
▁ xxmaj for i have neither wit , nor words , nor worth , 
▁ xxmaj action , nor utterance , nor the power of speech , 
▁ xxmaj to stir men 's blood . i only speak right on ; 
▁ i tell you that which you yourselves do know ; 
▁ xxmaj show you sweet xxmaj caesar 's wounds , poor dumb mouths , 
▁ xxmaj and bid them speak for me . xxmaj but were i xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj brutus xxmaj antony , there were an xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue 
▁ xxmaj in every wound of xxmaj caesar that should move 
▁ xxmaj the stones of xxmaj rome to rise and mutiny . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj we 'll mutiny . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj we 'll burn the house of xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj away , then ! xxmaj come , seek the conspirators . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj yet hear me , countrymen ; yet hear me speak . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj peace , ho ! xxmaj hear xxmaj antony , most noble xxmaj antony ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj why , friends , you go to do you know not what . 
▁ xxmaj wherein hath xxmaj caesar thus deserved your loves ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , you know not ; i must tell you then . 
▁ xxmaj you have forgot the will i told you of . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj most true , the will ! xxmaj let 's stay and hear the will . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj here is the will , and under xxmaj caesar 's seal . 
▁ xxmaj to every xxmaj roman citizen he gives , 
▁ xxmaj to every several man , seventy - five drachmas . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj most noble xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj we 'll revenge his death . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . o royal xxmaj caesar ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj hear me with patience . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj peace , ho ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj moreover , he hath left you all his walks , 
▁ xxmaj his private arbors , and new - planted orchards , 
▁ xxmaj on this side xxmaj tiber ; he hath left them you , 
▁ xxmaj and to your heirs forever- common pleasures , 
▁ xxmaj to walk abroad and recreate yourselves . 
▁ xxmaj here was a xxmaj caesar ! xxmaj when comes such another ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj never , never . xxmaj come , away , away ! 
▁ xxmaj we 'll burn his body in the holy place 
▁ xxmaj and with the brands fire the traitors ' houses . 
▁ xxmaj take up the body . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj go fetch fire . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj pluck down benches . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj pluck down forms , windows , anything . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj citizens with the body . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj now let it work . xxmaj mischief , thou art afoot , 
▁ xxmaj take thou what course thou wilt . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxmaj how now , fellow ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj sir , xxmaj octavius is already come to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he and xxmaj lepidus are at xxmaj caesar 's house . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj and thither will i straight to visit him . 
▁ xxmaj he comes upon a wish . xxmaj fortune is merry , 
▁ xxmaj and in this mood will give us anything . 
▁ xxup servant . i heard him say xxmaj brutus and xxmaj cassius 
▁ xxmaj are rid like madmen through the gates of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj be like they had some notice of the people , 
▁ xxmaj how i had moved them . xxmaj bring me to xxmaj octavius . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj cinna the poet . 

▁ xxup cinna . i dreamt tonight that i did feast with xxmaj caesar , 
▁ xxmaj and things unluckily charge my fantasy . 
▁ i have no will to wander forth of doors , 
▁ xxmaj yet something leads me forth . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj citizens . 

▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj what is your name ? 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj whither are you going ? 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj where do you dwell ? 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj are you a married man or a bachelor ? 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj answer every man directly . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj ay , and briefly . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj ay , and wisely . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj ay , and truly , you were best . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj what is my name ? xxmaj whither am i going ? xxmaj where do i dwell ? xxmaj am i 
▁ a married man or a bachelor ? xxmaj then , to answer every man directly 
▁ and briefly , wisely and truly : wisely i say , i am a bachelor . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj that 's as much as to say they are fools that marry . 
▁ xxmaj you 'll bear me a bang for that , i fear . xxmaj proceed directly . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj directly , i am going to xxmaj caesar 's funeral . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj as a friend or an enemy ? 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj as a friend . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj that matter is answered directly . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj for your dwelling , briefly . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj briefly , i dwell by the xxmaj capitol . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj your name , sir , truly . 
▁ xxup cinna . xxmaj truly , my name is xxmaj cinna . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj tear him to pieces , he 's a conspirator . 
▁ xxup cinna . i am xxmaj cinna the poet , i am xxmaj cinna the poet . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj tear him for his bad verses , tear him for his bad 
▁ verses . 
▁ xxup cinna . i am not xxmaj cinna the conspirator . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup citizen . xxmaj it is no matter , his name 's xxmaj cinna . xxmaj pluck but his 
▁ name out of his heart , and turn him going . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj tear him , tear him ! xxmaj come , brands , ho , firebrands . xxmaj to 
▁ xxmaj brutus ' , to xxmaj cassius ' ; burn all . xxmaj some to xxmaj decius ' house , and some 
▁ to xxmaj casca 's , some to xxmaj ligarius ' . xxmaj away , go ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a house in xxmaj rome . xxmaj antony , xxmaj octavius , and xxmaj lepidus , seated at a table . 

▁ xxup antony . xxmaj these many then shall die , their names are prick'd . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj your brother too must die ; consent you , xxmaj lepidus ? 
▁ xxup lepidus . i do consent- 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj prick him down , xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj upon condition xxmaj publius shall not live , 
▁ xxmaj who is your sister 's son , xxmaj mark xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj he shall not live ; look , with a spot i damn him . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj lepidus , go you to xxmaj caesar 's house , 
▁ xxmaj fetch the will hither , and we shall determine 
▁ xxmaj how to cut off some charge in legacies . 
▁ xxup lepidus . xxmaj what , shall i find you here ? 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj or here , or at the xxmaj capitol . xxmaj exit xxmaj lepidus . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj this is a slight unmeritable man , 
▁ xxmaj meet to be sent on errands . xxmaj is it fit , 
▁ xxmaj the three - fold world divided , he should stand 
▁ xxmaj one of the three to share it ? 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj so you thought him , 
▁ xxmaj and took his voice who should be prick'd to die 
▁ xxmaj in our black sentence and proscription . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj octavius , i have seen more days than you , 
▁ xxmaj and though we lay these honors on this man 
▁ xxmaj to ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads , 
▁ xxmaj he shall but bear them as the ass bears gold , 
▁ xxmaj to groan and sweat under the business , 
▁ xxmaj either led or driven , as we point the way ; 
▁ xxmaj and having brought our treasure where we will , 
▁ xxmaj then take we down his load and turn him off , 
▁ xxmaj like to the empty ass , to shake his ears 
▁ xxmaj and graze in commons . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj you may do your will , 
▁ xxmaj but he 's a tried and valiant soldier . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj so is my horse , xxmaj octavius , and for that 
▁ i do appoint him store of provender . 
▁ xxmaj it is a creature that i teach to fight , 
▁ xxmaj to wind , to stop , to run directly on , 
▁ xxmaj his corporal motion govern'd by my spirit . 
▁ xxmaj and , in some taste , is xxmaj lepidus but so : 
▁ xxmaj he must be taught , and train'd , and bid go forth ; 
▁ a barren - spirited fellow , one that feeds 
▁ xxmaj on objects , arts , and imitations , 
▁ xxmaj which , out of use and staled by other men , 
▁ xxmaj begin his fashion . xxmaj do not talk of him 
▁ xxmaj but as a property . xxmaj and now , xxmaj octavius , 
▁ xxmaj listen great things . xxmaj brutus and xxmaj cassius 
▁ xxmaj are levying powers ; we must straight make head ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore let our alliance be combined , 
▁ xxmaj our best friends made , our means stretch'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us presently go sit in council , 
▁ xxmaj how covert matters may be best disclosed , 
▁ xxmaj and open perils surest answered . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj let us do so , for we are at the stake , 
▁ xxmaj and bay'd about with many enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj and some that smile have in their hearts , i fear , 
▁ xxmaj millions of mischiefs . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj camp near xxmaj sardis . xxmaj before xxmaj brutus ' tent . xxmaj drum . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus , xxmaj lucilius , xxmaj lucius , and xxmaj soldiers ; xxmaj titinius and xxmaj pindarus meet them . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj stand , ho ! 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj give the word , ho , and stand . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what now , xxmaj lucilius , is xxmaj cassius near ? 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj he is at hand , and xxmaj pindarus is come 
▁ xxmaj to do you salutation from his master . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he greets me well . xxmaj your master , xxmaj pindarus , 
▁ xxmaj in his own change , or by ill officers , 
▁ xxmaj hath given me some worthy cause to wish 
▁ xxmaj things done undone ; but if he be at hand , 
▁ i shall be satisfied . 
▁ xxup pindarus . i do not doubt 
▁ xxmaj but that my noble master will appear 
▁ xxmaj such as he is , full of regard and honor . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he is not doubted . a word , xxmaj lucilius , 
▁ xxmaj how he received you . xxmaj let me be resolved . 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj with courtesy and with respect enough , 
▁ xxmaj but not with such familiar instances , 
▁ xxmaj nor with such free and friendly conference , 
▁ xxmaj as he hath used of old . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj thou hast described 
▁ a hot friend cooling . xxmaj ever note , xxmaj lucilius , 
▁ xxmaj when love begins to sicken and decay 
▁ xxmaj it useth an enforced ceremony . 
▁ xxmaj there are no tricks in plain and simple faith ; 
▁ xxmaj but hollow men , like horses hot at hand , 
▁ xxmaj make gallant show and promise of their mettle ; 
▁ xxmaj but when they should endure the bloody spur , 
▁ xxmaj they fall their crests and like deceitful jades 
▁ xxmaj sink in the trial . xxmaj comes his army on ? 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj they meant his night in xxmaj sard is to be quarter'd ; 
▁ xxmaj the greater part , the horse in general , 
▁ xxmaj are come with xxmaj cassius . xxmaj low march within . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj hark , he is arrived . 
▁ xxmaj march gently on to meet him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassius and his xxmaj powers . 

▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj stand , ho ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj stand , ho ! xxmaj speak the word along . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj stand ! 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj stand ! 
▁ xxup third xxup soldier . xxmaj stand ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj most noble brother , you have done me wrong . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj judge me , you gods ! xxmaj wrong i mine enemies ? 
▁ xxmaj and , if not so , how should i wrong a brother ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj brutus , this sober form of yours hides wrongs , 
▁ xxmaj and when you do them- 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj cassius , be content , 
▁ xxmaj speak your griefs softly , i do know you well . 
▁ xxmaj before the eyes of both our armies here , 
▁ xxmaj which should perceive nothing but love from us , 
▁ xxmaj let us not wrangle . xxmaj bid them move away ; 
▁ xxmaj then in my tent , xxmaj cassius , enlarge your griefs , 
▁ xxmaj and i will give you audience . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj pindarus , 
▁ xxmaj bid our commanders lead their charges off 
▁ a little from this ground . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj lucilius , do you the like , and let no man 
▁ xxmaj come to our tent till we have done our conference . 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj lucius and xxmaj titinius guard our door . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj brutus ' tent . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus and xxmaj cassius . 

▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj that you have wrong'd me doth appear in this : 
▁ xxmaj you have condemn'd and noted xxmaj lucius xxmaj pella 
▁ xxmaj for taking bribes here of the xxmaj sardians , 
▁ xxmaj wherein my letters , praying on his side , 
▁ xxmaj because i knew the man , were slighted off . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you wrong'd yourself to write in such a case . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj in such a time as this it is not meet 
▁ xxmaj that every nice offense should bear his comment . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj let me tell you , xxmaj cassius , you yourself 
▁ xxmaj are much condemn'd to have an itching palm , 
▁ xxmaj to sell and mart your offices for gold 
▁ xxmaj to undeservers . 
▁ xxup cassius . i an itching palm ? 
▁ xxmaj you know that you are xxmaj brutus that speaks this , 
▁ xxmaj or , by the gods , this speech were else your last . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the name of xxmaj cassius honors this corruption , 
▁ xxmaj and chastisement doth therefore hide his head . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj chastisement ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj remember xxmaj march , the ides of xxmaj march remember . 
▁ xxmaj did not great xxmaj julius bleed for justice ' sake ? 
▁ xxmaj what villain touch'd his body , that did stab , 
▁ xxmaj and not for justice ? xxmaj what , shall one of us , 
▁ xxmaj that struck the foremost man of all this world 
▁ xxmaj but for supporting robbers , shall we now 
▁ xxmaj contaminate our fingers with base bribes 
▁ xxmaj and sell the mighty space of our large honors 
▁ xxmaj for so much trash as may be grasped thus ? 
▁ i had rather be a dog , and bay the moon , 
▁ xxmaj than such a xxmaj roman . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj brutus , bait not me , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not endure it . xxmaj you forget yourself 
▁ xxmaj to hedge me in . i am a soldier , xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj older in practice , abler than yourself 
▁ xxmaj to make conditions . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj go to , you are not , xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxup cassius . i am . 
▁ xxup brutus . i say you are not . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj urge me no more , i shall forget myself ; 
▁ xxmaj have mind upon your health , tempt me no farther . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj away , slight man ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj hear me , for i will speak . 
▁ xxmaj must i give way and room to your rash choler ? 
▁ xxmaj shall i be frighted when a madman stares ? 
▁ xxup cassius . o gods , ye gods ! xxmaj must i endure all this ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj all this ? xxmaj ay , more . xxmaj fret till your proud heart break . 
▁ xxmaj go show your slaves how choleric you are , 
▁ xxmaj and make your bondmen tremble . xxmaj must i bouge ? 
▁ xxmaj must i observe you ? xxmaj must i stand and crouch 
▁ xxmaj under your testy humor ? xxmaj by the gods , 
▁ xxmaj you shall digest the venom of your spleen , 
▁ xxmaj though it do split you , for , from this day forth , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll use you for my mirth , yea , for my laughter , 
▁ xxmaj when you are waspish . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj is it come to this ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you say you are a better soldier : 
▁ xxmaj let it appear so , make your vaunting true , 
▁ xxmaj and it shall please me well . xxmaj for mine own part , 
▁ i shall be glad to learn of noble men . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj you wrong me every way , you wrong me , xxmaj brutus . 
▁ i said , an elder soldier , not a better . 
▁ xxmaj did i say " better " ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj if you did , i care not . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj when xxmaj caesar lived , he durst not thus have moved me . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj peace , peace ! xxmaj you durst not so have tempted him . 
▁ xxup cassius . i durst not ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj what , durst not tempt him ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj for your life you durst not . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj do not presume too much upon my love ; 
▁ i may do that i shall be sorry for . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you have done that you should be sorry for . 
▁ xxmaj there is no terror , xxmaj cassius , in your threats , 
▁ xxmaj for i am arm'd so strong in honesty , 
▁ xxmaj that they pass by me as the idle wind 
▁ xxmaj which i respect not . i did send to you 
▁ xxmaj for certain sums of gold , which you denied me , 
▁ xxmaj for i can raise no money by vile means . 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i had rather coin my heart 
▁ xxmaj and drop my blood for drachmas than to wring 
▁ xxmaj from the hard hands of peasants their vile trash 
▁ xxmaj by any indirection . i did send 
▁ xxmaj to you for gold to pay my legions , 
▁ xxmaj which you denied me . xxmaj was that done like xxmaj cassius ? 
▁ xxmaj should i have answer'd xxmaj caius xxmaj cassius so ? 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj marcus xxmaj brutus grows so covetous 
▁ xxmaj to lock such rascal counters from his friends , 
▁ xxmaj be ready , gods , with all your thunderbolts , 
▁ xxmaj dash him to pieces ! 
▁ xxup cassius . i denied you not . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj you did . 
▁ xxup cassius . i did not . xxmaj he was but a fool 
▁ xxmaj that brought my answer back . xxmaj brutus hath rived my heart . 
▁ a friend should bear his friend 's infirmities , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj brutus makes mine greater than they are . 
▁ xxup brutus . i do not , till you practise them on me . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj you love me not . 
▁ xxup brutus . i do not like your faults . 
▁ xxup cassius . a friendly eye could never see such faults . 
▁ xxup brutus . a flatterer 's would not , though they do appear 
▁ xxmaj as huge as high xxmaj olympus . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj come , xxmaj antony , and young xxmaj octavius , come , 
▁ xxmaj revenge yourselves alone on xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj cassius is aweary of the world : 
▁ xxmaj hated by one he loves ; braved by his brother ; 
▁ xxmaj check'd like a bondman ; all his faults observed , 
▁ xxmaj set in a notebook , learn'd and conn'd by rote , 
▁ xxmaj to cast into my teeth . xxup o , i could weep 
▁ xxmaj my spirit from mine eyes ! xxmaj there is my dagger , 
▁ xxmaj and here my naked breast ; within , a heart 
▁ xxmaj dearer than xxmaj pluto 's mine , richer than gold . 
▁ xxmaj if that thou best a xxmaj roman , take it forth ; 
▁ xxup i , that denied thee gold , will give my heart . 
▁ xxmaj strike , as thou didst at xxmaj caesar , for i know , 
▁ xxmaj when thou didst hate him worst , thou lovedst him better 
▁ xxmaj than ever thou lovedst xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj sheathe your dagger . 
▁ xxmaj be angry when you will , it shall have scope ; 
▁ xxmaj do what you will , dishonor shall be humor . 
▁ o xxmaj cassius , you are yoked with a lamb , 
▁ xxmaj that carries anger as the flint bears fire , 
▁ xxmaj who , much enforced , shows a hasty spark 
▁ xxmaj and straight is cold again . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj hath xxmaj cassius lived 
▁ xxmaj to be but mirth and laughter to his xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj when grief and blood ill - temper'd vexeth him ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj when i spoke that , i was ill - temper'd too . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj do you confess so much ? xxmaj give me your hand . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj and my heart too . 
▁ xxup cassius . o xxmaj brutus ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj have not you love enough to bear with me 
▁ xxmaj when that rash humor which my mother gave me 
▁ xxmaj makes me forgetful ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj yes , xxmaj cassius , and from henceforth , 
▁ xxmaj when you are overearnest with your xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll think your mother chides , and leave you so . 
▁ xxup poet . [ within . ] xxmaj let me go in to see the generals . 
▁ xxmaj there is some grudge between 'em , ' tis not meet 
▁ xxmaj they be alone . 
▁ xxup lucilius . [ within . ] xxmaj you shall not come to them . 
▁ xxup poet . [ within . ] xxmaj nothing but death shall stay me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj poet , followed by xxmaj lucilius , xxmaj titinius , and xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj how now , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj for shame , you generals ! xxmaj what do you mean ? 
▁ xxmaj love , and be friends , as two such men should be ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have seen more years , xxmaj i 'm sure , than ye . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj ha , ha ! xxmaj how vilely doth this cynic rhyme ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj get you hence , sirrah ; saucy fellow , hence ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj bear with him , xxmaj brutus ; ' tis his fashion . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj i 'll know his humor when he knows his time . 
▁ xxmaj what should the wars do with these jigging fools ? 
▁ xxmaj companion , hence ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj away , away , be gone ! xxmaj exit xxmaj poet . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj lucilius and xxmaj titinius , bid the commanders 
▁ xxmaj prepare to lodge their companies tonight . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj and come yourselves and bring xxmaj messala with you 
▁ xxmaj immediately to us . xxmaj exeunt xxmaj lucilius and xxmaj titinius . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj lucius , a bowl of wine ! xxmaj exit xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxup cassius . i did not think you could have been so angry . 
▁ xxup brutus . o xxmaj cassius , i am sick of many griefs . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj of your philosophy you make no use , 
▁ xxmaj if you give place to accidental evils . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no man bears sorrow better . xxmaj portia is dead . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj ha ? xxmaj portia ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj she is dead . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj how ' scaped killing when i cross'd you so ? 
▁ o insupportable and touching loss ! 
▁ xxmaj upon what sickness ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj impatient of my absence , 
▁ xxmaj and grief that young xxmaj octavius with xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj have made themselves so strong- for with her death 
▁ xxmaj that tidings came- with this she fell distract , 
▁ xxmaj and ( her attendants absent ) swallow'd fire . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj and died so ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj even so . 
▁ xxup cassius . o ye immortal gods ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius , with wine and taper . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj speak no more of her . xxmaj give me a bowl of wine . 
▁ xxmaj in this i bury all unkindness , xxmaj cassius . xxmaj drinks . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj my heart is thirsty for that noble pledge . 
▁ xxmaj fill , xxmaj lucius , till the wine o'erswell the cup ; 
▁ i can not drink too much of xxmaj brutus ' love . xxmaj drinks . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come in , xxmaj titinius ! xxmaj exit xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj titinius , with xxmaj messala . 

▁ xxmaj welcome , good xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxmaj now sit we close about this taper here , 
▁ xxmaj and call in question our necessities . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj portia , art thou gone ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no more , i pray you . 
▁ xxmaj messala , i have here received letters 
▁ xxmaj that young xxmaj octavius and xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj come down upon us with a mighty power , 
▁ xxmaj bending their expedition toward xxmaj philippi . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj myself have letters of the selfsame tenure . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj with what addition ? 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj that by proscription and bills of outlawry 
▁ xxmaj octavius , xxmaj antony , and xxmaj lepidus 
▁ xxmaj have put to death an hundred senators . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj there in our letters do not well agree ; 
▁ xxmaj mine speak of seventy senators that died 
▁ xxmaj by their proscriptions , xxmaj cicero being one . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj cicero one ! 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj cicero is dead , 
▁ xxmaj and by that order of proscription . 
▁ xxmaj had you your letters from your wife , my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no , xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj nor nothing in your letters writ of her ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj nothing , xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj that , methinks , is strange . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why ask you ? xxmaj hear you aught of her in yours ? 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj now , as you are a xxmaj roman , tell me true . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj then like a xxmaj roman bear the truth i tell : 
▁ xxmaj for certain she is dead , and by strange manner . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why , farewell , xxmaj portia . xxmaj we must die , xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxmaj with meditating that she must die once 
▁ i have the patience to endure it now . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj even so great men great losses should endure . 
▁ xxup cassius . i have as much of this in art as you , 
▁ xxmaj but yet my nature could not bear it so . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj well , to our work alive . xxmaj what do you think 
▁ xxmaj of marching to xxmaj philippi presently ? 
▁ xxup cassius . i do not think it good . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj your reason ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj this it is : 
▁ ' tis better that the enemy seek us ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall he waste his means , weary his soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj doing himself offense , whilst we lying still 
▁ xxmaj are full of rest , defense , and nimbleness . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj good reasons must of force give place to better . 
▁ xxmaj the people ' twixt xxmaj philippi and this ground 
▁ xxmaj do stand but in a forced affection , 
▁ xxmaj for they have grudged us contribution . 
▁ xxmaj the enemy , marching along by them , 
▁ xxmaj by them shall make a fuller number up , 
▁ xxmaj come on refresh'd , new - added , and encouraged ; 
▁ xxmaj from which advantage shall we cut him off 
▁ xxmaj if at xxmaj philippi we do face him there , 
▁ xxmaj these people at our back . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj hear me , good brother . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj under your pardon . xxmaj you must note beside 
▁ xxmaj that we have tried the utmost of our friends , 
▁ xxmaj our legions are brim - full , our cause is ripe : 
▁ xxmaj the enemy increaseth every day ; 
▁ xxmaj we , at the height , are ready to decline . 
▁ xxmaj there is a tide in the affairs of men 
▁ xxmaj which taken at the flood leads on to fortune ; 
▁ xxmaj omitted , all the voyage of their life 
▁ xxmaj is bound in shallows and in miseries . 
▁ xxmaj on such a full sea are we now afloat , 
▁ xxmaj and we must take the current when it serves , 
▁ xxmaj or lose our ventures . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj then , with your will , go on ;