xxbos xxmaj we 'll along ourselves and meet them at xxmaj philippi . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj the deep of night is crept upon our talk , 
▁ xxmaj and nature must obey necessity , 
▁ xxmaj which we will niggard with a little rest . 
▁ xxmaj there is no more to say ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj no more . xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj early tomorrow will we rise and hence . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj lucius ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius . 

▁ xxmaj my gown . xxmaj exit xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj messala ; 
▁ xxmaj good night , xxmaj titinius ; noble , noble xxmaj cassius , 
▁ xxmaj good night and good repose . 
▁ xxup cassius . o my dear brother ! 
▁ xxmaj this was an ill beginning of the night . 
▁ xxmaj never come such division ' tween our souls ! 
▁ xxmaj let it not , xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj everything is well . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj good night , my lord . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj good night , good brother . 
▁ xxup titinius . xxup messala . xxmaj good night , xxmaj lord xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj farewell , everyone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj brutus . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius , with the gown . 

▁ xxmaj give me the gown . xxmaj where is thy instrument ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj here in the tent . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj what , thou speak'st drowsily ? 
▁ xxmaj poor knave , i blame thee not , thou art o'erwatch'd . 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj claudio and some other of my men , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj varro and xxmaj claudio ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj varro and xxmaj claudio . 

▁ xxup varro . xxmaj calls my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . i pray you , sirs , lie in my tent and sleep ; 
▁ xxmaj it may be i shall raise you by and by 
▁ xxmaj on business to my brother xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxup varro . xxmaj so please you , we will stand and watch your pleasure . 
▁ xxup brutus . i would not have it so . xxmaj lie down , good sirs . 
▁ xxmaj it may be i shall otherwise bethink me . 
▁ xxmaj look xxmaj lucius , here 's the book i sought for so ; 
▁ i put it in the pocket of my gown . 
▁ xxmaj varro and xxmaj claudio lie down . 
▁ xxup lucius . i was sure your lordship did not give it me . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj bear with me , good boy , i am much forgetful . 
▁ xxmaj canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile , 
▁ xxmaj and touch thy instrument a strain or two ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj ay , my lord , an't please you . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj it does , my boy . 
▁ i trouble thee too much , but thou art willing . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj it is my duty , sir . 
▁ xxup brutus . i should not urge thy duty past thy might ; 
▁ i know young bloods look for a time of rest . 
▁ xxup lucius . i have slept , my lord , already . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj it was well done , and thou shalt sleep again ; 
▁ i will not hold thee long . xxmaj if i do live , 
▁ i will be good to thee . xxmaj music , and a song . 
▁ xxmaj this is a sleepy tune . o murtherous slumber , 
▁ xxmaj layest thou thy leaden mace upon my boy 
▁ xxmaj that plays thee music ? xxmaj gentle knave , good night . 
▁ i will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost nod , thou break'st thy instrument ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll take it from thee ; and , good boy , good night . 
▁ xxmaj let me see , let me see ; is not the leaf turn'd down 
▁ xxmaj where i left reading ? xxmaj here it is , i think . xxmaj sits down . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj ghost of xxmaj caesar . 

▁ xxmaj how ill this taper burns ! xxmaj ha , who comes here ? 
▁ i think it is the weakness of mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj that shapes this monstrous apparition . 
▁ xxmaj it comes upon me . xxmaj art thou anything ? 
▁ xxmaj art thou some god , some angel , or some devil 
▁ xxmaj that makest my blood cold and my hair to stare ? 
▁ xxmaj speak to me what thou art . 
▁ xxup ghost . xxmaj thy evil spirit , xxmaj brutus . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why comest thou ? 
▁ xxup ghost . xxmaj to tell thee thou shalt see me at xxmaj philippi . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj well , then i shall see thee again ? 
▁ xxup ghost . xxmaj ay , at xxmaj philippi . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why , i will see thee at xxmaj philippi then . xxmaj exit xxmaj ghost . 
▁ xxmaj now i have taken heart thou vanishest . 
▁ xxmaj ill spirit , i would hold more talk with thee . 
▁ xxmaj boy ! xxmaj lucius ! xxmaj varro ! xxmaj claudio ! xxmaj sirs , awake ! 
▁ xxmaj claudio ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj the strings , my lord , are false . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj he thinks he still is at his instrument . 
▁ xxmaj lucius , awake ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj didst thou dream , xxmaj lucius , that thou so criedst out ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj my lord , i do not know that i did cry . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj yes , that thou didst . xxmaj didst thou see anything ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj nothing , my lord . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj sleep again , xxmaj lucius . xxmaj sirrah xxmaj claudio ! 
▁ [ to xxmaj varro . ] xxmaj fellow thou , awake ! 
▁ xxup varro . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why did you so cry out , sirs , in your sleep ? 
▁ xxup varro . xxup claudio . xxmaj did we , my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj ay , saw you anything ? 
▁ xxup varro . xxmaj no , my lord , i saw nothing . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj nor xxup i , my lord . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj go and commend me to my brother xxmaj cassius ; 
▁ xxmaj bid him set on his powers betimes before , 
▁ xxmaj and we will follow . 
▁ xxup varro . xxup claudio . xxmaj it shall be done , my lord . xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the plains of xxmaj philippi . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj octavius , xxmaj antony , and their xxmaj army . 

▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj now , xxmaj antony , our hopes are answered . 
▁ xxmaj you said the enemy would not come down , 
▁ xxmaj but keep the hills and upper regions . 
▁ xxmaj it proves not so . xxmaj their battles are at hand ; 
▁ xxmaj they mean to warn us at xxmaj philippi here , 
▁ xxmaj answering before we do demand of them . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj tut , i am in their bosoms , and i know 
▁ xxmaj wherefore they do it . xxmaj they could be content 
▁ xxmaj to visit other places , and come down 
▁ xxmaj with fearful bravery , thinking by this face 
▁ xxmaj to fasten in our thoughts that they have courage ; 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis not so . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj prepare you , generals . 
▁ xxmaj the enemy comes on in gallant show ; 
▁ xxmaj their bloody sign of battle is hung out , 
▁ xxmaj and something to be done immediately . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj octavius , lead your battle softly on , 
▁ xxmaj upon the left hand of the even field . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj upon the right hand xxup i , keep thou the left . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj why do you cross me in this exigent ? 
▁ xxup octavius . i do not cross you , but i will do so . 

▁ xxmaj march . xxmaj drum . xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus , xxmaj cassius , and their xxmaj army ; 
▁ xxmaj lucilius , xxmaj titinius , xxmaj messala , and others . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj they stand , and would have parley . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj stand fast , xxmaj titinius ; we must out and talk . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj mark xxmaj antony , shall we give sign of battle ? 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj no , xxmaj caesar , we will answer on their charge . 
▁ xxmaj make forth , the generals would have some words . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj stir not until the signal not until the signal . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj words before blows . xxmaj is it so , countrymen ? 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj not that we love words better , as you do . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj good words are better than bad strokes , xxmaj octavius . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj in your bad strokes , xxmaj brutus , you give good words . 
▁ xxmaj witness the hole you made in xxmaj caesar 's heart , 
▁ xxmaj crying " long live ! xxmaj hail , xxmaj caesar ! " 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj the posture of your blows are yet unknown ; 
▁ xxmaj but for your words , they rob the xxmaj hybla bees , 
▁ xxmaj and leave them honeyless . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj not stingless too . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxup o , yes , and soundless too , 
▁ xxmaj for you have stol'n their buzzing , xxmaj antony , 
▁ xxmaj and very wisely threat before you sting . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj villains ! xxmaj you did not so when your vile daggers 
▁ xxmaj hack'd one another in the sides of xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxmaj you show'd your teeth like apes , and fawn'd like hounds , 
▁ xxmaj and bow'd like bondmen , kissing xxmaj caesar 's feet ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst damned xxmaj casca , like a cur , behind 
▁ xxmaj strooke xxmaj caesar on the neck . o you flatterers ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj flatterers ? xxmaj now , xxmaj brutus , thank yourself . 
▁ xxmaj this tongue had not offended so today , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj cassius might have ruled . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj come , come , the cause . xxmaj if arguing make us sweat , 
▁ xxmaj the proof of it will turn to redder drops . 
▁ xxmaj look , 
▁ i draw a sword against conspirators ; 
▁ xxmaj when think you that the sword goes up again ? 
▁ xxmaj never , till xxmaj caesar 's three and thirty wounds 
▁ xxmaj be well avenged , or till another xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj have added slaughter to the sword of traitors . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj caesar , thou canst not die by traitors ' hands , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou bring'st them with thee . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj so i hope , 
▁ i was not born to die on xxmaj brutus ' sword . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxup o , if thou wert the noblest of thy strain , 
▁ xxmaj young man , thou couldst not die more honorable . 
▁ xxup cassius . a peevish school boy , worthless of such honor , 
▁ xxmaj join'd with a masker and a reveler ! 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj old xxmaj cassius still ! 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj come , xxmaj antony , away ! 
▁ xxmaj defiance , traitors , hurl we in your teeth . 
▁ xxmaj if you dare fight today , come to the field ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , when you have stomachs . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj octavius , xxmaj antony , and their xxmaj army . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj why , now , blow and , swell billow , and swim bark ! 
▁ xxmaj the storm is up , and all is on the hazard . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj ho , xxmaj lucilius ! xxmaj hark , a word with you . 
▁ xxup lucilius . [ stands forth . ] xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj brutus and xxmaj lucilius converse apart . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj messala ! 
▁ xxup messala . [ stands forth . ] xxmaj what says my general ? 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj messala , 
▁ xxmaj this is my birthday , as this very day 
▁ xxmaj was xxmaj cassius born . xxmaj give me thy hand , xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxmaj be thou my witness that , against my will , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj pompey was , am i compell'd to set 
▁ xxmaj upon one battle all our liberties . 
▁ xxmaj you know that i held xxmaj epicurus strong , 
▁ xxmaj and his opinion . xxmaj now i change my mind , 
▁ xxmaj and partly credit things that do presage . 
▁ xxmaj coming from xxmaj sardis , on our former ensign 
▁ xxmaj two mighty eagles fell , and there they perch'd , 
▁ xxmaj gorging and feeding from our soldiers ' hands , 
▁ xxmaj who to xxmaj philippi here consorted us . 
▁ xxmaj this morning are they fled away and gone , 
▁ xxmaj and in their steads do ravens , crows , and kites 
▁ xxmaj fly o'er our heads and downward look on us , 
▁ xxmaj as we were sickly prey . xxmaj their shadows seem 
▁ a canopy most fatal , under which 
▁ xxmaj our army lies , ready to give up the ghost . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj believe not so . 
▁ xxup cassius . i but believe it partly , 
▁ xxmaj for i am fresh of spirit and resolved 
▁ xxmaj to meet all perils very constantly . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj even so , xxmaj lucilius . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj now , most noble xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj the gods today stand friendly that we may , 
▁ xxmaj lovers in peace , lead on our days to age ! 
▁ xxmaj but , since the affairs of men rest still incertain , 
▁ xxmaj let 's reason with the worst that may befall . 
▁ xxmaj if we do lose this battle , then is this 
▁ xxmaj the very last time we shall speak together . 
▁ xxmaj what are you then determined to do ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj even by the rule of that philosophy 
▁ xxmaj by which i did blame xxmaj cato for the death 
▁ xxmaj which he did give himself- i know not how , 
▁ xxmaj but i do find it cowardly and vile , 
▁ xxmaj for fear of what might fall , so to prevent 
▁ xxmaj the time of life- arming myself with patience 
▁ xxmaj to stay the providence of some high powers 
▁ xxmaj that govern us below . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj then , if we lose this battle , 
▁ xxmaj you are contented to be led in triumph 
▁ xxmaj thorough the streets of xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj no , xxmaj cassius , no . xxmaj think not , thou noble xxmaj roman , 
▁ xxmaj that ever xxmaj brutus will go bound to xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj he bears too great a mind . xxmaj but this same day 
▁ xxmaj must end that work the ides of xxmaj march begun . 
▁ xxmaj and whether we shall meet again i know not . 
▁ xxmaj therefore our everlasting farewell take . 
▁ xxmaj forever , and forever , farewell , xxmaj cassius ! 
▁ xxmaj if we do meet again , why , we shall smile ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , why then this parting was well made . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj forever and forever farewell , xxmaj brutus ! 
▁ xxmaj if we do meet again , we 'll smile indeed ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , ' tis true this parting was well made . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why then , lead on . xxup o , that a man might know 
▁ xxmaj the end of this day 's business ere it come ! 
▁ xxmaj but it sufficeth that the day will end , 
▁ xxmaj and then the end is known . xxmaj come , ho ! xxmaj away ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the field of battle . 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus and xxmaj messala . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj ride , ride , xxmaj messala , ride , and give these bills 
▁ xxmaj unto the legions on the other side . xxmaj loud alarum . 
▁ xxmaj let them set on at once , for i perceive 
▁ xxmaj but cold demeanor in xxmaj octavia 's wing , 
▁ xxmaj and sudden push gives them the overthrow . 
▁ xxmaj ride , ride , xxmaj messala . xxmaj let them all come down . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another part of the field . 

 xxmaj alarums . xxmaj enter xxmaj cassius and xxmaj titinius . 

▁ xxup cassius . xxup o , look , xxmaj titinius , look , the villains fly ! 
▁ xxmaj myself have to mine own turn'd enemy . 
▁ xxmaj this ensign here of mine was turning back ; 
▁ i slew the coward , and did take it from him . 
▁ xxup titinius . o xxmaj cassius , xxmaj brutus gave the word too early , 
▁ xxmaj who , having some advantage on xxmaj octavius , 
▁ xxmaj took it too eagerly . xxmaj his soldiers fell to spoil , 
▁ xxmaj whilst we by xxmaj antony are all enclosed . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj pindarus . 

▁ xxup pindarus . xxmaj fly further off , my lord , fly further off ; 
▁ xxmaj mark xxmaj antony is in your tents , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj fly , therefore , noble xxmaj cassius , fly far off . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj this hill is far enough . xxmaj look , look , xxmaj titinius : 
▁ xxmaj are those my tents where i perceive the fire ? 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj they are , my lord . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj titinius , if thou lovest me , 
▁ xxmaj mount thou my horse and hide thy spurs in him , 
▁ xxmaj till he have brought thee up to yonder troops 
▁ xxmaj and here again , that i may rest assured 
▁ xxmaj whether yond troops are friend or enemy . 
▁ xxup titinius . i will be here again , even with a thought . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj go , xxmaj pindarus , get higher on that hill ; 
▁ xxmaj my sight was ever thick ; regard xxmaj titinius , 
▁ xxmaj and tell me what thou notest about the field . 
▁ xxmaj pindarus ascends the hill . 
▁ xxmaj this day i breathed first : time is come round , 
▁ xxmaj and where i did begin , there shall i end ; 
▁ xxmaj my life is run his compass . xxmaj sirrah , what news ? 
▁ xxup pindarus . [ above . ] o my lord ! 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxup pindarus . [ above . ] xxmaj titinius is enclosed round about 
▁ xxmaj with horsemen , that make to him on the spur ; 
▁ xxmaj yet he spurs on . xxmaj now they are almost on him . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj titinius ! xxmaj now some light . xxup o , he lights too . 
▁ xxmaj he 's ta'en [ shout . ] xxmaj and , hark ! xxmaj they shout for joy . 
▁ xxup cassius . xxmaj come down ; behold no more . 
▁ xxup o , coward that i am , to live so long , 
▁ xxmaj to see my best friend ta'en before my face ! 
▁ xxmaj pindarus descends . 
▁ xxmaj come hither , sirrah . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj parthia did i take thee prisoner , 
▁ xxmaj and then i swore thee , saving of thy life , 
▁ xxmaj that whatsoever i did bid thee do , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst attempt it . xxmaj come now , keep thine oath ; 
▁ xxmaj now be a freeman , and with this good sword , 
▁ xxmaj that ran through xxmaj caesar 's bowels , search this bosom . 
▁ xxmaj stand not to answer : here , take thou the hilts ; 
▁ xxmaj and when my face is cover'd , as ' tis now , 
▁ xxmaj guide thou the sword . [ pindarus stabs him . ] xxmaj caesar , thou art 
▁ revenged , 
▁ xxmaj even with the sword that kill'd thee . xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxup pindarus . xxmaj so , i am free , yet would not so have been , 
▁ xxmaj durst i have done my will . o xxmaj cassius ! 
▁ xxmaj far from this country xxmaj pindarus shall run , 
▁ xxmaj where never xxmaj roman shall take note of him . xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj titinius with xxmaj messala . 

▁ xxup messala . xxmaj it is but change , xxmaj titinius , for xxmaj octavius 
▁ xxmaj is overthrown by noble xxmaj brutus ' power , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj cassius ' legions are by xxmaj antony . 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj these tidings would well comfort xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj where did you leave him ? 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj all disconsolate , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj pindarus his bondman , on this hill . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj is not that he that lies upon the ground ? 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj he lies not like the living . o my heart ! 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj is not that he ? 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj no , this was he , xxmaj messala , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj cassius is no more . o setting sun , 
▁ xxmaj as in thy red rays thou dost sink to night , 
▁ xxmaj so in his red blood xxmaj cassius ' day is set , 
▁ xxmaj the sun of xxmaj rome is set ! xxmaj our day is gone ; 
▁ xxmaj clouds , dews , and dangers come ; our deeds are done ! 
▁ xxmaj mistrust of my success hath done this deed . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj mistrust of good success hath done this deed . 
▁ o hateful error , melancholy 's child , 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men 
▁ xxmaj the things that are not ? o error , soon conceived , 
▁ xxmaj thou never comest unto a happy birth , 
▁ xxmaj but kill'st the mother that engender'd thee ! 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj what , xxmaj pindarus ! xxmaj where art thou , xxmaj pindarus ? 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj seek him , xxmaj titinius , whilst i go to meet 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj brutus , thrusting this report 
▁ xxmaj into his ears . i may say " thrusting " it , 
▁ xxmaj for piercing steel and darts envenomed 
▁ xxmaj shall be as welcome to the ears of xxmaj brutus 
▁ xxmaj as tidings of this sight . 
▁ xxup titinius . xxmaj hie you , xxmaj messala , 
▁ xxmaj and i will seek for xxmaj pindarus the while . xxmaj exit xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxmaj why didst thou send me forth , brave xxmaj cassius ? 
▁ xxmaj did i not meet thy friends ? xxmaj and did not they 
▁ xxmaj put on my brows this wreath of victory , 
▁ xxmaj and bid me give it thee ? xxmaj didst thou not hear their shouts ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , thou hast misconstrued everything ! 
▁ xxmaj but , hold thee , take this garland on thy brow ; 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj brutus bid me give it thee , and i 
▁ xxmaj will do his bidding . xxmaj brutus , come apace , 
▁ xxmaj and see how i regarded xxmaj caius xxmaj cassius . 
▁ xxmaj by your leave , gods , this is a xxmaj roman 's part . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj cassius ' sword , and find xxmaj titinius ' heart . 
▁ xxmaj kills himself . 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj re - enter xxmaj messala , with xxmaj brutus , young xxmaj cato , 
▁ and others . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj where , where , xxmaj messala , doth his body lie ? 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj lo , yonder , and xxmaj titinius mourning it . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj titinius ' face is upward . 
▁ xxup cato . xxmaj he is slain . 
▁ xxup brutus . o xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar , thou art mighty yet ! 
▁ xxmaj thy spirit walks abroad , and turns our swords 
▁ xxmaj in our own proper entrails . xxmaj low alarums . 
▁ xxup cato . xxmaj brave xxmaj titinius ! 
▁ xxmaj look whe'er he have not crown'd dead xxmaj cassius ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj are yet two xxmaj romans living such as these ? 
▁ xxmaj the last of all the xxmaj romans , fare thee well ! 
▁ xxmaj it is impossible that ever xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj should breed thy fellow . xxmaj friends , i owe moe tears 
▁ xxmaj to this dead man than you shall see me pay . 
▁ i shall find time , xxmaj cassius , i shall find time . 
▁ xxmaj come therefore , and to xxmaj thasos send his body ; 
▁ xxmaj his funerals shall not be in our camp , 
▁ xxmaj lest it discomfort us . xxmaj lucilius , come , 
▁ xxmaj and come , young xxmaj cato ; let us to the field . 
▁ xxmaj labio and xxmaj flavio , set our battles on . 
▁ ' tis three o'clock , and xxmaj romans , yet ere night 
▁ xxmaj we shall try fortune in a second fight . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the field . 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter , fighting , xxmaj soldiers of both armies ; then xxmaj brutus , young xxmaj cato , 
 xxmaj lucilius , and others . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj yet , countrymen , xxup o , yet hold up your heads ! 
▁ xxup cato . xxmaj what bastard doth not ? xxmaj who will go with me ? 
▁ i will proclaim my name about the field . 
▁ i am the son of xxmaj marcus xxmaj cato , ho ! 
▁ a foe to tyrants , and my country 's friend . 
▁ i am the son of xxmaj marcus xxmaj cato , ho ! 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj and i am xxmaj brutus , xxmaj marcus xxmaj brutus , xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj brutus , my country 's friend ; know me for xxmaj brutus ! xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup lucilius . o young and noble xxmaj cato , art thou down ? 
▁ xxmaj why , now thou diest as bravely as xxmaj titinius , 
▁ xxmaj and mayst be honor'd , being xxmaj cato 's son . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj yield , or thou diest . 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj only i yield to die . 
▁ [ offers money . ] xxmaj there is so much that thou wilt kill me straight : 
▁ xxmaj kill xxmaj brutus , and be honor'd in his death . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj we must not . a noble prisoner ! 
▁ xxup second xxup soldier . xxmaj room , ho ! xxmaj tell xxmaj antony , xxmaj brutus is ta'en . 
▁ xxup first xxup soldier . xxmaj i 'll tell the news . xxmaj here comes the general . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj antony . 

▁ xxmaj brutus is ta'en , xxmaj brutus is ta'en , my lord . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj safe , xxmaj antony , xxmaj brutus is safe enough . 
▁ i dare assure thee that no enemy 
▁ xxmaj shall ever take alive the noble xxmaj brutus ; 
▁ xxmaj the gods defend him from so great a shame ! 
▁ xxmaj when you do find him , or alive or dead , 
▁ xxmaj he will be found like xxmaj brutus , like himself . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj this is not xxmaj brutus , friend , but , i assure you , 
▁ a prize no less in worth . xxmaj keep this man safe , 
▁ xxmaj give him all kindness ; i had rather have 
▁ xxmaj such men my friends than enemies . xxmaj go on , 
▁ xxmaj and see wheer xxmaj brutus be alive or dead , 
▁ xxmaj and bring us word unto xxmaj octavius ' tent 
▁ xxmaj how everything is chanced . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj another part of the field . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj brutus , xxmaj dardanius , xxmaj clitus , xxmaj strato , and xxmaj volumnius . 

▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come , poor remains of friends , rest on this rock . 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj statilius show'd the torchlight , but , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj he came not back . xxmaj he is or ta'en or slain . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj sit thee down , xxmaj clitus . xxmaj slaying is the word : 
▁ xxmaj it is a deed in fashion . xxmaj hark thee , xxmaj clitus . xxmaj whispers . 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj what , xxup i , my lord ? xxmaj no , not for all the world . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj peace then , no words . 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj i 'll rather kill myself . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj hark thee , xxmaj dardanius . xxmaj whispers . 
▁ xxup dardanius . xxmaj shall i do such a deed ? 
▁ xxup clitus . o xxmaj dardanius ! 
▁ xxup dardanius . o xxmaj clitus ! 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj what ill request did xxmaj brutus make to thee ? 
▁ xxup dardanius . xxmaj to kill him , xxmaj clitus . xxmaj look , he meditates . 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj now is that noble vessel full of grief , 
▁ xxmaj that it runs over even at his eyes . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj come hither , good xxmaj volumnius , list a word . 
▁ xxup volumnius . xxmaj what says my lord ? 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj why , this , xxmaj volumnius : 
▁ xxmaj the ghost of xxmaj caesar hath appear'd to me 
▁ xxmaj two several times by night ; at xxmaj sardis once , 
▁ xxmaj and this last night here in xxmaj philippi fields . 
▁ i know my hour is come . 
▁ xxup volumnius . xxmaj not so , my lord . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj nay i am sure it is , xxmaj volumnius . 
▁ xxmaj thou seest the world , xxmaj volumnius , how it goes ; 
▁ xxmaj our enemies have beat us to the pit ; xxmaj low alarums . 
▁ xxmaj it is more worthy to leap in ourselves 
▁ xxmaj than tarry till they push us . xxmaj good xxmaj volumnius , 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st that we two went to school together ; 
▁ xxmaj even for that our love of old , i prithee , 
▁ xxmaj hold thou my sword - hilts , whilst i run on it . 
▁ xxup volumnius . xxmaj that 's not an office for a friend , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj alarum still . 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj fly , fly , my lord , there is no tarrying here . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj farewell to you , and you , and you , xxmaj volumnius . 
▁ xxmaj strato , thou hast been all this while asleep ; 
▁ xxmaj farewell to thee too , xxmaj strato . xxmaj countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj my heart doth joy that yet in all my life 
▁ i found no man but he was true to me . 
▁ i shall have glory by this losing day , 
▁ xxmaj more than xxmaj octavius and xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 
▁ xxmaj by this vile conquest shall attain unto . 
▁ xxmaj so , fare you well at once , for xxmaj brutus ' tongue 
▁ xxmaj hath almost ended his life 's history . 
▁ xxmaj night hangs upon mine eyes , my bones would rest 
▁ xxmaj that have but labor'd to attain this hour . 
▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj cry within , " fly , fly , fly ! " 
▁ xxup clitus . xxmaj fly , my lord , fly . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj hence ! i will follow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj clitus , xxmaj dardanius , and xxmaj volumnius . 
▁ i prithee , xxmaj strato , stay thou by thy lord . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a fellow of a good respect ; 
▁ xxmaj thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it . 
▁ xxmaj hold then my sword , and turn away thy face , 
▁ xxmaj while i do run upon it . xxmaj wilt thou , xxmaj strato ? 
▁ xxup strato . xxmaj give me your hand first . xxmaj fare you well , my lord . 
▁ xxup brutus . xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj strato . xxmaj runs on his sword . 
▁ xxmaj caesar , now be still ; 
▁ i kill'd not thee with half so good a will . xxmaj dies . 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj retreat . xxmaj enter xxmaj octavius , xxmaj antony , xxmaj messala , 
▁ xxmaj lucilius , and the xxmaj army . 

▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj what man is that ? 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj my master 's man . xxmaj strato , where is thy master ? 
▁ xxup strato . xxmaj free from the bondage you are in , xxmaj messala : 
▁ xxmaj the conquerors can but make a fire of him ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj brutus only overcame himself , 
▁ xxmaj and no man else hath honor by his death . 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj so xxmaj brutus should be found . i thank thee , xxmaj brutus , 
▁ xxmaj that thou hast proved xxmaj lucilius ' saying true . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj all that served xxmaj brutus , i will entertain them . 
▁ xxmaj fellow , wilt thou bestow thy time with me ? 
▁ xxup strato . xxmaj ay , if xxmaj messala will prefer me to you . 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj do so , good xxmaj messala . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj how died my master , xxmaj strato ? 
▁ xxup strato . i held the sword , and he did run on it . 
▁ xxup messala . xxmaj octavius , then take him to follow thee 
▁ xxmaj that did the latest service to my master . 
▁ xxup antony . xxmaj this was the noblest xxmaj roman of them all . 
▁ xxmaj all the conspirators , save only he , 
▁ xxmaj did that they did in envy of great xxmaj caesar ; 
▁ xxmaj he only , in a general honest thought 
▁ xxmaj and common good to all , made one of them . 
▁ xxmaj his life was gentle , and the elements 
▁ xxmaj so mix'd in him that xxmaj nature might stand up 
▁ xxmaj and say to all the world , " this was a man ! " 
▁ xxup octavius . xxmaj according to his virtue let us use him 
▁ xxmaj with all respect and rites of burial . 
▁ xxmaj within my tent his bones tonight shall lie , 
▁ xxmaj most like a soldier , ordered honorably . 
▁ xxmaj so call the field to rest , and let 's away , 
▁ xxmaj to part the glories of this happy day . xxmaj exeunt . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 






 1606 


 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup king xxup lear 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 




 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxmaj lear , xxmaj king of xxmaj britain . 
▁ xxmaj king of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj cornwall . 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany . 
▁ xxmaj earl of xxmaj kent . 
▁ xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj edgar , son of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj edmund , bastard son to xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj curan , a courtier . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man , tenant to xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj doctor . 
▁ xxmaj lear 's xxmaj fool . 
▁ xxmaj oswald , steward to xxmaj goneril . 
▁ a xxmaj captain under xxmaj edmund 's command . 
▁ xxmaj gentlemen . 
▁ a xxmaj herald . 
▁ xxmaj servants to xxmaj cornwall . 

▁ xxmaj goneril , daughter to xxmaj lear . 
▁ xxmaj regan , daughter to xxmaj lear . 
▁ xxmaj cordelia , daughter to xxmaj lear . 

▁ xxmaj knights attending on xxmaj lear , xxmaj officers , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj attendants . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj scene : - xxmaj britain . 


 xxup act xxup i. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 [ king xxmaj lear 's xxmaj palace . ] 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj kent , xxmaj gloucester , and xxmaj edmund . [ kent and xxmaj glouceste converse . 
 xxmaj edmund stands back . ] 

▁ xxmaj kent . i thought the xxmaj king had more affected the xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany than 
▁ xxmaj cornwall . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj it did always seem so to us ; but now , in the division of the 
▁ kingdom , it appears not which of the xxmaj dukes he values most , for 
▁ equalities are so weigh'd that curiosity in neither can make 
▁ choice of either 's moiety . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj is not this your son , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj his breeding , sir , hath been at my charge . i have so often 
▁ blush'd to acknowledge him that now i am braz'd to't . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i can not conceive you . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj sir , this young fellow 's mother could ; whereupon she grew 
▁ round - womb'd , and had indeed , sir , a son for her cradle ere she 
▁ had a husband for her bed . xxmaj do you smell a fault ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . i can not wish the fault undone , the issue of it being so 
▁ proper . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj but i have , sir , a son by order of law , some year elder than 
▁ this , who yet is no dearer in my account . xxmaj though this knave came 
▁ something saucily into the world before he was sent for , yet was 
▁ his mother fair , there was good sport at his making , and the 
▁ whoreson must be acknowledged.- xxmaj do you know this noble gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj edmund ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . [ comes forward ] xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj kent . xxmaj remember him hereafter as my honourable 
▁ friend . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj my services to your lordship . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i must love you , and sue to know you better . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj sir , i shall study deserving . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj he hath been out nine years , and away he shall again . 
▁ xxmaj sound a sennet . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is coming . 

▁ xxmaj enter one bearing a coronet ; then xxmaj lear ; then the xxmaj dukes of 
▁ xxmaj albany and xxmaj cornwall ; next , xxmaj goneril , xxmaj regan , xxmaj cordelia , with 
▁ xxmaj followers . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj attend the lords of xxmaj france and xxmaj burgundy , xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i shall , my liege . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ gloucester and xxmaj edmund ] . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj meantime we shall express our darker purpose . 
▁ xxmaj give me the map there . xxmaj know we have divided 
▁ xxmaj in three our kingdom ; and ' tis our fast intent 
▁ xxmaj to shake all cares and business from our age , 
▁ xxmaj conferring them on younger strengths while we 
▁ xxmaj unburthen'd crawl toward death . xxmaj our son of xxmaj cornwall , 
▁ xxmaj and you , our no less loving son of xxmaj albany , 
▁ xxmaj we have this hour a constant will to publish 
▁ xxmaj our daughters ' several dowers , that future strife 
▁ xxmaj may be prevented now . xxmaj the princes , xxmaj france and xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj great rivals in our youngest daughter 's love , 
▁ xxmaj long in our court have made their amorous sojourn , 
▁ xxmaj and here are to be answer'd . xxmaj tell me , my daughters 
▁ ( since now we will divest us both of rule , 
▁ xxmaj interest of territory , cares of state ) , 
▁ xxmaj which of you shall we say doth love us most ? 
▁ xxmaj that we our largest bounty may extend 
▁ xxmaj where nature doth with merit challenge . xxmaj goneril , 
▁ xxmaj our eldest - born , speak first . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj sir , i love you more than words can wield the matter ; 
▁ xxmaj dearer than eyesight , space , and liberty ; 
▁ xxmaj beyond what can be valued , rich or rare ; 
▁ xxmaj no less than life , with grace , health , beauty , honour ; 
▁ xxmaj as much as child e'er lov'd , or father found ; 
▁ a love that makes breath poor , and speech unable . 
▁ xxmaj beyond all manner of so much i love you . 
▁ xxmaj cor . [ aside ] xxmaj what shall xxmaj cordelia speak ? xxmaj love , and be silent . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj of all these bounds , even from this line to this , 
▁ xxmaj with shadowy forests and with champains rich'd , 
▁ xxmaj with plenteous rivers and wide - skirted meads , 
▁ xxmaj we make thee lady . xxmaj to thine and xxmaj albany 's issue 
▁ xxmaj be this perpetual.- xxmaj what says our second daughter , 
▁ xxmaj our dearest xxmaj regan , wife to xxmaj cornwall ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj sir , i am made 
▁ xxmaj of the selfsame metal that my sister is , 
▁ xxmaj and prize me at her worth . xxmaj in my true heart 
▁ i find she names my very deed of love ; 
▁ xxmaj only she comes too short , that i profess 
▁ xxmaj myself an enemy to all other joys 
▁ xxmaj which the most precious square of sense possesses , 
▁ xxmaj and find i am alone felicitate 
▁ xxmaj in your dear xxmaj highness ' love . 
▁ xxmaj cor . [ aside ] xxmaj then poor xxmaj cordelia ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet not so ; since i am sure my love 's 
▁ xxmaj more richer than my tongue . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj to thee and thine hereditary ever 
▁ xxmaj remain this ample third of our fair kingdom , 
▁ xxmaj no less in space , validity , and pleasure 
▁ xxmaj than that conferr'd on xxmaj goneril.- xxmaj now , our joy , 
▁ xxmaj although the last , not least ; to whose young love 
▁ xxmaj the vines of xxmaj france and milk of xxmaj burgundy 
▁ xxmaj strive to be interest ; what can you say to draw 
▁ a third more opulent than your sisters ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj nothing , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj nothing ? 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj nothing . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj nothing can come of nothing . xxmaj speak again . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj unhappy that i am , i can not heave 
▁ xxmaj my heart into my mouth . i love your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj according to my bond ; no more nor less . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj how , how , xxmaj cordelia ? xxmaj mend your speech a little , 
▁ xxmaj lest it may mar your fortunes . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you have begot me , bred me , lov'd me ; i 
▁ xxmaj return those duties back as are right fit , 
▁ xxmaj obey you , love you , and most honour you . 
▁ xxmaj why have my sisters husbands , if they say 
▁ xxmaj they love you all ? xxmaj haply , when i shall we d , 
▁ xxmaj that lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry 
▁ xxmaj half my love with him , half my care and duty . 
▁ xxmaj sure i shall never marry like my sisters , 
▁ xxmaj to love my father all . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj but goes thy heart with this ? 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj ay , good my lord . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj so young , and so untender ? 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj so young , my lord , and true . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj let it be so ! thy truth then be thy dower ! 
▁ xxmaj for , by the sacred radiance of the sun , 
▁ xxmaj the mysteries of xxmaj hecate and the night ; 
▁ xxmaj by all the operation of the orbs 
▁ xxmaj from whom we do exist and cease to be ; 
▁ xxmaj here i disclaim all my paternal care , 
▁ xxmaj propinquity and property of blood , 
▁ xxmaj and as a stranger to my heart and me 
▁ xxmaj hold thee from this for ever . xxmaj the barbarous xxmaj scythian , 
▁ xxmaj or he that makes his generation messes 
▁ xxmaj to gorge his appetite , shall to my bosom 
▁ xxmaj be as well neighbour'd , pitied , and reliev'd , 
▁ xxmaj as thou my sometime daughter . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj good my liege- 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj peace , xxmaj kent ! 
▁ xxmaj come not between the dragon and his wrath . 
▁ i lov'd her most , and thought to set my rest 
▁ xxmaj on her kind nursery.- xxmaj hence and avoid my sight!- 
▁ xxmaj so be my grave my peace as here i give 
▁ xxmaj her father 's heart from her ! xxmaj call xxmaj france ! xxmaj who stirs ? 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj burgundy ! xxmaj cornwall and xxmaj albany , 
▁ xxmaj with my two daughters ' dowers digest this third ; 
▁ xxmaj let pride , which she calls plainness , marry her . 
▁ i do invest you jointly in my power , 
▁ xxmaj preeminence , and all the large effects 
▁ xxmaj that troop with majesty . xxmaj ourself , by monthly course , 
▁ xxmaj with reservation of an hundred knights , 
▁ xxmaj by you to be sustain'd , shall our abode 
▁ xxmaj make with you by due turns . xxmaj only we still retain 
▁ xxmaj the name , and all th ' additions to a king . xxmaj the sway , 
▁ xxmaj revenue , execution of the rest , 
▁ xxmaj beloved sons , be yours ; which to confirm , 
▁ xxmaj this coronet part betwixt you . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj royal xxmaj lear , 
▁ xxmaj whom i have ever honour'd as my king , 
▁ xxmaj lov'd as my father , as my master follow'd , 
▁ xxmaj as my great patron thought on in my prayers- 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj the bow is bent and drawn ; make from the shaft . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj let it fall rather , though the fork invade 
▁ xxmaj the region of my heart ! xxmaj be xxmaj kent unmannerly 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj lear is mad . xxmaj what wouldst thou do , old man ? 
▁ xxmaj think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak 
▁ xxmaj when power to flattery bows ? xxmaj to plainness honour 's bound 
▁ xxmaj when majesty falls to folly . xxmaj reverse thy doom ; 
▁ xxmaj and in thy best consideration check 
▁ xxmaj this hideous rashness . xxmaj answer my life my judgment , 
▁ xxmaj thy youngest daughter does not love thee least , 
▁ xxmaj nor are those empty - hearted whose low sound 
▁ xxmaj reverbs no hollowness . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj kent , on thy life , no more ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj my life i never held but as a pawn 
▁ xxmaj to wage against thine enemies ; nor fear to lose it , 
▁ xxmaj thy safety being the motive . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj out of my sight ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj see better , xxmaj lear , and let me still remain 
▁ xxmaj the true blank of thine eye . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj now by xxmaj apollo- 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj now by xxmaj apollo , xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj thou swear'st thy gods in vain . 
▁ xxmaj lear . o vassal ! miscreant ! 
▁ [ lays his hand on his sword . ] 
▁ xxmaj alb . , xxmaj corn . xxmaj dear sir , forbear ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj do ! 
▁ xxmaj kill thy physician , and the fee bestow 
▁ xxmaj upon the foul disease . xxmaj revoke thy gift , 
▁ xxmaj or , whilst i can vent clamour from my throat , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell thee thou dost evil . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj hear me , recreant ! 
▁ xxmaj on thine allegiance , hear me ! 
▁ xxmaj since thou hast sought to make us break our vow- 
▁ xxmaj which we durst never yet- and with strain'd pride 
▁ xxmaj to come between our sentence and our power,- 
▁ xxmaj which nor our nature nor our place can bear,- 
▁ xxmaj our potency made good , take thy reward . 
▁ xxmaj five days we do allot thee for provision 
▁ xxmaj to shield thee from diseases of the world , 
▁ xxmaj and on the sixth to turn thy hated back 
▁ xxmaj upon our kingdom . xxmaj if , on the tenth day following , 
▁ xxmaj thy banish'd trunk be found in our dominions , 
▁ xxmaj the moment is thy death . xxmaj away ! xxmaj by xxmaj jupiter , 
▁ xxmaj this shall not be revok'd . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj fare thee well , xxmaj king . xxmaj since thus thou wilt appear , 
▁ xxmaj freedom lives hence , and banishment is here . 
▁ [ to xxmaj cordelia ] xxmaj the gods to their dear shelter take thee , maid , 
▁ xxmaj that justly think'st and hast most rightly said ! 
▁ [ to xxmaj regan and xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj and your large speeches may your deeds 
▁ approve , 
▁ xxmaj that good effects may spring from words of love . 
▁ xxmaj thus xxmaj kent , o princes , bids you all adieu ; 
▁ xxmaj he 'll shape his old course in a country new . 
 xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester , with xxmaj france and xxmaj burgundy ; xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj here 's xxmaj france and xxmaj burgundy , my noble lord . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj we first address toward you , who with this king 
▁ xxmaj hath rivall'd for our daughter . xxmaj what in the least 
▁ xxmaj will you require in present dower with her , 
▁ xxmaj or cease your quest of love ? 
▁ xxmaj bur . xxmaj most royal xxmaj majesty , 
▁ i crave no more than hath your xxmaj highness offer'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor will you tender less . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj right noble xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj when she was dear to us , we did hold her so ; 
▁ xxmaj but now her price is fall'n . xxmaj sir , there she stands . 
▁ xxmaj if aught within that little seeming substance , 
▁ xxmaj or all of it , with our displeasure piec'd , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing more , may fitly like your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj she 's there , and she is yours . 
▁ xxmaj bur . i know no answer . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj will you , with those infirmities she owes , 
▁ xxmaj unfriended , new adopted to our hate , 
▁ xxmaj dow'r'd with our curse , and stranger'd with our oath , 
▁ xxmaj take her , or leave her ? 
▁ xxmaj bur . xxmaj pardon me , royal sir . 
▁ xxmaj election makes not up on such conditions . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj then leave her , sir ; for , by the pow'r that made me , 
▁ i tell you all her wealth . [ to xxmaj france ] xxmaj for you , great xxmaj king , 
▁ i would not from your love make such a stray 
▁ xxmaj to match you where i hate ; therefore beseech you 
▁ xxup t ' avert your liking a more worthier way 
▁ xxmaj than on a wretch whom nature is asham'd 
▁ xxmaj almost t ' acknowledge hers . 
▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj this is most strange , 
▁ xxmaj that she that even but now was your best object , 
▁ xxmaj the argument of your praise , balm of your age , 
▁ xxmaj most best , most dearest , should in this trice of time 
▁ xxmaj commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle 
▁ xxmaj so many folds of favour . xxmaj sure her offence 
▁ xxmaj must be of such unnatural degree 
▁ xxmaj that monsters it , or your fore - vouch'd affection 
▁ xxmaj fall'n into taint ; which to believe of her 
▁ xxmaj must be a faith that reason without miracle 
▁ xxmaj should never plant in me . 
▁ xxmaj cor . i yet beseech your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj if for i want that glib and oily art 
▁ xxmaj to speak and purpose not , since what i well intend , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do't before i speak- that you make known 
▁ xxmaj it is no vicious blot , murther , or foulness , 
▁ xxmaj no unchaste action or dishonoured step , 
▁ xxmaj that hath depriv'd me of your grace and favour ; 
▁ xxmaj but even for want of that for which i am richer- 
▁ a still - soliciting eye , and such a tongue 
▁ xxmaj as i am glad i have not , though not to have it 
▁ xxmaj hath lost me in your liking . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj better thou 
▁ xxmaj hadst not been born than not t ' have pleas'd me better . 
▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj is it but this- a tardiness in nature 
▁ xxmaj which often leaves the history unspoke 
▁ xxmaj that it intends to do ? xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj burgundy , 
▁ xxmaj what say you to the lady ? xxmaj love 's not love 
▁ xxmaj when it is mingled with regards that stands 
▁ xxmaj aloof from th ' entire point . xxmaj will you have her ? 
▁ xxmaj she is herself a dowry . 
▁ xxmaj bur . xxmaj royal xxmaj lear , 
▁ xxmaj give but that portion which yourself propos'd , 
▁ xxmaj and here i take xxmaj cordelia by the hand , 
▁ xxmaj duchess of xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj nothing ! i have sworn ; i am firm . 
▁ xxmaj bur . i am sorry then you have so lost a father 
▁ xxmaj that you must lose a husband . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj peace be with xxmaj burgundy ! 
▁ xxmaj since that respects of fortune are his love , 
▁ i shall not be his wife . 
▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj fairest xxmaj cordelia , that art most rich , being poor ; 
▁ xxmaj most choice , forsaken ; and most lov'd , despis'd ! 
▁ xxmaj thee and thy virtues here i seize upon . 
▁ xxmaj be it lawful i take up what 's cast away . 
▁ xxmaj gods , gods ! ' tis strange that from their cold'st neglect 
▁ xxmaj my love should kindle to inflam'd respect . 
▁ xxmaj thy dow'rless daughter , xxmaj king , thrown to my chance , 
▁ xxmaj is queen of us , of ours , and our fair xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj not all the dukes in wat'rish xxmaj burgundy 
▁ xxmaj can buy this unpriz'd precious maid of me . 
▁ xxmaj bid them farewell , xxmaj cordelia , though unkind . 
▁ xxmaj thou losest here , a better where to find . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj thou hast her , xxmaj france ; let her be thine ; for we 
▁ xxmaj have no such daughter , nor shall ever see 
▁ xxmaj that face of hers again . xxmaj therefore be gone 
▁ xxmaj without our grace , our love , our benison . 
▁ xxmaj come , noble xxmaj burgundy . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt xxmaj lear , xxmaj burgundy , [ cornwall , xxmaj albany , 
▁ xxmaj gloucester , and xxmaj attendants ] . 
▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj bid farewell to your sisters . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj the jewels of our father , with wash'd eyes 
▁ xxmaj cordelia leaves you . i know you what you are ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like a sister , am most loath to call 
▁ xxmaj your faults as they are nam'd . xxmaj use well our father . 
▁ xxmaj to your professed bosoms i commit him ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet , alas , stood i within his grace , 
▁ i would prefer him to a better place ! 
▁ xxmaj so farewell to you both . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj prescribe not us our duties . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj let your study 
▁ xxmaj be to content your lord , who hath receiv'd you 
▁ xxmaj at fortune 's alms . xxmaj you have obedience scanted , 
▁ xxmaj and well are worth the want that you have wanted . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides . 
▁ xxmaj who cover faults , at last shame them derides . 
▁ xxmaj well may you prosper ! 
▁ xxmaj france . xxmaj come , my fair xxmaj cordelia . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj france and xxmaj cordelia . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj sister , it is not little i have to say of what most nearly 
▁ appertains to us both . i think our father will hence to - night . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj that 's most certain , and with you ; next month with us . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj you see how full of changes his age is . xxmaj the observation we 
▁ have made of it hath not been little . xxmaj he always lov'd our 
▁ sister most , and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her 
▁ off appears too grossly . 
▁ xxmaj reg . ' tis the infirmity of his age ; yet he hath ever but slenderly 
▁ known himself . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj the best and soundest of his time hath been but rash ; then 
▁ must we look to receive from his age , not alone the 
▁ imperfections of long - ingraffed condition , but therewithal 
▁ the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with 
▁ them . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this 
▁ of xxmaj kent 's banishment . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj there is further compliment of leave - taking between xxmaj france and 
▁ him . xxmaj pray you let 's hit together . xxmaj if our father carry authority 
▁ with such dispositions as he bears , this last surrender of his 
▁ will but offend us . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj we shall further think on't . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj we must do something , and i ' th ' heat . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt .