xxbos xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter [ edmund the ] xxmaj bastard solus , [ with a letter ] . 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj thou , xxmaj nature , art my goddess ; to thy law 
▁ xxmaj my services are bound . xxmaj wherefore should i 
▁ xxmaj stand in the plague of custom , and permit 
▁ xxmaj the curiosity of nations to deprive me , 
▁ xxmaj for that i am some twelve or fourteen moonshines 
▁ xxmaj lag of a brother ? xxmaj why bastard ? wherefore base ? 
▁ xxmaj when my dimensions are as well compact , 
▁ xxmaj my mind as generous , and my shape as true , 
▁ xxmaj as honest madam 's issue ? xxmaj why brand they us 
▁ xxmaj with base ? with baseness ? bastardy ? base , base ? 
▁ xxmaj who , in the lusty stealth of nature , take 
▁ xxmaj more composition and fierce quality 
▁ xxmaj than doth , within a dull , stale , tired bed , 
▁ xxmaj go to th ' creating a whole tribe of fops 
▁ xxmaj got ' tween asleep and wake ? xxmaj well then , 
▁ xxmaj legitimate xxmaj edgar , i must have your land . 
▁ xxmaj our father 's love is to the bastard xxmaj edmund 
▁ xxmaj as to th ' legitimate . xxmaj fine word- ' legitimate ' ! 
▁ xxmaj well , my legitimate , if this letter speed , 
▁ xxmaj and my invention thrive , xxmaj edmund the base 
▁ xxmaj shall top th ' legitimate . i grow ; i prosper . 
▁ xxmaj now , gods , stand up for bastards ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj kent banish'd thus ? and xxmaj france in choler parted ? 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj king gone to - night ? subscrib'd his pow'r ? 
▁ xxmaj confin'd to exhibition ? xxmaj all this done 
▁ xxmaj upon the gad ? xxmaj edmund , how now ? xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj so please your lordship , none . 
▁ [ puts up the letter . ] 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . i know no news , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj what paper were you reading ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj nothing , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj no ? xxmaj what needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your 
▁ pocket ? xxmaj the quality of nothing hath not such need to hide 
▁ itself . xxmaj let 's see . xxmaj come , if it be nothing , i shall not need 
▁ spectacles . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i beseech you , sir , pardon me . xxmaj it is a letter from my brother 
▁ that i have not all o'er - read ; and for so much as i have 
▁ perus'd , i find it not fit for your o'erlooking . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj give me the letter , sir . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i shall offend , either to detain or give it . xxmaj the contents , as 
▁ in part i understand them , are to blame . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj let 's see , let 's see ! 
▁ xxmaj edm . i hope , for my brother 's justification , he wrote this but as 
▁ an essay or taste of my virtue . 

▁ xxmaj glou . ( reads ) ' this policy and reverence of age makes the world 
▁ bitter to the best of our times ; keeps our fortunes from us 
▁ till our oldness can not relish them . i begin to find an idle 
▁ and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny , who sways , 
▁ not as it hath power , but as it is suffer'd . xxmaj come to me , that 
▁ of this i may speak more . xxmaj if our father would sleep till i 
▁ wak'd him , you should enjoy half his revenue for ever , and live 
▁ the beloved of your brother , 
▁ ' edgar . ' 

▁ xxmaj hum ! xxmaj conspiracy ? ' sleep till i wak'd him , you should enjoy half 
▁ his revenue . ' xxmaj my son xxmaj edgar ! xxmaj had he a hand to write this ? a heart 
▁ and brain to breed it in ? xxmaj when came this to you ? xxmaj who brought it ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj it was not brought me , my lord : there 's the cunning of it . i 
▁ found it thrown in at the casement of my closet . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj you know the character to be your brother 's ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj if the matter were good , my lord , i durst swear it were his ; 
▁ but in respect of that , i would fain think it were not . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj it is his . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj it is his hand , my lord ; but i hope his heart is not in the 
▁ contents . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj hath he never before sounded you in this business ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj never , my lord . xxmaj but i have heard him oft maintain it to be fit 
▁ that , sons at perfect age , and fathers declining , the father 
▁ should be as ward to the son , and the son manage his revenue . 
▁ xxmaj glou . o villain , villain ! xxmaj his very opinion in the letter ! xxmaj abhorred 
▁ villain ! xxmaj unnatural , detested , brutish villain ! worse than 
▁ brutish ! xxmaj go , sirrah , seek him . xxmaj i 'll apprehend him . xxmaj abominable 
▁ villain ! xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . i do not well know , my lord . xxmaj if it shall please you to suspend 
▁ your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him 
▁ better testimony of his intent , you should run a certain course ; 
▁ where , if you violently proceed against him , mistaking his 
▁ purpose , it would make a great gap in your own honour and shake 
▁ in pieces the heart of his obedience . i dare pawn down my life 
▁ for him that he hath writ this to feel my affection to your 
▁ honour , and to no other pretence of danger . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj think you so ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj if your honour judge it meet , i will place you where you shall 
▁ hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your 
▁ satisfaction , and that without any further delay than this very 
▁ evening . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj he can not be such a monster . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj nor is not , sure . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj to his father , that so tenderly and entirely loves him . 
▁ xxmaj heaven and earth ! xxmaj edmund , seek him out ; wind me into him , i pray 
▁ you ; frame the business after your own wisdom . i would unstate 
▁ myself to be in a due resolution . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i will seek him , sir , presently ; convey the business as i 
▁ shall find means , and acquaint you withal . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj these late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to 
▁ us . xxmaj though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus , yet 
▁ nature finds itself scourg'd by the sequent effects . xxmaj love cools , 
▁ friendship falls off , brothers divide . xxmaj in cities , mutinies ; in 
▁ countries , discord ; in palaces , treason ; and the bond crack'd 
▁ ' twixt son and father . xxmaj this villain of mine comes under the 
▁ prediction ; there 's son against father : the xxmaj king falls from bias 
▁ of nature ; there 's father against child . xxmaj we have seen the best 
▁ of our time . xxmaj machinations , hollowness , treachery , and all 
▁ ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves . xxmaj find out 
▁ this villain , xxmaj edmund ; it shall lose thee nothing ; do it 
▁ carefully . xxmaj and the noble and true - hearted xxmaj kent banish'd ! his 
▁ offence , honesty ! ' tis strange . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj this is the excellent foppery of the world , that , when we are 
▁ sick in fortune , often the surfeit of our own behaviour , we make 
▁ guilty of our disasters the sun , the moon , and the stars ; as if 
▁ we were villains on necessity ; fools by heavenly compulsion ; 
▁ knaves , thieves , and treachers by spherical pre - dominance ; 
▁ drunkards , liars , and adulterers by an enforc'd obedience of 
▁ planetary influence ; and all that we are evil in , by a divine 
▁ thrusting on . xxmaj an admirable evasion of whore - master man , to lay 
▁ his goatish disposition to the charge of a star ! xxmaj my father 
▁ compounded with my mother under the xxmaj dragon 's xxmaj tail , and my 
▁ nativity was under xxmaj ursa xxmaj major , so that it follows i am rough and 
▁ lecherous . xxmaj fut ! i should have been that i am , had the 
▁ maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing . 
▁ xxmaj edgar- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar . 

▁ and pat ! he comes , like the catastrophe of the old comedy . xxmaj my 
▁ cue is villainous melancholy , with a sigh like xxmaj tom o ' xxmaj bedlam . 
▁ xxup o , these eclipses do portend these divisions ! xxmaj fa , sol , la , mi . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj how now , brother xxmaj edmund ? xxmaj what serious contemplation are you 
▁ in ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . i am thinking , brother , of a prediction i read this other day , 
▁ what should follow these eclipses . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj do you busy yourself with that ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . i promise you , the effects he writes of succeed unhappily : as 
▁ of unnaturalness between the child and the parent ; death , 
▁ dearth , dissolutions of ancient amities ; divisions in state , 
▁ menaces and maledictions against king and nobles ; needless 
▁ diffidences , banishment of friends , dissipation of cohorts , 
▁ nuptial breaches , and i know not what . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj how long have you been a sectary astronomical ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj come , come ! xxmaj when saw you my father last ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj the night gone by . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj spake you with him ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj ay , two hours together . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj parted you in good terms ? xxmaj found you no displeasure in him by 
▁ word or countenance 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj none at all . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him ; and at my 
▁ entreaty forbear his presence until some little time hath 
▁ qualified the heat of his displeasure , which at this instant so 
▁ rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would 
▁ scarcely allay . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj some villain hath done me wrong . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj that 's my fear . i pray you have a continent forbearance till 
▁ the speed of his rage goes slower ; and , as i say , retire with me 
▁ to my lodging , from whence i will fitly bring you to hear my 
▁ lord speak . xxmaj pray ye , go ! xxmaj there 's my key . xxmaj if you do stir abroad , 
▁ go arm'd . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj arm'd , brother ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj brother , i advise you to the best . xxmaj go arm'd . i am no honest man 
▁ if there be any good meaning toward you . i have told you what i 
▁ have seen and heard ; but faintly , nothing like the image and 
▁ horror of it . xxmaj pray you , away ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj shall i hear from you anon ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . i do serve you in this business . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj edgar . 
▁ a credulous father ! and a brother noble , 
▁ xxmaj whose nature is so far from doing harms 
▁ xxmaj that he suspects none ; on whose foolish honesty 
▁ xxmaj my practices ride easy ! i see the business . 
▁ xxmaj let me , if not by birth , have lands by wit ; 
▁ xxmaj all with me 's meet that i can fashion fit . 
 xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany 's xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj goneril and [ her ] xxmaj steward [ oswald ] . 

▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj ay , madam . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj by day and night , he wrongs me ! xxmaj every hour 
▁ xxmaj he flashes into one gross crime or other 
▁ xxmaj that sets us all at odds . xxmaj i 'll not endure it . 
▁ xxmaj his knights grow riotous , and himself upbraids us 
▁ xxmaj on every trifle . xxmaj when he returns from hunting , 
▁ i will not speak with him . xxmaj say i am sick . 
▁ xxmaj if you come slack of former services , 
▁ xxmaj you shall do well ; the fault of it xxmaj i 'll answer . 
▁ [ horns within . ] 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj he 's coming , madam ; i hear him . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj put on what weary negligence you please , 
▁ xxmaj you and your fellows . xxmaj i 'd have it come to question . 
▁ xxmaj if he distaste it , let him to our sister , 
▁ xxmaj whose mind and mine i know in that are one , 
▁ xxmaj not to be overrul'd . xxmaj idle old man , 
▁ xxmaj that still would manage those authorities 
▁ xxmaj that he hath given away ! xxmaj now , by my life , 
▁ xxmaj old fools are babes again , and must be us'd 
▁ xxmaj with checks as flatteries , when they are seen abus'd . 
▁ xxmaj remember what i have said . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj very well , madam . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj and let his knights have colder looks among you . 
▁ xxmaj what grows of it , no matter . xxmaj advise your fellows so . 
▁ i would breed from hence occasions , and i shall , 
▁ xxmaj that i may speak . xxmaj i 'll write straight to my sister 
▁ xxmaj to hold my very course . xxmaj prepare for dinner . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany 's xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj kent , [ disguised ] . 

▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj if but as well i other accents borrow , 
▁ xxmaj that can my speech defuse , my good intent 
▁ xxmaj may carry through itself to that full issue 
▁ xxmaj for which i raz'd my likeness . xxmaj now , banish'd xxmaj kent , 
▁ xxmaj if thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemn'd , 
▁ xxmaj so may it come , thy master , whom thou lov'st , 
▁ xxmaj shall find thee full of labours . 

▁ xxmaj horns within . xxmaj enter xxmaj lear , [ knights , ] and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj let me not stay a jot for dinner ; go get it ready . [ exit 
▁ an xxmaj attendant . ] xxmaj how now ? xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . a man , sir . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what dost thou profess ? xxmaj what wouldst thou with us ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . i do profess to be no less than i seem , to serve him truly 
▁ that will put me in trust , to love him that is honest , to 
▁ converse with him that is wise and says little , to fear 
▁ judgment , to fight when i can not choose , and to eat no fish . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . a very honest - hearted fellow , and as poor as the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj if thou be'st as poor for a subject as he 's for a king , thou 
▁ art poor enough . xxmaj what wouldst thou ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj service . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj who wouldst thou serve ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj you . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj dost thou know me , fellow ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj no , sir ; but you have that in your countenance which i would 
▁ fain call master . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj authority . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what services canst thou do ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . i can keep honest counsel , ride , run , mar a curious tale in 
▁ telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly . xxmaj that which 
▁ ordinary men are fit for , i am qualified in , and the best of me 
▁ is diligence . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj how old art thou ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj not so young , sir , to love a woman for singing , nor so old to 
▁ dote on her for anything . i have years on my back forty - eight . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj follow me ; thou shalt serve me . xxmaj if i like thee no worse after 
▁ dinner , i will not part from thee yet . xxmaj dinner , ho , dinner ! 
▁ xxmaj where 's my knave ? my fool ? xxmaj go you and call my fool hither . 

▁ [ exit an attendant . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj you , you , sirrah , where 's my daughter ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj so please you- xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what says the fellow there ? xxmaj call the clotpoll back . 
▁ [ exit a xxmaj knight . ] xxmaj where 's my fool , ho ? i think the world 's 
▁ asleep . 

▁ [ enter xxmaj knight ] 

▁ xxmaj how now ? xxmaj where 's that mongrel ? 
▁ xxmaj knight . xxmaj he says , my lord , your daughter is not well . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj why came not the slave back to me when i call'd him ? 
▁ xxmaj knight . xxmaj sir , he answered me in the roundest manner , he would not . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj he would not ? 
▁ xxmaj knight . xxmaj my lord , i know not what the matter is ; but to my judgment 
▁ your xxmaj highness is not entertain'd with that ceremonious affection 
▁ as you were wo nt . xxmaj there 's a great abatement of kindness appears 
▁ as well in the general dependants as in the xxmaj duke himself also 
▁ and your daughter . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ha ! say'st thou so ? 
▁ xxmaj knight . i beseech you pardon me , my lord , if i be mistaken ; for 
▁ my duty can not be silent when i think your xxmaj highness wrong'd . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj thou but rememb'rest me of mine own conception . i have 
▁ perceived a most faint neglect of late , which i have rather 
▁ blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretence 
▁ and purpose of unkindness . i will look further into't . xxmaj but 
▁ where 's my fool ? i have not seen him this two days . 
▁ xxmaj knight . xxmaj since my young lady 's going into xxmaj france , sir , the fool 
▁ hath much pined away . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no more of that ; i have noted it well . xxmaj go you and tell my 
▁ daughter i would speak with her . [ exit xxmaj knight . ] xxmaj go you , call 
▁ hither my fool . 
▁ [ exit an xxmaj attendant . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxup o , you , sir , you ! xxmaj come you hither , sir . xxmaj who am xxup i , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj my lady 's father . 
▁ xxmaj lear . ' my lady 's father ' ? xxmaj my lord 's knave ! xxmaj you whoreson dog ! you 
▁ slave ! you cur ! 
▁ xxmaj osw . i am none of these , my lord ; i beseech your pardon . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj do you bandy looks with me , you rascal ? 
▁ [ strikes him . ] 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj i 'll not be strucken , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj nor tripp'd neither , you base football player ? 
▁ [ trips up his heels . 
▁ xxmaj lear . i thank thee , fellow . xxmaj thou serv'st me , and xxmaj i 'll love thee . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj come , sir , arise , away ! xxmaj i 'll teach you differences . xxmaj away , 
▁ away ! xxmaj if you will measure your lubber 's length again , tarry ; but 
▁ away ! xxmaj go to ! xxmaj have you wisdom ? xxmaj so . 
▁ [ pushes him out . ] 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj now , my friendly knave , i thank thee . xxmaj there 's earnest of thy 
▁ service . [ gives money . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj fool . 

▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj let me hire him too . xxmaj here 's my coxcomb . 
▁ [ offers xxmaj kent his cap . ] 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj how now , my pretty knave ? xxmaj how dost thou ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj sirrah , you were best take my coxcomb . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj why , fool ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj why ? xxmaj for taking one 's part that 's out of favour . xxmaj nay , an thou 
▁ canst not smile as the wind sits , thou'lt catch cold shortly . 
▁ xxmaj there , take my coxcomb ! xxmaj why , this fellow hath banish'd two on 's 
▁ daughters , and did the third a blessing against his will . xxmaj if 
▁ thou follow him , thou must needs wear my coxcomb.- xxmaj how now , 
▁ nuncle ? xxmaj would i had two coxcombs and two daughters ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj why , my boy ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj if i gave them all my living , xxmaj i'ld keep my coxcombs myself . 
▁ xxmaj there 's mine ! beg another of thy daughters . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj take heed , sirrah- the whip . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj truth 's a dog must to kennel ; he must be whipp'd out , when 
▁ xxmaj lady the brach may stand by th ' fire and stink . 
▁ xxmaj lear . a pestilent gall to me ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj sirrah , xxmaj i 'll teach thee a speech . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj do . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj mark it , nuncle . 
▁ xxmaj have more than thou showest , 
▁ xxmaj speak less than thou knowest , 
▁ xxmaj lend less than thou owest , 
▁ xxmaj ride more than thou goest , 
▁ xxmaj learn more than thou trowest , 
▁ xxmaj set less than thou throwest ; 
▁ xxmaj leave thy drink and thy whore , 
▁ xxmaj and keep in - a - door , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt have more 
▁ xxmaj than two tens to a score . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj this is nothing , fool . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj then ' tis like the breath of an unfeed lawyer- you gave me 
▁ nothing for't . xxmaj can you make no use of nothing , nuncle ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj why , no , boy . xxmaj nothing can be made out of nothing . 
▁ xxmaj fool . [ to xxmaj kent ] xxmaj prithee tell him , so much the rent of his land 
▁ comes to . xxmaj he will not believe a fool . 
▁ xxmaj lear . a bitter fool ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj dost thou know the difference , my boy , between a bitter 
▁ fool and a sweet fool ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , lad ; teach me . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj that lord that counsell'd thee 
▁ xxmaj to give away thy land , 
▁ xxmaj come place him here by me- 
▁ xxmaj do thou for him stand . 
▁ xxmaj the sweet and bitter fool 
▁ xxmaj will presently appear ; 
▁ xxmaj the one in motley here , 
▁ xxmaj the other found out there . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj dost thou call me fool , boy ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj all thy other titles thou hast given away ; that thou wast 
▁ born with . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj this is not altogether fool , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj no , faith ; lords and great men will not let me . xxmaj if i had a 
▁ monopoly out , they would have part on't . xxmaj and ladies too , they 
▁ will not let me have all the fool to myself ; they 'll be 
▁ snatching . xxmaj give me an egg , nuncle , and xxmaj i 'll give thee two 
▁ crowns . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what two crowns shall they be ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj why , after i have cut the egg i ' th ' middle and eat up the 
▁ meat , the two crowns of the egg . xxmaj when thou clovest thy crown i ' 
▁ th ' middle and gav'st away both parts , thou bor'st thine ass on 
▁ thy back o'er the dirt . xxmaj thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown 
▁ when thou gav'st thy golden one away . xxmaj if i speak like myself in 
▁ this , let him be whipp'd that first finds it so . 

▁ [ sings ] xxmaj fools had ne'er less grace in a year , 
▁ xxmaj for wise men are grown foppish ; 
▁ xxmaj they know not how their wits to wear , 
▁ xxmaj their manners are so apish . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj when were you wo nt to be so full of songs , sirrah ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . i have us'd it , nuncle , ever since thou mad'st thy daughters 
▁ thy mother ; for when thou gav'st them the rod , and put'st down 
▁ thine own breeches , 
▁
▁ [ sings ] xxmaj then they for sudden joy did weep , 
▁ xxmaj and i for sorrow sung , 
▁ xxmaj that such a king should play bo - peep 
▁ xxmaj and go the fools among . 

▁ xxmaj prithee , nuncle , keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to 
▁ lie . i would fain learn to lie . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj an you lie , sirrah , we 'll have you whipp'd . 
▁ xxmaj fool . i marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are . xxmaj they 'll have me 
▁ whipp'd for speaking true ; thou'lt have me whipp'd for lying ; 
▁ and sometimes i am whipp'd for holding my peace . i had rather be 
▁ any kind o ' thing than a fool ! xxmaj and yet i would not be thee , 
▁ nuncle . xxmaj thou hast pared thy wit o ' both sides and left nothing 
▁ i ' th ' middle . xxmaj here comes one o ' the parings . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj goneril . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj how now , daughter ? xxmaj what makes that frontlet on ? xxmaj methinks you 
▁ are too much o ' late i ' th ' frown . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for 
▁ her frowning . xxmaj now thou art an o without a figure . i am better 
▁ than thou art now : i am a fool , thou art nothing . 
▁ [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj yes , forsooth , i will hold my tongue . xxmaj so your face 
▁ bids me , though you say nothing . xxmaj mum , mum ! 

▁ xxmaj he that keeps nor crust nor crum , 
▁ xxmaj weary of all , shall want some.- 

▁ [ points at xxmaj lear ] xxmaj that 's a sheal'd peascod . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj not only , sir , this your all - licens'd fool , 
▁ xxmaj but other of your insolent retinue 
▁ xxmaj do hourly carp and quarrel , breaking forth 
▁ xxmaj in rank and not - to - be - endured riots . xxmaj sir , 
▁ i had thought , by making this well known unto you , 
▁ xxmaj to have found a safe redress , but now grow fearful , 
▁ xxmaj by what yourself , too , late have spoke and done , 
▁ xxmaj that you protect this course , and put it on 
▁ xxmaj by your allowance ; which if you should , the fault 
▁ xxmaj would not scape censure , nor the redresses sleep , 
▁ xxmaj which , in the tender of a wholesome weal , 
▁ xxmaj might in their working do you that offence 
▁ xxmaj which else were shame , that then necessity 
▁ xxmaj must call discreet proceeding . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj for you know , nuncle , 

▁ xxmaj the hedge - sparrow fed the cuckoo so long 
▁ xxmaj that it had it head bit off by it young . 

▁ xxmaj so out went the candle , and we were left darkling . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj are you our daughter ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj come , sir , 
▁ i would you would make use of that good wisdom 
▁ xxmaj whereof i know you are fraught , and put away 
▁ xxmaj these dispositions that of late transform you 
▁ xxmaj from what you rightly are . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj may not an ass know when the cart draws the horse ? 
▁ xxmaj whoop , xxmaj jug , i love thee ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj doth any here know me ? xxmaj this is not xxmaj lear . 
▁ xxmaj doth xxmaj lear walk thus ? speak thus ? xxmaj where are his eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj either his notion weakens , his discernings 
▁ xxmaj are lethargied- xxmaj ha ! waking ? ' tis not so ! 
▁ xxmaj who is it that can tell me who i am ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj lear 's shadow . 
▁ xxmaj lear . i would learn that ; for , by the marks of sovereignty , 
▁ xxmaj knowledge , and reason , i should be false persuaded 
▁ i had daughters . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj which they will make an obedient father . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj your name , fair gentlewoman ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj this admiration , sir , is much o ' th ' savour 
▁ xxmaj of other your new pranks . i do beseech you 
▁ xxmaj to understand my purposes aright . 
▁ xxmaj as you are old and reverend , you should be wise . 
▁ xxmaj here do you keep a hundred knights and squires ; 
▁ xxmaj men so disorder'd , so debosh'd , and bold 
▁ xxmaj that this our court , infected with their manners , 
▁ xxmaj shows like a riotous inn . xxmaj epicurism and lust 
▁ xxmaj make it more like a tavern or a brothel 
▁ xxmaj than a grac'd palace . xxmaj the shame itself doth speak 
▁ xxmaj for instant remedy . xxmaj be then desir'd 
▁ xxmaj by her that else will take the thing she begs 
▁ a little to disquantity your train , 
▁ xxmaj and the remainder that shall still depend 
▁ xxmaj to be such men as may besort your age , 
▁ xxmaj which know themselves , and you . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj darkness and devils ! 
▁ xxmaj saddle my horses ! xxmaj call my train together ! 
▁ xxmaj degenerate bastard , xxmaj i 'll not trouble thee ; 
▁ xxmaj yet have i left a daughter . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj you strike my people , and your disorder'd rabble 
▁ xxmaj make servants of their betters . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj albany . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj woe that too late repents!- xxup o , sir , are you come ? 
▁ xxmaj is it your will ? xxmaj speak , sir!- xxmaj prepare my horses . 
▁ xxmaj ingratitude , thou marble - hearted fiend , 
▁ xxmaj more hideous when thou show'st thee in a child 
▁ xxmaj than the sea - monster ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj pray , sir , be patient . 
▁ xxmaj lear . [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj detested kite , thou liest ! 
▁ xxmaj my train are men of choice and rarest parts , 
▁ xxmaj that all particulars of duty know 
▁ xxmaj and in the most exact regard support 
▁ xxmaj the worships of their name.- o most small fault , 
▁ xxmaj how ugly didst thou in xxmaj cordelia show ! 
▁ xxmaj which , like an engine , wrench'd my frame of nature 
▁ xxmaj from the fix'd place ; drew from my heart all love 
▁ xxmaj and added to the gall . o xxmaj lear , xxmaj lear , xxmaj lear ! 
▁ xxmaj beat at this gate that let thy folly in [ strikes his head . ] 
▁ xxmaj and thy dear judgment out ! xxmaj go , go , my people . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj my lord , i am guiltless , as i am ignorant 
▁ xxmaj of what hath mov'd you . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj it may be so , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj hear , xxmaj nature , hear ! dear goddess , hear ! 
▁ xxmaj suspend thy purpose , if thou didst intend 
▁ xxmaj to make this creature fruitful . 
▁ xxmaj into her womb convey sterility ; 
▁ xxmaj dry up in her the organs of increase ; 
▁ xxmaj and from her derogate body never spring 
▁ a babe to honour her ! xxmaj if she must teem , 
▁ xxmaj create her child of spleen , that it may live 
▁ xxmaj and be a thwart disnatur'd torment to her . 
▁ xxmaj let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth , 
▁ xxmaj with cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj turn all her mother 's pains and benefits 
▁ xxmaj to laughter and contempt , that she may feel 
▁ xxmaj how sharper than a serpent 's tooth it is 
▁ xxmaj to have a thankless child ! xxmaj away , away ! xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj now , gods that we adore , whereof comes this ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj never afflict yourself to know the cause ; 
▁ xxmaj but let his disposition have that scope 
▁ xxmaj that dotage gives it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lear . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what , fifty of my followers at a clap ? 
▁ xxmaj within a fortnight ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj what 's the matter , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj i 'll tell thee . [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj life and death ! i am asham'd 
▁ xxmaj that thou hast power to shake my manhood thus ; 
▁ xxmaj that these hot tears , which break from me perforce , 
▁ xxmaj should make thee worth them . xxmaj blasts and fogs upon thee ! 
▁ xxmaj th ' untented woundings of a father 's curse 
▁ xxmaj pierce every sense about thee!- xxmaj old fond eyes , 
▁ xxmaj beweep this cause again , xxmaj i 'll pluck ye out , 
▁ xxmaj and cast you , with the waters that you lose , 
▁ xxmaj to temper clay . xxmaj yea , is it come to this ? 
▁ xxmaj let it be so . xxmaj yet have i left a daughter , 
▁ xxmaj who i am sure is kind and comfortable . 
▁ xxmaj when she shall hear this of thee , with her nails 
▁ xxmaj she 'll flay thy wolvish visage . xxmaj thou shalt find 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj i 'll resume the shape which thou dost think 
▁ i have cast off for ever ; thou shalt , i warrant thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ lear , xxmaj kent , and xxmaj attendants ] . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj do you mark that , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . i can not be so partial , xxmaj goneril , 
▁ xxmaj to the great love i bear you - 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj pray you , content.- xxmaj what , xxmaj oswald , ho ! 
▁ [ to the xxmaj fool ] xxmaj you , sir , more knave than fool , after your master ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj nuncle xxmaj lear , nuncle xxmaj lear , tarry ! xxmaj take the fool with thee . 

▁ a fox when one has caught her , 
▁ xxmaj and such a daughter , 
▁ xxmaj should sure to the slaughter , 
▁ xxmaj if my cap would buy a halter . 
▁ xxmaj so the fool follows after . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj this man hath had good counsel ! a hundred knights ? 
▁ ' tis politic and safe to let him keep 
▁ xxmaj at point a hundred knights ; yes , that on every dream , 
▁ xxmaj each buzz , each fancy , each complaint , dislike , 
▁ xxmaj he may enguard his dotage with their pow'rs 
▁ xxmaj and hold our lives in mercy.- xxmaj oswald , i say ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj well , you may fear too far . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj safer than trust too far . 
▁ xxmaj let me still take away the harms i fear , 
▁ xxmaj not fear still to be taken . i know his heart . 
▁ xxmaj what he hath utter'd i have writ my sister . 
▁ xxmaj if she sustain him and his hundred knights , 
▁ xxmaj when i have show'd th ' unfitness- 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj oswald ? 
▁ xxmaj what , have you writ that letter to my sister ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj yes , madam . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj take you some company , and away to horse ! 
▁ xxmaj inform her full of my particular fear , 
▁ xxmaj and thereto add such reasons of your own 
▁ xxmaj as may compact it more . xxmaj get you gone , 
▁ xxmaj and hasten your return . [ exit xxmaj oswald . ] xxmaj no , no , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj this milky gentleness and course of yours , 
▁ xxmaj though i condemn it not , yet , under pardon , 
▁ xxmaj you are much more at task for want of wisdom 
▁ xxmaj than prais'd for harmful mildness . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj how far your eyes may pierce i can not tell . 
▁ xxmaj striving to better , oft we mar what 's well . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj nay then- 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj well , well ; th ' event . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj court before the xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany 's xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lear , xxmaj kent , and xxmaj fool . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj go you before to xxmaj gloucester with these letters . xxmaj acquaint my 
▁ daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her 
▁ demand out of the letter . xxmaj if your diligence be not speedy , i 
▁ shall be there afore you . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i will not sleep , my lord , till i have delivered your letter . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj if a man 's brains were in 's heels , were't not in danger of 
▁ kibes ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ay , boy . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj then i prithee be merry . xxmaj thy wit shall ne'er go slip - shod . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly ; for though 
▁ she 's as like this as a crab 's like an apple , yet i can tell 
▁ what i can tell . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what canst tell , boy ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj she 'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab . xxmaj thou 
▁ canst tell why one 's nose stands i ' th ' middle on 's face ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj why , to keep one 's eyes of either side 's nose , that what a 
▁ man can not smell out , ' a may spy into . 
▁ xxmaj lear . i did her wrong . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj canst tell how an oyster makes his shell ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj nor i neither ; but i can tell why a snail has a house . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj why , to put 's head in ; not to give it away to his daughters , 
▁ and leave his horns without a case . 
▁ xxmaj lear . i will forget my nature . xxmaj so kind a father!- xxmaj be my horses 
▁ ready ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj thy asses are gone about 'em . xxmaj the reason why the seven stars 
▁ are no moe than seven is a pretty reason . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj because they are not eight ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj yes indeed . xxmaj thou wouldst make a good fool . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj to tak't again perforce ! xxmaj monster ingratitude ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj if thou wert my fool , nuncle , xxmaj i'ld have thee beaten for being 
▁ old before thy time . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj how 's that ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxup o , let me not be mad , not mad , sweet heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj keep me in temper ; i would not be mad ! 

▁ [ enter a xxmaj gentleman . ] 

▁ xxmaj how now ? xxmaj are the horses ready ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj ready , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj come , boy . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj she that 's a maid now , and laughs at my departure , 
▁ xxmaj shall not be a maid long , unless things be cut shorter 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 a court within the xxmaj castle of the xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester . 

 xxmaj enter [ edmund the ] xxmaj bastard and xxmaj curan , meeting . 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj save thee , xxmaj curan . 
▁ xxmaj cur . xxmaj and you , sir . i have been with your father , and given him 
▁ notice that the xxmaj duke of xxmaj cornwall and xxmaj regan his xxmaj duchess will be 
▁ here with him this night . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj how comes that ? 
▁ xxmaj cur . xxmaj nay , i know not . xxmaj you have heard of the news abroad- i mean the 
▁ whisper'd ones , for they are yet but ear - kissing arguments ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj not xxup i. xxmaj pray you , what are they ? 
▁ xxmaj cur . xxmaj have you heard of no likely wars toward ' twixt the two xxmaj dukes 
▁ of xxmaj cornwall and xxmaj albany ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj not a word . 
▁ xxmaj cur . xxmaj you may do , then , in time . xxmaj fare you well , sir . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj the xxmaj duke be here to - night ? xxmaj the better ! best ! 
▁ xxmaj this weaves itself perforce into my business . 
▁ xxmaj my father hath set guard to take my brother ; 
▁ xxmaj and i have one thing , of a queasy question , 
▁ xxmaj which i must act . xxmaj briefness and fortune , work ! 
▁ xxmaj brother , a word ! xxmaj descend ! xxmaj brother , i say ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar . 

▁ xxmaj my father watches . o sir , fly this place ! 
▁ xxmaj intelligence is given where you are hid . 
▁ xxmaj you have now the good advantage of the night . 
▁ xxmaj have you not spoken ' gainst the xxmaj duke of xxmaj cornwall ? 
▁ xxmaj he 's coming hither ; now , i ' th ' night , i ' th ' haste , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj regan with him . xxmaj have you nothing said 
▁ xxmaj upon his party ' gainst the xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany ? 
▁ xxmaj advise yourself . 
▁ xxmaj edg . i am sure on't , not a word . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i hear my father coming . xxmaj pardon me ! 
▁ xxmaj in cunning i must draw my sword upon you . 
▁ xxmaj draw , seem to defend yourself ; now quit you well.- 
▁ xxmaj yield ! xxmaj come before my father . xxmaj light , ho , here ! 
▁ xxmaj fly , brother.- xxmaj torches , torches!- xxmaj so farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj edgar . 
▁ xxmaj some blood drawn on me would beget opinion 
▁ xxmaj of my more fierce endeavour . [ stabs his arm . ] i have seen 
▁ drunkards 
▁ xxmaj do more than this in sport.- xxmaj father , father!- 
▁ xxmaj stop , stop ! xxmaj no help ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester , and xxmaj servants with torches . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj now , xxmaj edmund , where 's the villain ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj here stood he in the dark , his sharp sword out , 
▁ xxmaj mumbling of wicked charms , conjuring the moon 
▁ xxmaj to stand 's auspicious mistress . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj but where is he ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj look , sir , i bleed . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj where is the villain , xxmaj edmund ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj fled this way , sir . xxmaj when by no means he could- 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj pursue him , ho ! xxmaj go after . [ exeunt some xxmaj servants ] . 
▁ xxmaj by no means what ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj persuade me to the murther of your lordship ; 
▁ xxmaj but that i told him the revenging gods 
▁ ' gainst parricides did all their thunders bend ; 
▁ xxmaj spoke with how manifold and strong a bond 
▁ xxmaj the child was bound to th ' father- sir , in fine , 
▁ xxmaj seeing how loathly opposite i stood 
▁ xxmaj to his unnatural purpose , in fell motion 
▁ xxmaj with his prepared sword he charges home 
▁ xxmaj my unprovided body , lanch'd mine arm ; 
▁ xxmaj but when he saw my best alarum'd spirits , 
▁ xxmaj bold in the quarrel 's right , rous'd to th ' encounter , 
▁ xxmaj or whether gasted by the noise i made , 
▁ xxmaj full suddenly he fled . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj let him fly far . 
▁ xxmaj not in this land shall he remain uncaught ; 
▁ xxmaj and found- dispatch . xxmaj the noble xxmaj duke my master , 
▁ xxmaj my worthy arch and patron , comes to - night . 
▁ xxmaj by his authority i will proclaim it 
▁ xxmaj that he which find , him shall deserve our thanks , 
▁ xxmaj bringing the murderous caitiff to the stake ; 
▁ xxmaj he that conceals him , death . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj when i dissuaded him from his intent 
▁ xxmaj and found him pight to do it , with curst speech 
▁ i threaten'd to discover him . xxmaj he replied , 
▁ ' thou unpossessing bastard , dost thou think , 
▁ xxmaj if i would stand against thee , would the reposal 
▁ xxmaj of any trust , virtue , or worth in thee 
▁ xxmaj make thy words faith'd ? xxmaj no . xxmaj what i should deny 
▁ ( as this i would ; ay , though thou didst produce 
▁ xxmaj my very character ) , xxmaj i'ld turn it all 
▁ xxmaj to thy suggestion , plot , and damned practice ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou must make a dullard of the world , 
▁ xxmaj if they not thought the profits of my death 
▁ xxmaj were very pregnant and potential spurs 
▁ xxmaj to make thee seek it . ' 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj strong and fast'ned villain ! 
▁ xxmaj would he deny his letter ? i never got him . 
▁ xxmaj tucket within . 
▁ xxmaj hark , the xxmaj duke 's trumpets ! i know not why he comes . 
▁ xxmaj all ports xxmaj i 'll bar ; the villain shall not scape ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke must grant me that . xxmaj besides , his picture 
▁ i will send far and near , that all the kingdom 
▁ xxmaj may have due note of him , and of my land , 
▁ xxmaj loyal and natural boy , xxmaj i 'll work the means 
▁ xxmaj to make thee capable . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cornwall , xxmaj regan , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj how now , my noble friend ? xxmaj since i came hither 
▁ ( which i can call but now ) i have heard strange news . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj if it be true , all vengeance comes too short 
▁ xxmaj which can pursue th ' offender . xxmaj how dost , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . o madam , my old heart is crack'd , it 's crack'd ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj what , did my father 's godson seek your life ? 
▁ xxmaj he whom my father nam'd ? xxmaj your xxmaj edgar ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . o lady , lady , shame would have it hid ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj was he not companion with the riotous knights 
▁ xxmaj that tend upon my father ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . i know not , madam . ' tis too bad , too bad ! 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj yes , madam , he was of that consort . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj no marvel then though he were ill affected . 
▁ ' tis they have put him on the old man 's death , 
▁ xxmaj to have th ' expense and waste of his revenues . 
▁ i have this present evening from my sister 
▁ xxmaj been well inform'd of them , and with such cautions 
▁ xxmaj that , if they come to sojourn at my house , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not be there . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj nor xxup i , assure thee , xxmaj regan . 
▁ xxmaj edmund , i hear that you have shown your father 
▁ a childlike office . 
▁ xxmaj edm . ' twas my duty , sir . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj he did bewray his practice , and receiv'd 
▁ xxmaj this hurt you see , striving to apprehend him . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj is he pursued ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj if he be taken , he shall never more 
▁ xxmaj be fear'd of doing harm . xxmaj make your own purpose , 
▁ xxmaj how in my strength you please . xxmaj for you , xxmaj edmund , 
▁ xxmaj whose virtue and obedience doth this instant 
▁ xxmaj so much commend itself , you shall be ours . 
▁ xxmaj natures of such deep trust we shall much need ; 
▁ xxmaj you we first seize on . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i shall serve you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj truly , however else . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj for him i thank your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj you know not why we came to visit you- 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj thus out of season , threading dark - ey'd night . 
▁ xxmaj occasions , noble xxmaj gloucester , of some poise , 
▁ xxmaj wherein we must have use of your advice . 
▁ xxmaj our father he hath writ , so hath our sister , 
▁ xxmaj of differences , which i best thought it fit 
▁ xxmaj to answer from our home . xxmaj the several messengers 
▁ xxmaj from hence attend dispatch . xxmaj our good old friend , 
▁ xxmaj lay comforts to your bosom , and bestow 
▁ xxmaj your needful counsel to our business , 
▁ xxmaj which craves the instant use . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i serve you , madam . 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj graces are right welcome . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj flourish . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj kent and [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward , severally . 

▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj good dawning to thee , friend . xxmaj art of this house ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj where may we set our horses ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxup i ' th ' mire . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj prithee , if thou lov'st me , tell me . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i love thee not . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj why then , i care not for thee . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj if i had thee in xxmaj lipsbury xxmaj pinfold , i would make thee care for 
▁ me . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj why dost thou use me thus ? i know thee not . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj fellow , i know thee . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj what dost thou know me for ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . a knave ; a rascal ; an eater of broken meats ; a base , proud , 
▁ shallow , beggarly , three - suited , hundred - pound , filthy , 
▁ worsted - stocking knave ; a lily - liver'd , action - taking , whoreson , 
▁ glass - gazing , superserviceable , finical rogue ; 
▁ one - trunk - inheriting slave ; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of 
▁ good service , and art nothing but the composition of a knave , 
▁ beggar , coward , pander , and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch ; 
▁ one whom i will beat into clamorous whining , if thou deny the 
▁ least syllable of thy addition . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj why , what a monstrous fellow art thou , thus to rail on one 
▁ that 's neither known of thee nor knows thee ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj what a brazen - fac'd varlet art thou , to deny thou knowest me ! 
▁ xxmaj is it two days ago since i beat thee and tripp'd up thy heels 
▁ before the xxmaj king ? [ draws his sword . ] xxmaj draw , you rogue ! for , though 
▁ it be night , yet the moon shines . xxmaj i 'll make a sop o ' th ' 
▁ moonshine o ' you . xxmaj draw , you whoreson cullionly barbermonger ! 
▁ draw ! 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj away ! i have nothing to do with thee . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj draw , you rascal ! xxmaj you come with letters against the xxmaj king , and 
▁ take xxmaj vanity the puppet 's part against the royalty of her father . 
▁ xxmaj draw , you rogue , or xxmaj i 'll so carbonado your shanks ! xxmaj draw , you 
▁ rascal ! xxmaj come your ways ! 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj help , ho ! murther ! help ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj strike , you slave ! xxmaj stand , rogue ! xxmaj stand , you neat slave ! 
▁ xxmaj strike ! [ beats him . ] 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj help , ho ! murther ! murther ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj edmund , with his rapier drawn , xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj cornwall , 
▁ xxmaj regan , xxmaj servants . 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj how now ? xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj parts [ them ] . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj with you , goodman boy , an you please ! xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll flesh ye ! 
▁ xxmaj come on , young master ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj weapons ? arms ? xxmaj what 's the matter here ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj keep peace , upon your lives ! 
▁ xxmaj he dies that strikes again . xxmaj what is the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj the messengers from our sister and the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj what is your difference ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj osw . i am scarce in breath , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj no marvel , you have so bestirr'd your valour . xxmaj you cowardly 
▁ rascal , nature disclaims in thee ; a tailor made thee . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj thou art a strange fellow . a tailor make a man ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj ay , a tailor , sir . a stonecutter or a painter could not have 
▁ made him so ill , though he had been but two hours at the trade . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj speak yet , how grew your quarrel ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj this ancient ruffian , sir , whose life i have spar'd 
▁ xxmaj at suit of his grey beard- 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj thou whoreson zed ! thou unnecessary letter ! xxmaj my lord , if 
▁ you 'll give me leave , i will tread this unbolted villain into 
▁ mortar and daub the walls of a jakes with him . ' spare my grey 
▁ beard , ' you wagtail ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj peace , sirrah ! 
▁ xxmaj you beastly knave , know you no reverence ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj yes , sir , but anger hath a privilege . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj why art thou angry ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj that such a slave as this should wear a sword , 
▁ xxmaj who wears no honesty . xxmaj such smiling rogues as these , 
▁ xxmaj like rats , oft bite the holy cords atwain 
▁ xxmaj which are too intrinse t ' unloose ; smooth every passion 
▁ xxmaj that in the natures of their lords rebel , 
▁ xxmaj bring oil to fire , snow to their colder moods ; 
▁ xxmaj renege , affirm , and turn their halcyon beaks 
▁ xxmaj with every gale and vary of their masters , 
▁ xxmaj knowing naught ( like dogs ) but following . 
▁ a plague upon your epileptic visage ! 
▁ xxmaj smile you my speeches , as i were a fool ? 
▁ xxmaj goose , an i had you upon xxmaj sarum xxmaj plain , 
▁ xxmaj i'ld drive ye cackling home to xxmaj camelot . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj what , art thou mad , old fellow ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj how fell you out ? xxmaj say that . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj no contraries hold more antipathy 
▁ xxmaj than i and such a knave . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj why dost thou call him knave ? xxmaj what is his fault ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj his countenance likes me not . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj no more perchance does mine , or his , or hers . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj sir , ' tis my occupation to be plain . 
▁ i have seen better faces in my time 
▁ xxmaj than stands on any shoulder that i see 
▁ xxmaj before me at this instant . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj this is some fellow 
▁ xxmaj who , having been prais'd for bluntness , doth affect 
▁ a saucy roughness , and constrains the garb 
▁ xxmaj quite from his nature . xxmaj he can not flatter , he ! 
▁ xxmaj an honest mind and plain- he must speak truth ! 
▁ xxmaj an they will take it , so ; if not , he 's plain . 
▁ xxmaj these kind of knaves i know which in this plainness 
▁ xxmaj harbour more craft and more corrupter ends 
▁ xxmaj than twenty silly - ducking observants 
▁ xxmaj that stretch their duties nicely . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj sir , in good faith , in sincere verity , 
▁ xxmaj under th ' allowance of your great aspect , 
▁ xxmaj whose influence , like the wreath of radiant fire 
▁ xxmaj on flickering xxmaj phoebus ' front- 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj what mean'st by this ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj to go out of my dialect , which you discommend so much . i 
▁ know , sir , i am no flatterer . xxmaj he that beguil'd you in a plain 
▁ accent was a plain knave , which , for my part , i will not be , 
▁ though i should win your displeasure to entreat me to't . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj what was th ' offence you gave him ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . i never gave him any . 
▁ xxmaj it pleas'd the xxmaj king his master very late 
▁ xxmaj to strike at me , upon his misconstruction ; 
▁ xxmaj when he , conjunct , and flattering his displeasure , 
▁ xxmaj tripp'd me behind ; being down , insulted , rail'd 
▁ xxmaj and put upon him such a deal of man 
▁ xxmaj that worthied him , got praises of the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj for him attempting who was self - subdu'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in the fleshment of this dread exploit , 
▁ xxmaj drew on me here again . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj none of these rogues and cowards 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj ajax is their fool . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj fetch forth the stocks ! 
▁ xxmaj you stubborn ancient knave , you reverent braggart , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll teach you- 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj sir , i am too old to learn . 
▁ xxmaj call not your stocks for me . i serve the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj on whose employment i was sent to you . 
▁ xxmaj you shall do small respect , show too bold malice 
▁ xxmaj against the grace and person of my master , 
▁ xxmaj stocking his messenger . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj fetch forth the stocks ! xxmaj as i have life and honour , 
▁ xxmaj there shall he sit till noon . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj till noon ? xxmaj till night , my lord , and all night too ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj why , madam , if i were your father 's dog , 
▁ xxmaj you should not use me so . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj sir , being his knave , i will . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj this is a fellow of the selfsame colour 
▁ xxmaj our sister speaks of . xxmaj come , bring away the stocks ! 
▁ xxmaj stocks brought out . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj let me beseech your xxmaj grace not to do so . 
▁ xxmaj his fault is much , and the good xxmaj king his master 
▁ xxmaj will check him for't . xxmaj your purpos'd low correction 
▁ xxmaj is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches 
▁ xxmaj for pilf'rings and most common trespasses 
▁ xxmaj are punish'd with . xxmaj the xxmaj king must take it ill 
▁ xxmaj that he , so slightly valued in his messenger , 
▁ xxmaj should have him thus restrain'd . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj i 'll answer that . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj my sister may receive it much more worse , 
▁ xxmaj to have her gentleman abus'd , assaulted ,