xxbos xxmaj for following her affairs . xxmaj put in his legs.- 
▁ [ kent is put in the stocks . ] 
▁ xxmaj come , my good lord , away . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but xxmaj gloucester and xxmaj kent ] . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i am sorry for thee , friend . ' tis the xxmaj duke 's pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj whose disposition , all the world well knows , 
▁ xxmaj will not be rubb'd nor stopp'd . xxmaj i 'll entreat for thee . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj pray do not , sir . i have watch'd and travell'd hard . 
▁ xxmaj some time i shall sleep out , the rest xxmaj i 'll whistle . 
▁ a good man 's fortune may grow out at heels . 
▁ xxmaj give you good morrow ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj the xxmaj duke 's to blame in this ; ' twill be ill taken . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj good xxmaj king , that must approve the common saw , 
▁ xxmaj thou out of heaven 's benediction com'st 
▁ xxmaj to the warm sun ! 
▁ xxmaj approach , thou beacon to this under globe , 
▁ xxmaj that by thy comfortable beams i may 
▁ xxmaj peruse this letter . xxmaj nothing almost sees miracles 
▁ xxmaj but misery . i know ' tis from xxmaj cordelia , 
▁ xxmaj who hath most fortunately been inform'd 
▁ xxmaj of my obscured course- and [ reads ] ' shall find time 
▁ xxmaj from this enormous state , seeking to give 
▁ xxmaj losses their remedies'- xxmaj all weary and o'erwatch'd , 
▁ xxmaj take vantage , heavy eyes , not to behold 
▁ xxmaj this shameful lodging . 
▁ xxmaj fortune , good night ; smile once more , turn thy wheel . 
▁ xxmaj sleeps . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the open country . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar . 

▁ xxmaj edg . i heard myself proclaim'd , 
▁ xxmaj and by the happy hollow of a tree 
▁ xxmaj escap'd the hunt . xxmaj no port is free , no place 
▁ xxmaj that guard and most unusual vigilance 
▁ xxmaj does not attend my taking . xxmaj whiles i may scape , 
▁ i will preserve myself ; and am bethought 
▁ xxmaj to take the basest and most poorest shape 
▁ xxmaj that ever penury , in contempt of man , 
▁ xxmaj brought near to beast . xxmaj my face xxmaj i 'll grime with filth , 
▁ xxmaj blanket my loins , elf all my hair in knots , 
▁ xxmaj and with presented nakedness outface 
▁ xxmaj the winds and persecutions of the sky . 
▁ xxmaj the country gives me proof and precedent 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj bedlam beggars , who , with roaring voices , 
▁ xxmaj strike in their numb'd and mortified bare arms 
▁ xxmaj pins , wooden pricks , nails , sprigs of rosemary ; 
▁ xxmaj and with this horrible object , from low farms , 
▁ xxmaj poor pelting villages , sheepcotes , and mills , 
▁ xxmaj sometime with lunatic bans , sometime with prayers , 
▁ xxmaj enforce their charity . ' poor xxmaj turlygod ! poor xxmaj tom ! ' 
▁ xxmaj that 's something yet ! xxmaj edgar i nothing am . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle ; xxmaj kent in the stocks . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lear , xxmaj fool , and xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj lear . ' tis strange that they should so depart from home , 
▁ xxmaj and not send back my messenger . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj as i learn'd , 
▁ xxmaj the night before there was no purpose in them 
▁ xxmaj of this remove . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj hail to thee , noble master ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj mak'st thou this shame thy pastime ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj ha , ha ! look ! he wears cruel garters . xxmaj horses are tied by the 
▁ head , dogs and bears by th ' neck , monkeys by th ' loins , and men 
▁ by th ' legs . xxmaj when a man 's over - lusty at legs , then he wears 
▁ wooden nether - stocks . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what 's he that hath so much thy place mistook 
▁ xxmaj to set thee here ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj it is both he and she- 
▁ xxmaj your son and daughter . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , i say . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i say yea . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , no , they would not ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj yes , they have . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj by xxmaj jupiter , i swear no ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj by xxmaj juno , i swear ay ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj they durst not do't ; 
▁ xxmaj they would not , could not do't . ' tis worse than murther 
▁ xxmaj to do upon respect such violent outrage . 
▁ xxmaj resolve me with all modest haste which way 
▁ xxmaj thou mightst deserve or they impose this usage , 
▁ xxmaj coming from us . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj my lord , when at their home 
▁ i did commend your xxmaj highness ' letters to them , 
▁ xxmaj ere i was risen from the place that show'd 
▁ xxmaj my duty kneeling , came there a reeking post , 
▁ xxmaj stew'd in his haste , half breathless , panting forth 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj goneril his mistress salutations ; 
▁ xxmaj deliver'd letters , spite of intermission , 
▁ xxmaj which presently they read ; on whose contents , 
▁ xxmaj they summon'd up their meiny , straight took horse , 
▁ xxmaj commanded me to follow and attend 
▁ xxmaj the leisure of their answer , gave me cold looks , 
▁ xxmaj and meeting here the other messenger , 
▁ xxmaj whose welcome i perceiv'd had poison'd mine- 
▁ xxmaj being the very fellow which of late 
▁ xxmaj display'd so saucily against your xxmaj highness- 
▁ xxmaj having more man than wit about me , drew . 
▁ xxmaj he rais'd the house with loud and coward cries . 
▁ xxmaj your son and daughter found this trespass worth 
▁ xxmaj the shame which here it suffers . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj winter 's not gone yet , if the wild geese fly that way . 

▁ xxmaj fathers that wear rags 
▁ xxmaj do make their children blind ; 
▁ xxmaj but fathers that bear bags 
▁ xxmaj shall see their children kind . 
▁ xxmaj fortune , that arrant whore , 
▁ xxmaj ne'er turns the key to th ' poor . 

▁ xxmaj but for all this , thou shalt have as many dolours for thy 
▁ daughters as thou canst tell in a year . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxup o , how this mother swells up toward my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj hysterica passio ! xxmaj down , thou climbing sorrow ! 
▁ xxmaj thy element 's below ! xxmaj where is this daughter ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj with the xxmaj earl , sir , here within . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj follow me not ; 
▁ xxmaj stay here . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj made you no more offence but what you speak of ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj none . 
▁ xxmaj how chance the xxmaj king comes with so small a number ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj an thou hadst been set i ' th ' stocks for that question , 
▁ thou'dst well deserv'd it . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj why , fool ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj we 'll set thee to school to an ant , to teach thee there 's no 
▁ labouring i ' th ' winter . xxmaj all that follow their noses are led by 
▁ their eyes but blind men , and there 's not a nose among twenty 
▁ but can smell him that 's stinking . xxmaj let go thy hold when a great 
▁ wheel runs down a hill , lest it break thy neck with following 
▁ it ; but the great one that goes upward , let him draw thee after . 
▁ xxmaj when a wise man gives thee better counsel , give me mine again . i 
▁ would have none but knaves follow it , since a fool gives it . 
▁ xxmaj that sir which serves and seeks for gain , 
▁ xxmaj and follows but for form , 
▁ xxmaj will pack when it begins to rain 
▁ xxmaj and leave thee in the storm . 
▁ xxmaj but i will tarry ; the fool will stay , 
▁ xxmaj and let the wise man fly . 
▁ xxmaj the knave turns fool that runs away ; 
▁ xxmaj the fool no knave , perdy . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj where learn'd you this , fool ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj not i ' th ' stocks , fool . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lear and xxmaj gloucester 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj deny to speak with me ? xxmaj they are sick ? they are weary ? 
▁ xxmaj they have travell'd all the night ? xxmaj mere fetches- 
▁ xxmaj the images of revolt and flying off ! 
▁ xxmaj fetch me a better answer . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj my dear lord , 
▁ xxmaj you know the fiery quality of the xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj how unremovable and fix'd he is 
▁ xxmaj in his own course . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj vengeance ! plague ! death ! confusion ! 
▁ xxmaj fiery ? xxmaj what quality ? xxmaj why , xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj i'ld speak with the xxmaj duke of xxmaj cornwall and his wife . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj well , my good lord , i have inform'd them so . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj inform'd them ? xxmaj dost thou understand me , man ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj the xxmaj king would speak with xxmaj cornwall ; the dear father 
▁ xxmaj would with his daughter speak , commands her service . 
▁ xxmaj are they inform'd of this ? xxmaj my breath and blood ! 
▁ xxmaj fiery ? the fiery xxmaj duke ? xxmaj tell the hot xxmaj duke that- 
▁ xxmaj no , but not yet ! xxmaj may be he is not well . 
▁ xxmaj infirmity doth still neglect all office 
▁ xxmaj whereto our health is bound . xxmaj we are not ourselves 
▁ xxmaj when nature , being oppress'd , commands the mind 
▁ xxmaj to suffer with the body . xxmaj i 'll forbear ; 
▁ xxmaj and am fallen out with my more headier will , 
▁ xxmaj to take the indispos'd and sickly fit 
▁ xxmaj for the sound man.- xxmaj death on my state ! xxmaj wherefore 
▁ xxmaj should be sit here ? xxmaj this act persuades me 
▁ xxmaj that this remotion of the xxmaj duke and her 
▁ xxmaj is practice only . xxmaj give me my servant forth . 
▁ xxmaj go tell the xxmaj duke and 's wife xxmaj i'ld speak with them- 
▁ xxmaj now , presently . xxmaj bid them come forth and hear me , 
▁ xxmaj or at their chamber door xxmaj i 'll beat the drum 
▁ xxmaj till it cry sleep to death . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i would have all well betwixt you . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj lear . o me , my heart , my rising heart ! xxmaj but down ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj cry to it , nuncle , as the cockney did to the eels when she 
▁ put 'em i ' th ' paste alive . xxmaj she knapp'd 'em o ' th ' coxcombs with 
▁ a stick and cried ' down , wantons , down ! ' ' twas her brother that , 
▁ in pure kindness to his horse , buttered his hay . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cornwall , xxmaj regan , xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj servants . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj good morrow to you both . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj hail to your xxmaj grace ! 
▁ xxmaj kent here set at liberty . 
▁ xxmaj reg . i am glad to see your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj regan , i think you are ; i know what reason 
▁ i have to think so . xxmaj if thou shouldst not be glad , 
▁ i would divorce me from thy mother 's tomb , 
▁ xxmaj sepulchring an adultress . [ to xxmaj kent ] xxup o , are you free ? 
▁ xxmaj some other time for that.- xxmaj beloved xxmaj regan , 
▁ xxmaj thy sister 's naught . o xxmaj regan , she hath tied 
▁ xxmaj sharp - tooth'd unkindness , like a vulture , here ! 
▁ [ lays his hand on his heart . ] 
▁ i can scarce speak to thee . xxmaj thou'lt not believe 
▁ xxmaj with how deprav'd a quality- o xxmaj regan ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . i pray you , sir , take patience . i have hope 
▁ xxmaj you less know how to value her desert 
▁ xxmaj than she to scant her duty . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj say , how is that ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . i can not think my sister in the least 
▁ xxmaj would fail her obligation . xxmaj if , sir , perchance 
▁ xxmaj she have restrain'd the riots of your followers , 
▁ ' tis on such ground , and to such wholesome end , 
▁ xxmaj as clears her from all blame . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj my curses on her ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxup o , sir , you are old ! 
▁ xxmaj nature in you stands on the very verge 
▁ xxmaj of her confine . xxmaj you should be rul'd , and led 
▁ xxmaj by some discretion that discerns your state 
▁ xxmaj better than you yourself . xxmaj therefore i pray you 
▁ xxmaj that to our sister you do make return ; 
▁ xxmaj say you have wrong'd her , sir . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ask her forgiveness ? 
▁ xxmaj do you but mark how this becomes the house : 
▁ ' dear daughter , i confess that i am old . [ kneels . ] 
▁ xxmaj age is unnecessary . xxmaj on my knees i beg 
▁ xxmaj that you 'll vouchsafe me raiment , bed , and food . ' 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj good sir , no more ! xxmaj these are unsightly tricks . 
▁ xxmaj return you to my sister . 
▁ xxmaj lear . [ rises ] xxmaj never , xxmaj regan ! 
▁ xxmaj she hath abated me of half my train ; 
▁ xxmaj look'd black upon me ; struck me with her tongue , 
▁ xxmaj most serpent - like , upon the very heart . 
▁ xxmaj all the stor'd vengeances of heaven fall 
▁ xxmaj on her ingrateful top ! xxmaj strike her young bones , 
▁ xxmaj you taking airs , with lameness ! 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj fie , sir , fie ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj you nimble lightnings , dart your blinding flames 
▁ xxmaj into her scornful eyes ! xxmaj infect her beauty , 
▁ xxmaj you fen - suck'd fogs , drawn by the pow'rful sun , 
▁ xxmaj to fall and blast her pride ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . o the blest gods ! so will you wish on me 
▁ xxmaj when the rash mood is on . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , xxmaj regan , thou shalt never have my curse . 
▁ xxmaj thy tender - hefted nature shall not give 
▁ xxmaj thee o'er to harshness . xxmaj her eyes are fierce ; but thine 
▁ xxmaj do comfort , and not burn . ' tis not in thee 
▁ xxmaj to grudge my pleasures , to cut off my train , 
▁ xxmaj to bandy hasty words , to scant my sizes , 
▁ xxmaj and , in conclusion , to oppose the bolt 
▁ xxmaj against my coming in . xxmaj thou better know'st 
▁ xxmaj the offices of nature , bond of childhood , 
▁ xxmaj effects of courtesy , dues of gratitude . 
▁ xxmaj thy half o ' th ' kingdom hast thou not forgot , 
▁ xxmaj wherein i thee endow'd . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj good sir , to th ' purpose . 
▁ xxmaj tucket within . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj who put my man i ' th ' stocks ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj what trumpet 's that ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . i know't- my sister 's . xxmaj this approves her letter , 
▁ xxmaj that she would soon be here . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj is your lady come ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj this is a slave , whose easy - borrowed pride 
▁ xxmaj dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows . 
▁ xxmaj out , varlet , from my sight ! 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj what means your xxmaj grace ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj goneril . 
▁
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj who stock'd my servant ? xxmaj regan , i have good hope 
▁ xxmaj thou didst not know on't.- xxmaj who comes here ? o heavens ! 
▁ xxmaj if you do love old men , if your sweet sway 
▁ xxmaj allow obedience- if yourselves are old , 
▁ xxmaj make it your cause ! xxmaj send down , and take my part ! 
▁ [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj art not asham'd to look upon this beard?- 
▁ o xxmaj regan , wilt thou take her by the hand ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj why not by th ' hand , sir ? xxmaj how have i offended ? 
▁ xxmaj all 's not offence that indiscretion finds 
▁ xxmaj and dotage terms so . 
▁ xxmaj lear . o sides , you are too tough ! 
▁ xxmaj will you yet hold ? xxmaj how came my man i ' th ' stocks ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . i set him there , sir ; but his own disorders 
▁ xxmaj deserv'd much less advancement . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj you ? xxmaj did you ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . i pray you , father , being weak , seem so . 
▁ xxmaj if , till the expiration of your month , 
▁ xxmaj you will return and sojourn with my sister , 
▁ xxmaj dismissing half your train , come then to me . 
▁ i am now from home , and out of that provision 
▁ xxmaj which shall be needful for your entertainment . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj return to her , and fifty men dismiss'd ? 
▁ xxmaj no , rather i abjure all roofs , and choose 
▁ xxmaj to wage against the enmity o ' th ' air , 
▁ xxmaj to be a comrade with the wolf and owl- 
▁ xxmaj necessity 's sharp pinch ! xxmaj return with her ? 
▁ xxmaj why , the hot - blooded xxmaj france , that dowerless took 
▁ xxmaj our youngest born , i could as well be brought 
▁ xxmaj to knee his throne , and , squire - like , pension beg 
▁ xxmaj to keep base life afoot . xxmaj return with her ? 
▁ xxmaj persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter 
▁ xxmaj to this detested groom . [ points at xxmaj oswald . ] 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj at your choice , sir . 
▁ xxmaj lear . i prithee , daughter , do not make me mad . 
▁ i will not trouble thee , my child ; farewell . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll no more meet , no more see one another . 
▁ xxmaj but yet thou art my flesh , my blood , my daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj or rather a disease that 's in my flesh , 
▁ xxmaj which i must needs call mine . xxmaj thou art a boil , 
▁ a plague sore , an embossed carbuncle 
▁ xxmaj in my corrupted blood . xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll not chide thee . 
▁ xxmaj let shame come when it will , i do not call it . 
▁ i do not bid the xxmaj thunder - bearer shoot 
▁ xxmaj nor tell tales of thee to high - judging xxmaj jove . 
▁ xxmaj mend when thou canst ; be better at thy leisure ; 
▁ i can be patient , i can stay with xxmaj regan , 
▁ i and my hundred knights . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj not altogether so . 
▁ i look'd not for you yet , nor am provided 
▁ xxmaj for your fit welcome . xxmaj give ear , sir , to my sister ; 
▁ xxmaj for those that mingle reason with your passion 
▁ xxmaj must be content to think you old , and so- 
▁ xxmaj but she knows what she does . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj is this well spoken ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . i dare avouch it , sir . xxmaj what , fifty followers ? 
▁ xxmaj is it not well ? xxmaj what should you need of more ? 
▁ xxmaj yea , or so many , sith that both charge and danger 
▁ xxmaj speak ' gainst so great a number ? xxmaj how in one house 
▁ xxmaj should many people , under two commands , 
▁ xxmaj hold amity ? ' tis hard ; almost impossible . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj why might not you , my lord , receive attendance 
▁ xxmaj from those that she calls servants , or from mine ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj why not , my lord ? xxmaj if then they chanc'd to slack ye , 
▁ xxmaj we could control them . xxmaj if you will come to me 
▁ ( for now i spy a danger ) , i entreat you 
▁ xxmaj to bring but five - and - twenty . xxmaj to no more 
▁ xxmaj will i give place or notice . 
▁ xxmaj lear . i gave you all- 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj and in good time you gave it ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj made you my guardians , my depositaries ; 
▁ xxmaj but kept a reservation to be followed 
▁ xxmaj with such a number . xxmaj what , must i come to you 
▁ xxmaj with five - and - twenty , xxmaj regan ? xxmaj said you so ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj and speak't again my lord . xxmaj no more with me . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj those wicked creatures yet do look well - favour'd 
▁ xxmaj when others are more wicked ; not being the worst 
▁ xxmaj stands in some rank of praise . [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj i 'll go with thee . 
▁ xxmaj thy fifty yet doth double five - and - twenty , 
▁ xxmaj and thou art twice her love . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj hear , me , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj what need you five - and - twenty , ten , or five , 
▁ xxmaj to follow in a house where twice so many 
▁ xxmaj have a command to tend you ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj what need one ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxup o , reason not the need ! xxmaj our basest beggars 
▁ xxmaj are in the poorest thing superfluous . 
▁ xxmaj allow not nature more than nature needs , 
▁ xxmaj man 's life is cheap as beast 's . xxmaj thou art a lady : 
▁ xxmaj if only to go warm were gorgeous , 
▁ xxmaj why , nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st 
▁ xxmaj which scarcely keeps thee warm . xxmaj but , for true need- 
▁ xxmaj you heavens , give me that patience , patience i need ! 
▁ xxmaj you see me here , you gods , a poor old man , 
▁ xxmaj as full of grief as age ; wretched in both . 
▁ xxmaj if it be you that stirs these daughters ' hearts 
▁ xxmaj against their father , fool me not so much 
▁ xxmaj to bear it tamely ; touch me with noble anger , 
▁ xxmaj and let not women 's weapons , water drops , 
▁ xxmaj stain my man 's cheeks ! xxmaj no , you unnatural hags ! 
▁ i will have such revenges on you both 
▁ xxmaj that all the world shall- i will do such things- 
▁ xxmaj what they are yet , i know not ; but they shall be 
▁ xxmaj the terrors of the earth ! xxmaj you think xxmaj i 'll weep . 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll not weep . 
▁ i have full cause of weeping , but this heart 
▁ xxmaj shall break into a hundred thousand flaws 
▁ xxmaj or ere xxmaj i 'll weep . o fool , i shall go mad ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj lear , xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj kent , and xxmaj fool . xxmaj storm and 
▁ tempest . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj let us withdraw ; ' twill be a storm . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj this house is little ; the old man and 's people 
▁ xxmaj can not be well bestow'd . 
▁ xxmaj gon . ' tis his own blame ; hath put himself from rest 
▁ xxmaj and must needs taste his folly . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj for his particular , xxmaj i 'll receive him gladly , 
▁ xxmaj but not one follower . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj so am i purpos'd . 
▁ xxmaj where is my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj followed the old man forth . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester . 

▁ xxmaj he is return'd . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj the xxmaj king is in high rage . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj whither is he going ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj he calls to horse , but will i know not whither . 
▁ xxmaj corn . ' tis best to give him way ; he leads himself . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj my lord , entreat him by no means to stay . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj alack , the night comes on , and the bleak winds 
▁ xxmaj do sorely ruffle . xxmaj for many miles about 
▁ xxmaj there 's scarce a bush . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxup o , sir , to wilful men 
▁ xxmaj the injuries that they themselves procure 
▁ xxmaj must be their schoolmasters . xxmaj shut up your doors . 
▁ xxmaj he is attended with a desperate train , 
▁ xxmaj and what they may incense him to , being apt 
▁ xxmaj to have his ear abus'd , wisdom bids fear . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj shut up your doors , my lord : ' tis a wild night . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj regan counsels well . xxmaj come out o ' th ' storm . [ exeunt . ] 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 a heath . 

 xxmaj storm still . xxmaj enter xxmaj kent and a xxmaj gentleman at several doors . 

▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj who 's there , besides foul weather ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj one minded like the weather , most unquietly . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i know you . xxmaj where 's the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj contending with the fretful elements ; 
▁ xxmaj bids the wind blow the earth into the sea , 
▁ xxmaj or swell the curled waters ' bove the main , 
▁ xxmaj that things might change or cease ; tears his white hair , 
▁ xxmaj which the impetuous blasts , with eyeless rage , 
▁ xxmaj catch in their fury and make nothing of ; 
▁ xxmaj strives in his little world of man to outscorn 
▁ xxmaj the to - and - fro - conflicting wind and rain . 
▁ xxmaj this night , wherein the cub - drawn bear would couch , 
▁ xxmaj the lion and the belly - pinched wolf 
▁ xxmaj keep their fur dry , unbonneted he runs , 
▁ xxmaj and bids what will take all . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj but who is with him ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj none but the fool , who labours to outjest 
▁ xxmaj his heart - struck injuries . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj sir , i do know you , 
▁ xxmaj and dare upon the warrant of my note 
▁ xxmaj commend a dear thing to you . xxmaj there is division 
▁ ( although as yet the face of it be cover'd 
▁ xxmaj with mutual cunning ) ' twixt xxmaj albany and xxmaj cornwall ; 
▁ xxmaj who have ( as who have not , that their great stars 
▁ xxmaj thron'd and set high ? ) servants , who seem no less , 
▁ xxmaj which are to xxmaj france the spies and speculations 
▁ xxmaj intelligent of our state . xxmaj what hath been seen , 
▁ xxmaj either in snuffs and packings of the xxmaj dukes , 
▁ xxmaj or the hard rein which both of them have borne 
▁ xxmaj against the old kind xxmaj king , or something deeper , 
▁ xxmaj whereof , perchance , these are but furnishings- 
▁ xxmaj but , true it is , from xxmaj france there comes a power 
▁ xxmaj into this scattered kingdom , who already , 
▁ xxmaj wise in our negligence , have secret feet 
▁ xxmaj in some of our best ports and are at point 
▁ xxmaj to show their open banner . xxmaj now to you : 
▁ xxmaj if on my credit you dare build so far 
▁ xxmaj to make your speed to xxmaj dover , you shall find 
▁ xxmaj some that will thank you , making just report 
▁ xxmaj of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king hath cause to plain . 
▁ i am a gentleman of blood and breeding , 
▁ xxmaj and from some knowledge and assurance offer 
▁ xxmaj this office to you . 
▁ xxmaj gent . i will talk further with you . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj no , do not . 
▁ xxmaj for confirmation that i am much more 
▁ xxmaj than my out - wall , open this purse and take 
▁ xxmaj what it contains . xxmaj if you shall see xxmaj cordelia 
▁ ( as fear not but you shall ) , show her this ring , 
▁ xxmaj and she will tell you who your fellow is 
▁ xxmaj that yet you do not know . xxmaj fie on this storm ! 
▁ i will go seek the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj give me your hand . xxmaj have you no more to say ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj few words , but , to effect , more than all yet : 
▁ xxmaj that , when we have found the xxmaj king ( in which your pain 
▁ xxmaj that way , xxmaj i 'll this ) , he that first lights on him 
▁ xxmaj holla the other . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ severally ] . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj another part of the heath . 

 xxmaj storm still . xxmaj enter xxmaj lear and xxmaj fool . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj blow , winds , and crack your cheeks ! rage ! blow ! 
▁ xxmaj you cataracts and hurricanoes , spout 
▁ xxmaj till you have drench'd our steeples , drown'd the cocks ! 
▁ xxmaj you sulph'rous and thought - executing fires , 
▁ xxmaj vaunt - couriers to oak - cleaving thunderbolts , 
▁ xxmaj singe my white head ! xxmaj and thou , all - shaking thunder , 
▁ xxmaj strike flat the thick rotundity o ' th ' world , 
▁ xxmaj crack xxmaj nature 's moulds , all germains spill at once , 
▁ xxmaj that makes ingrateful man ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . o nuncle , court holy water in a dry house is better than this 
▁ rain water out o ' door . xxmaj good nuncle , in , and ask thy daughters 
▁ blessing ! xxmaj here 's a night pities nether wise men nor fools . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj rumble thy bellyful ! xxmaj spit , fire ! spout , rain ! 
▁ xxmaj nor rain , wind , thunder , fire are my daughters . 
▁ i tax not you , you elements , with unkindness . 
▁ i never gave you kingdom , call'd you children , 
▁ xxmaj you owe me no subscription . xxmaj then let fall 
▁ xxmaj your horrible pleasure . xxmaj here i stand your slave , 
▁ a poor , infirm , weak , and despis'd old man . 
▁ xxmaj but yet i call you servile ministers , 
▁ xxmaj that will with two pernicious daughters join 
▁ xxmaj your high - engender'd battles ' gainst a head 
▁ xxmaj so old and white as this ! xxup o ! xxup o ! ' tis foul ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj he that has a house to put 's head in has a good head - piece . 
▁ xxmaj the codpiece that will house 
▁ xxmaj before the head has any , 
▁ xxmaj the head and he shall louse : 
▁ xxmaj so beggars marry many . 
▁ xxmaj the man that makes his toe 
▁ xxmaj what he his heart should make 
▁ xxmaj shall of a corn cry woe , 
▁ xxmaj and turn his sleep to wake . 
▁ xxmaj for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a 
▁ glass . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj kent . 
▁
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , i will be the pattern of all patience ; 
▁ i will say nothing . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj marry , here 's grace and a codpiece ; that 's a wise man and a 
▁ fool . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj alas , sir , are you here ? xxmaj things that love night 
▁ xxmaj love not such nights as these . xxmaj the wrathful skies 
▁ xxmaj gallow the very wanderers of the dark 
▁ xxmaj and make them keep their caves . xxmaj since i was man , 
▁ xxmaj such sheets of fire , such bursts of horrid thunder , 
▁ xxmaj such groans of roaring wind and rain , i never 
▁ xxmaj remember to have heard . xxmaj man 's nature can not carry 
▁ xxmaj th ' affliction nor the fear . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj let the great gods , 
▁ xxmaj that keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads , 
▁ xxmaj find out their enemies now . xxmaj tremble , thou wretch , 
▁ xxmaj that hast within thee undivulged crimes 
▁ xxmaj unwhipp'd of justice . xxmaj hide thee , thou bloody hand ; 
▁ xxmaj thou perjur'd , and thou simular man of virtue 
▁ xxmaj that art incestuous . xxmaj caitiff , in pieces shake 
▁ xxmaj that under covert and convenient seeming 
▁ xxmaj hast practis'd on man 's life . xxmaj close pent - up guilts , 
▁ xxmaj rive your concealing continents , and cry 
▁ xxmaj these dreadful summoners grace . i am a man 
▁ xxmaj more sinn'd against than sinning . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj alack , bareheaded ? 
▁ xxmaj gracious my lord , hard by here is a hovel ; 
▁ xxmaj some friendship will it lend you ' gainst the tempest . 
▁ xxmaj repose you there , whilst i to this hard house 
▁ ( more harder than the stones whereof ' tis rais'd , 
▁ xxmaj which even but now , demanding after you , 
▁ xxmaj denied me to come in ) return , and force 
▁ xxmaj their scanted courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj my wits begin to turn . 
▁ xxmaj come on , my boy . xxmaj how dost , my boy ? xxmaj art cold ? 
▁ i am cold myself . xxmaj where is this straw , my fellow ? 
▁ xxmaj the art of our necessities is strange , 
▁ xxmaj that can make vile things precious . xxmaj come , your hovel . 
▁ xxmaj poor fool and knave , i have one part in my heart 
▁ xxmaj that 's sorry yet for thee . 
▁ xxmaj fool . [ sings ] 

▁ xxmaj he that has and a little tiny wit- 
▁ xxmaj with hey , ho , the wind and the rain- 
▁ xxmaj must make content with his fortunes fit , 
▁ xxmaj for the rain it raineth every day . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj true , my good boy . xxmaj come , bring us to this hovel . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ lear and xxmaj kent ] . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj this is a brave night to cool a courtesan . xxmaj i 'll speak a 
▁ prophecy ere i go : 
▁ xxmaj when priests are more in word than matter ; 
▁ xxmaj when brewers mar their malt with water ; 
▁ xxmaj when nobles are their tailors ' tutors , 
▁ xxmaj no heretics burn'd , but wenches ' suitors ; 
▁ xxmaj when every case in law is right , 
▁ xxmaj no squire in debt nor no poor knight ; 
▁ xxmaj when slanders do not live in tongues , 
▁ xxmaj nor cutpurses come not to throngs ; 
▁ xxmaj when usurers tell their gold i ' th ' field , 
▁ xxmaj and bawds and whores do churches build : 
▁ xxmaj then shall the realm of xxmaj albion 
▁ xxmaj come to great confusion . 
▁ xxmaj then comes the time , who lives to see't , 
▁ xxmaj that going shall be us'd with feet . 
▁ xxmaj this prophecy xxmaj merlin shall make , for i live before his time . 
 xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester and xxmaj edmund . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj alack , alack , xxmaj edmund , i like not this unnatural dealing ! xxmaj when 
▁ i desir'd their leave that i might pity him , they took from me 
▁ the use of mine own house , charg'd me on pain of perpetual 
▁ displeasure neither to speak of him , entreat for him , nor any 
▁ way sustain him . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj most savage and unnatural ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj go to ; say you nothing . xxmaj there is division betwixt the xxmaj dukes , 
▁ and a worse matter than that . i have received a letter this 
▁ night- ' tis dangerous to be spoken- i have lock'd the letter in 
▁ my closet . xxmaj these injuries the xxmaj king now bears will be revenged 
▁ home ; there 's part of a power already footed ; we must incline to 
▁ the xxmaj king . i will seek him and privily relieve him . xxmaj go you and 
▁ maintain talk with the xxmaj duke , that my charity be not of him 
▁ perceived . xxmaj if he ask for me , i am ill and gone to bed . xxmaj though i 
▁ die for't , as no less is threat'ned me , the xxmaj king my old master 
▁ must be relieved . xxmaj there is some strange thing toward , xxmaj edmund . 
▁ xxmaj pray you be careful . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj this courtesy , forbid thee , shall the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj instantly know , and of that letter too . 
▁ xxmaj this seems a fair deserving , and must draw me 
▁ xxmaj that which my father loses- no less than all . 
▁ xxmaj the younger rises when the old doth fall . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the heath . xxmaj before a hovel . 

 xxmaj storm still . xxmaj enter xxmaj lear , xxmaj kent , and xxmaj fool . 

▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj here is the place , my lord . xxmaj good my lord , enter . 
▁ xxmaj the tyranny of the open night 's too rough 
▁ xxmaj for nature to endure . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj let me alone . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj good my lord , enter here . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj wilt break my heart ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . i had rather break mine own . xxmaj good my lord , enter . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj thou think'st ' tis much that this contentious storm 
▁ xxmaj invades us to the skin . xxmaj so ' tis to thee ; 
▁ xxmaj but where the greater malady is fix'd , 
▁ xxmaj the lesser is scarce felt . xxmaj thou'dst shun a bear ; 
▁ xxmaj but if thy flight lay toward the raging sea , 
▁ xxmaj thou'dst meet the bear i ' th ' mouth . xxmaj when the mind 's free , 
▁ xxmaj the body 's delicate . xxmaj the tempest in my mind 
▁ xxmaj doth from my senses take all feeling else 
▁ xxmaj save what beats there . xxmaj filial ingratitude ! 
▁ xxmaj is it not as this mouth should tear this hand 
▁ xxmaj for lifting food to't ? xxmaj but i will punish home ! 
▁ xxmaj no , i will weep no more . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ ' to shut me out ! xxmaj pour on ; i will endure . 
▁ xxmaj in such a night as this ! o xxmaj regan , xxmaj goneril ! 
▁ xxmaj your old kind father , whose frank heart gave all ! 
▁ xxup o , that way madness lies ; let me shun that ! 
▁ xxmaj no more of that . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj good my lord , enter here . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj prithee go in thyself ; seek thine own ease . 
▁ xxmaj this tempest will not give me leave to ponder 
▁ xxmaj on things would hurt me more . xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll go in . 
▁ [ to the xxmaj fool ] xxmaj in , boy ; go first.- xxmaj you houseless poverty- 
▁ xxmaj nay , get thee in . xxmaj i 'll pray , and then xxmaj i 'll sleep . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ fool ] . 
▁ xxmaj poor naked wretches , wheresoe'er you are , 
▁ xxmaj that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm , 
▁ xxmaj how shall your houseless heads and unfed sides , 
▁ xxmaj your loop'd and window'd raggedness , defend you 
▁ xxmaj from seasons such as these ? xxup o , i have ta'en 
▁ xxmaj too little care of this ! xxmaj take physic , pomp ; 
▁ xxmaj expose thyself to feel what wretches feel , 
▁ xxmaj that thou mayst shake the superflux to them 
▁ xxmaj and show the heavens more just . 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ within ] xxmaj fathom and half , fathom and half ! xxmaj poor xxmaj tom ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj fool [ from the hovel ] . 

▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj come not in here , nuncle , here 's a spirit . xxmaj help me , help me ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj give me thy hand . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . a spirit , a spirit ! xxmaj he says his name 's poor xxmaj tom . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj what art thou that dost grumble there i ' th ' straw ? 
▁ xxmaj come forth . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar [ disguised as a madman ] . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj away ! the foul fiend follows me ! xxmaj through the sharp hawthorn 
▁ blows the cold wind . xxmaj humh ! go to thy cold bed , and warm thee . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj hast thou given all to thy two daughters , and art thou come 
▁ to this ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj who gives anything to poor xxmaj tom ? whom the foul fiend hath led 
▁ through fire and through flame , through ford and whirlpool , o'er 
▁ bog and quagmire ; that hath laid knives under his pillow and 
▁ halters in his pew , set ratsbane by his porridge , made him proud 
▁ of heart , to ride on a bay trotting horse over four - inch'd 
▁ bridges , to course his own shadow for a traitor . xxmaj bless thy five 
▁ wits ! xxmaj tom 's acold . xxup o , do de , do de , do de . xxmaj bless thee from 
▁ whirlwinds , star - blasting , and taking ! xxmaj do poor xxmaj tom some charity , 
▁ whom the foul fiend vexes . xxmaj there could i have him now- and there- 
▁ and there again- and there ! 
▁ xxmaj storm still . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what , have his daughters brought him to this pass ? 
▁ xxmaj couldst thou save nothing ? xxmaj didst thou give 'em all ? 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj nay , he reserv'd a blanket , else we had been all sham'd . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj now all the plagues that in the pendulous air 
▁ xxmaj hang fated o'er men 's faults light on thy daughters ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj he hath no daughters , sir . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj death , traitor ! nothing could have subdu'd nature 
▁ xxmaj to such a lowness but his unkind daughters . 
▁ xxmaj is it the fashion that discarded fathers 
▁ xxmaj should have thus little mercy on their flesh ? 
▁ xxmaj judicious punishment ! ' twas this flesh begot 
▁ xxmaj those pelican daughters . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj pillicock sat on xxmaj pillicock 's xxmaj hill . ' allow , ' allow , loo , loo ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj this cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj take heed o ' th ' foul fiend ; obey thy parents : keep thy word 
▁ justly ; swear not ; commit not with man 's sworn spouse ; set not 
▁ thy sweet heart on proud array . xxmaj tom 's acold . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what hast thou been ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . a servingman , proud in heart and mind ; that curl'd my hair , 
▁ wore gloves in my cap ; serv'd the lust of my mistress ' heart and 
▁ did the act of darkness with her ; swore as many oaths as i spake 
▁ words , and broke them in the sweet face of heaven ; one that 
▁ slept in the contriving of lust , and wak'd to do it . xxmaj wine lov'd 
▁ i deeply , dice dearly ; and in woman out - paramour'd the xxmaj turk . 
▁ xxmaj false of heart , light of ear , bloody of hand ; hog in sloth , fox 
▁ in stealth , wolf in greediness , dog in madness , lion in prey . 
▁ xxmaj let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray 
▁ thy poor heart to woman . xxmaj keep thy foot out of brothel , thy hand 
▁ out of placket , thy pen from lender 's book , and defy the foul 
▁ fiend . xxmaj still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind ; says 
▁ suum , mun , hey , no , nonny . xxmaj dolphin my boy , my boy , sessa ! let 
▁ him trot by . 
▁ xxmaj storm still . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj why , thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy 
▁ uncover'd body this extremity of the skies . xxmaj is man no more than 
▁ this ? xxmaj consider him well . xxmaj thou ow'st the worm no silk , the beast 
▁ no hide , the sheep no wool , the cat no perfume . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj here 's three 
▁ on 's are sophisticated ! xxmaj thou art the thing itself ; 
▁ unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor , bare , forked 
▁ animal as thou art . xxmaj off , off , you lendings ! xxmaj come , unbutton 
▁ here . 
▁ [ tears at his clothes . ] 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj prithee , nuncle , be contented ! ' tis a naughty night to swim 
▁ in . xxmaj now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher 's 
▁ heart- a small spark , all the rest on 's body cold . xxmaj look , here 
▁ comes a walking fire . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester with a torch . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj this is the foul fiend xxmaj flibbertigibbet . xxmaj he begins at curfew , 
▁ and walks till the first cock . xxmaj he gives the web and the pin , 
▁ squints the eye , and makes the harelip ; mildews the white wheat , 
▁ and hurts the poor creature of earth . 

▁ xxmaj saint xxmaj withold footed thrice the ' old ; 
▁ xxmaj he met the nightmare , and her nine fold ; 
▁ xxmaj bid her alight 
▁ xxmaj and her troth plight , 
▁ xxmaj and aroint thee , witch , aroint thee ! 

▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj how fares your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what 's he ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj what is't you seek ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj what are you there ? xxmaj your names ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj poor xxmaj tom , that eats the swimming frog , the toad , the todpole , 
▁ the wall - newt and the water ; that in the fury of his heart , when 
▁ the foul fiend rages , eats cow - dung for sallets , swallows the 
▁ old rat and the ditch - dog , drinks the green mantle of the 
▁ standing pool ; who is whipp'd from tithing to tithing , and 
▁ stock - punish'd and imprison'd ; who hath had three suits to his 
▁ back , six shirts to his body , horse to ride , and weapons to 
▁ wear ; 

▁ xxmaj but mice and rats , and such small deer , 
▁ xxmaj have been xxmaj tom 's food for seven long year . 

▁ xxmaj beware my follower . xxmaj peace , xxmaj smulkin ! peace , thou fiend ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj what , hath your xxmaj grace no better company ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj the prince of darkness is a gentleman ! 
▁ xxmaj modo he 's call'd , and xxmaj mahu . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj our flesh and blood is grown so vile , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj that it doth hate what gets it . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj poor xxmaj tom 's acold . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj go in with me . xxmaj my duty can not suffer 
▁ xxup t ' obey in all your daughters ' hard commands . 
▁ xxmaj though their injunction be to bar my doors 
▁ xxmaj and let this tyrannous night take hold upon you , 
▁ xxmaj yet have i ventur'd to come seek you out 
▁ xxmaj and bring you where both fire and food is ready . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj first let me talk with this philosopher . 
▁ xxmaj what is the cause of thunder ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj good my lord , take his offer ; go into th ' house . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj i 'll talk a word with this same learned xxmaj theban . 
▁ xxmaj what is your study ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj how to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj let me ask you one word in private . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj importune him once more to go , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj his wits begin t ' unsettle . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj canst thou blame him ? 
▁ xxmaj storm still . 
▁ xxmaj his daughters seek his death . xxmaj ah , that good xxmaj kent ! 
▁ xxmaj he said it would be thus- poor banish'd man ! 
▁ xxmaj thou say'st the xxmaj king grows mad : xxmaj i 'll tell thee , friend , 
▁ i am almost mad myself . i had a son , 
▁ xxmaj now outlaw'd from my blood . xxmaj he sought my life 
▁ xxmaj but lately , very late . i lov'd him , friend- 
▁ xxmaj no father his son dearer . xxmaj true to tell thee , 
▁ xxmaj the grief hath craz'd my wits . xxmaj what a night 's this ! 
▁ i do beseech your xxmaj grace- 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxup o , cry you mercy , sir . 
▁ xxmaj noble philosopher , your company . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj tom 's acold . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj in , fellow , there , into th ' hovel ; keep thee warm . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj come , let 's in all . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj this way , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj with him ! 
▁ i will keep still with my philosopher . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj good my lord , soothe him ; let him take the fellow . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj take him you on . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj sirrah , come on ; go along with us . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj come , good xxmaj athenian . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj no words , no words ! hush . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj child xxmaj rowland to the dark tower came ; 
▁ xxmaj his word was still 

▁ xxmaj fie , foh , and fum ! 
▁ i smell the blood of a xxmaj british man . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 

 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj cornwall and xxmaj edmund . 

▁ xxmaj corn . i will have my revenge ere i depart his house . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj how , my lord , i may be censured , that nature thus gives way to 
▁ loyalty , something fears me to think of . 
▁ xxmaj corn . i now perceive it was not altogether your brother 's evil 
▁ disposition made him seek his death ; but a provoking merit , set 
▁ awork by a reproveable badness in himself . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj how malicious is my fortune that i must repent to be just ! 
▁ xxmaj this is the letter he spoke of , which approves him an 
▁ intelligent party to the advantages of xxmaj france . o heavens ! that 
▁ this treason were not- or not i the detector ! 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj go with me to the xxmaj duchess . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj if the matter of this paper be certain , you have mighty 
▁ business in hand . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj true or false , it hath made thee xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj seek out where thy father is , that he may be ready for our 
▁ apprehension . 
▁ xxmaj edm . [ aside ] xxmaj if i find him comforting the xxmaj king , it will stuff his 
▁ suspicion more fully.- i will persever in my course of loyalty , 
▁ though the conflict be sore between that and my blood . 
▁ xxmaj corn . i will lay trust upon thee , and thou shalt find a dearer 
▁ father in my love . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup vi . 
 a farmhouse near xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj lear , xxmaj kent , xxmaj fool , and xxmaj edgar . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj here is better than the open air ; take it thankfully . i will 
▁ piece out the comfort with what addition i can . i will not be 
▁ long from you . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj all the power of his wits have given way to his impatience . 
▁ xxmaj the gods reward your kindness ! 
▁ xxmaj exit [ gloucester ] . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj frateretto calls me , and tells me xxmaj nero is an angler in the 
▁ lake of darkness . xxmaj pray , innocent , and beware the foul fiend . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj prithee , nuncle , tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a 
▁ yeoman . 
▁ xxmaj lear . a king , a king ! 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj no , he 's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son ; for he 's a 
▁ mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj to have a thousand with red burning spits 
▁ xxmaj come hizzing in upon ' em- 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj the foul fiend bites my back . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj he 's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf , a horse 's 
▁ health , a boy 's love , or a whore 's oath . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj it shall be done ; i will arraign them straight . 
▁ [ to xxmaj edgar ] xxmaj come , sit thou here , most learned justicer . 
▁ [ to the xxmaj fool ] xxmaj thou , sapient sir , sit here . xxmaj now , you she - foxes ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj look , where he stands and glares ! xxmaj want'st thou eyes at trial , 
▁ madam ? 

▁ xxmaj come o'er the bourn , xxmaj bessy , to me . 

▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj her boat hath a leak , 
▁ xxmaj and she must not speak 
▁ xxmaj why she dares not come over to thee . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj the foul fiend haunts poor xxmaj tom in the voice of a nightingale . 
▁ xxmaj hoppedance cries in xxmaj tom 's belly for two white herring . xxmaj croak 
▁ not , black angel ; i have no food for thee . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj how do you , sir ? xxmaj stand you not so amaz'd . 
▁ xxmaj will you lie down and rest upon the cushions ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj i 'll see their trial first . xxmaj bring in their evidence . 
▁ [ to xxmaj edgar ] xxmaj thou , robed man of justice , take thy place . 
▁ [ to the xxmaj fool ] xxmaj and thou , his yokefellow of equity , 
▁ xxmaj bench by his side . [ to xxmaj kent ] xxmaj you are o ' th ' commission , 
▁ xxmaj sit you too . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj let us deal justly . 

▁ xxmaj sleepest or wakest thou , jolly shepherd ? 
▁ xxmaj thy sheep be in the corn ; 
▁ xxmaj and for one blast of thy minikin mouth 
▁ xxmaj thy sheep shall take no harm . 

▁ xxmaj purr ! the cat is gray . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj arraign her first . ' tis xxmaj goneril . i here take my oath before 
▁ this honourable assembly , she kicked the poor xxmaj king her father . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj come hither , mistress . xxmaj is your name xxmaj goneril ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj she can not deny it . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj cry you mercy , i took you for a joint - stool . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj and here 's another , whose warp'd looks proclaim 
▁ xxmaj what store her heart is made on . xxmaj stop her there ! 
▁ xxmaj arms , arms ! sword ! fire ! xxmaj corruption in the place ! 
▁ xxmaj false justicer , why hast thou let her scape ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj bless thy five wits ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . o pity ! xxmaj sir , where is the patience now 
▁ xxmaj that you so oft have boasted to retain ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] xxmaj my tears begin to take his part so much 
▁ xxmaj they 'll mar my counterfeiting . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj the little dogs and all , 
▁ xxmaj tray , xxmaj blanch , and xxmaj sweetheart , see , they bark at me . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj tom will throw his head at them . xxmaj avaunt , you curs ! 
▁ xxmaj be thy mouth or black or white , 
▁ xxmaj tooth that poisons if it bite ; 
▁ xxmaj mastiff , greyhound , mongrel grim , 
▁ xxmaj hound or spaniel , brach or lym , 
▁ xxmaj bobtail tyke or trundle - tall- 
▁ xxmaj tom will make them weep and wail ; 
▁ xxmaj for , with throwing thus my head , 
▁ xxmaj dogs leap the hatch , and all are fled . 
▁ xxmaj do de , de , de . xxmaj sessa ! xxmaj come , march to wakes and fairs and market 
▁ towns . xxmaj poor xxmaj tom , thy horn is dry . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj then let them anatomize xxmaj regan . xxmaj see what breeds about her 
▁ heart . xxmaj is there any cause in nature that makes these hard 
▁ hearts ? [ to xxmaj edgar ] xxmaj you , sir- i entertain you for one of my 
▁ hundred ; only i do not like the fashion of your garments . xxmaj you 'll 
▁ say they are xxmaj persian attire ; but let them be chang'd . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj now , good my lord , lie here and rest awhile . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj make no noise , make no noise ; draw the curtains . 
▁ xxmaj so , so , so . xxmaj we 'll go to supper i ' th ' morning . xxmaj so , so , so . 
▁ xxmaj fool . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll go to bed at noon . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj come hither , friend . xxmaj where is the xxmaj king my master ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj here , sir ; but trouble him not ; his wits are gone . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj good friend , i prithee take him in thy arms . 
▁ i have o'erheard a plot of death upon him . 
▁ xxmaj there is a litter ready ; lay him in't 
▁ xxmaj and drive towards xxmaj dover , friend , where thou shalt meet 
▁ xxmaj both welcome and protection . xxmaj take up thy master . 
▁ xxmaj if thou shouldst dally half an hour , his life , 
▁ xxmaj with thine , and all that offer to defend him , 
▁ xxmaj stand in assured loss . xxmaj take up , take up ! 
▁ xxmaj and follow me , that will to some provision 
▁ xxmaj give thee quick conduct . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj oppressed nature sleeps . 
▁ xxmaj this rest might yet have balm'd thy broken senses , 
▁ xxmaj which , if convenience will not allow , 
▁ xxmaj stand in hard cure . [ to the xxmaj fool ] xxmaj come , help to bear thy master . 
▁ xxmaj thou must not stay behind . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj come , come , away ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but xxmaj edgar ] . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj when we our betters see bearing our woes , 
▁ xxmaj we scarcely think our miseries our foes . 
▁ xxmaj who alone suffers suffers most i ' th ' mind , 
▁ xxmaj leaving free things and happy shows behind ; 
▁ xxmaj but then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip 
▁ xxmaj when grief hath mates , and bearing fellowship . 
▁ xxmaj how light and portable my pain seems now ,