xxbos xxmaj when that which makes me bend makes the xxmaj king bow , 
▁ xxmaj he childed as i fathered ! xxmaj tom , away ! 
▁ xxmaj mark the high noises , and thyself bewray 
▁ xxmaj when false opinion , whose wrong thought defiles thee , 
▁ xxmaj in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee . 
▁ xxmaj what will hap more to - night , safe scape the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxmaj lurk , lurk . [ exit . ] 




 xxmaj scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj cornwall , xxmaj regan , xxmaj goneril , [ edmund the ] xxmaj bastard , and xxmaj servants . 

▁ xxmaj corn . [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj post speedily to my lord your husband , show him 
▁ this letter . xxmaj the army of xxmaj france is landed.- xxmaj seek out the traitor 
▁ xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ [ exeunt some of the xxmaj servants . ] 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj hang him instantly . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj pluck out his eyes . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj leave him to my displeasure . xxmaj edmund , keep you our sister 
▁ company . xxmaj the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous 
▁ father are not fit for your beholding . xxmaj advise the xxmaj duke where you 
▁ are going , to a most festinate preparation . xxmaj we are bound to the 
▁ like . xxmaj our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , dear sister ; farewell , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj how now ? xxmaj where 's the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester hath convey'd him hence . 
▁ xxmaj some five or six and thirty of his knights , 
▁ xxmaj hot questrists after him , met him at gate ; 
▁ xxmaj who , with some other of the lord 's dependants , 
▁ xxmaj are gone with him towards xxmaj dover , where they boast 
▁ xxmaj to have well - armed friends . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj get horses for your mistress . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj farewell , sweet lord , and sister . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj edmund , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj goneril , [ edmund , and xxmaj oswald ] . 
▁ xxmaj go seek the traitor xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj pinion him like a thief , bring him before us . 
▁ [ exeunt other xxmaj servants . ] 
▁ xxmaj though well we may not pass upon his life 
▁ xxmaj without the form of justice , yet our power 
▁ xxmaj shall do a court'sy to our wrath , which men 
▁ xxmaj may blame , but not control . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester , brought in by two or three . 
▁
▁ xxmaj who 's there ? the traitor ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj ingrateful fox ! ' tis he . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj bind fast his corky arms . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj what mean , your xxmaj graces ? xxmaj good my friends , consider 
▁ xxmaj you are my guests . xxmaj do me no foul play , friends . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj bind him , i say . 
▁ [ servants bind him . ] 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj hard , hard . o filthy traitor ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj unmerciful lady as you are , i am none . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj to this chair bind him . xxmaj villain , thou shalt find- 
▁ [ regan plucks his beard . ] 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj by the kind gods , ' tis most ignobly done 
▁ xxmaj to pluck me by the beard . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj so white , and such a traitor ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj naughty lady , 
▁ xxmaj these hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin 
▁ xxmaj will quicken , and accuse thee . i am your host . 
▁ xxmaj with robber 's hands my hospitable favours 
▁ xxmaj you should not ruffle thus . xxmaj what will you do ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj come , sir , what letters had you late from xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj be simple - answer'd , for we know the truth . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj and what confederacy have you with the traitors 
▁ xxmaj late footed in the kingdom ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj to whose hands have you sent the lunatic xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i have a letter guessingly set down , 
▁ xxmaj which came from one that 's of a neutral heart , 
▁ xxmaj and not from one oppos'd . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj cunning . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj and false . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj where hast thou sent the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj to xxmaj dover . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj wherefore to xxmaj dover ? xxmaj wast thou not charg'd at peril- 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj wherefore to xxmaj dover ? xxmaj let him first answer that . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i am tied to th ' stake , and i must stand the course . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj wherefore to xxmaj dover , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj because i would not see thy cruel nails 
▁ xxmaj pluck out his poor old eyes ; nor thy fierce sister 
▁ xxmaj in his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs . 
▁ xxmaj the sea , with such a storm as his bare head 
▁ xxmaj in hell - black night endur'd , would have buoy'd up 
▁ xxmaj and quench'd the steeled fires . 
▁ xxmaj yet , poor old heart , he holp the heavens to rain . 
▁ xxmaj if wolves had at thy gate howl'd that stern time , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst have said , ' good porter , turn the key . ' 
▁ xxmaj all cruels else subscrib'd . xxmaj but i shall see 
▁ xxmaj the winged vengeance overtake such children . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj see't shalt thou never . xxmaj fellows , hold the chair . 
▁ xxmaj upon these eyes of thine xxmaj i 'll set my foot . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj he that will think to live till he be old , 
▁ xxmaj give me some help!- o cruel ! o ye gods ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj one side will mock another . xxmaj th ' other too ! 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj if you see vengeance- 
▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj hold your hand , my lord ! 
▁ i have serv'd you ever since i was a child ; 
▁ xxmaj but better service have i never done you 
▁ xxmaj than now to bid you hold . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj how now , you dog ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj if you did wear a beard upon your chin , 
▁ xxmaj i'ld shake it on this quarrel . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj what do you mean ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj my villain ! xxmaj draw and fight . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj nay , then , come on , and take the chance of anger . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj give me thy sword . a peasant stand up thus ? 
▁ xxmaj she takes a sword and runs at him behind . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxup o , i am slain ! xxmaj my lord , you have one eye left 
▁ xxmaj to see some mischief on him . xxup o ! xxmaj he dies . 
▁ xxmaj corn . xxmaj lest it see more , prevent it . xxmaj out , vile jelly ! 
▁ xxmaj where is thy lustre now ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj all dark and comfortless ! xxmaj where 's my son xxmaj edmund ? 
▁ xxmaj edmund , enkindle all the sparks of nature 
▁ xxmaj to quit this horrid act . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj out , treacherous villain ! 
▁ xxmaj thou call'st on him that hates thee . xxmaj it was he 
▁ xxmaj that made the overture of thy treasons to us ; 
▁ xxmaj who is too good to pity thee . 
▁ xxmaj glou . o my follies ! xxmaj then xxmaj edgar was abus'd . 
▁ xxmaj kind gods , forgive me that , and prosper him ! 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj go thrust him out at gates , and let him smell 
▁ xxmaj his way to xxmaj dover . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ one ] with xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj how is't , my lord ? xxmaj how look you ? 
▁ xxmaj corn . i have receiv'd a hurt . xxmaj follow me , lady . 
▁ xxmaj turn out that eyeless villain . xxmaj throw this slave 
▁ xxmaj upon the dunghill . xxmaj regan , i bleed apace . 
▁ xxmaj untimely comes this hurt . xxmaj give me your arm . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ cornwall , led by xxmaj regan ] . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj i 'll never care what wickedness i do , 
▁ xxmaj if this man come to good . 
▁ 3 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj if she live long , 
▁ xxmaj and in the end meet the old course of death , 
▁ xxmaj women will all turn monsters . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj let 's follow the old xxmaj earl , and get the bedlam 
▁ xxmaj to lead him where he would . xxmaj his roguish madness 
▁ xxmaj allows itself to anything . 
▁ 3 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj go thou . xxmaj i 'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs 
▁ xxmaj to apply to his bleeding face . xxmaj now heaven help him ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the heath . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj yet better thus , and known to be contemn'd , 
▁ xxmaj than still contemn'd and flatter'd . xxmaj to be worst , 
▁ xxmaj the lowest and most dejected thing of fortune , 
▁ xxmaj stands still in esperance , lives not in fear . 
▁ xxmaj the lamentable change is from the best ; 
▁ xxmaj the worst returns to laughter . xxmaj welcome then , 
▁ xxmaj thou unsubstantial air that i embrace ! 
▁ xxmaj the wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst 
▁ xxmaj owes nothing to thy blasts . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester , led by an xxmaj old xxmaj man . 

▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? 
▁ xxmaj my father , poorly led ? xxmaj world , world , o world ! 
▁ xxmaj but that thy strange mutations make us hate thee , 
▁ xxmaj life would not yield to age . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . o my good lord , 
▁ i have been your tenant , and your father 's tenant , 
▁ xxmaj these fourscore years . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj away , get thee away ! xxmaj good friend , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj thy comforts can do me no good at all ; 
▁ xxmaj thee they may hurt . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj you can not see your way . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i have no way , and therefore want no eyes ; 
▁ i stumbled when i saw . xxmaj full oft ' tis seen 
▁ xxmaj our means secure us , and our mere defects 
▁ xxmaj prove our commodities . xxmaj ah dear son xxmaj edgar , 
▁ xxmaj the food of thy abused father 's wrath ! 
▁ xxmaj might i but live to see thee in my touch , 
▁ xxmaj i'ld say i had eyes again ! 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj how now ? xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] o gods ! xxmaj who is't can say ' i am at the worst ' ? 
▁ i am worse than e'er i was . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . ' tis poor mad xxmaj tom . 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] xxmaj and worse i may be yet . xxmaj the worst is not 
▁ xxmaj so long as we can say ' this is the worst . ' 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj fellow , where goest ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj is it a beggarman ? 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj madman and beggar too . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj he has some reason , else he could not beg . 
▁ xxup i ' th ' last night 's storm i such a fellow saw , 
▁ xxmaj which made me think a man a worm . xxmaj my son 
▁ xxmaj came then into my mind , and yet my mind 
▁ xxmaj was then scarce friends with him . i have heard more since . 
▁ xxmaj as flies to wanton boys are we to th ' gods . 
▁ xxmaj they kill us for their sport . 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] xxmaj how should this be ? 
▁ xxmaj bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj ang'ring itself and others.- xxmaj bless thee , master ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj is that the naked fellow ? 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj then prithee get thee gone . xxmaj if for my sake 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain 
▁ xxup i ' th ' way toward xxmaj dover , do it for ancient love ; 
▁ xxmaj and bring some covering for this naked soul , 
▁ xxmaj who xxmaj i 'll entreat to lead me . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj alack , sir , he is mad ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . ' tis the time 's plague when madmen lead the blind . 
▁ xxmaj do as i bid thee , or rather do thy pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj above the rest , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj man . xxmaj i 'll bring him the best ' parel that i have , 
▁ xxmaj come on't what will . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj sirrah naked fellow- 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj poor xxmaj tom 's acold . [ aside ] i can not daub it further . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj come hither , fellow . 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] xxmaj and yet i must.- xxmaj bless thy sweet eyes , they bleed . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj know'st thou the way to xxmaj dover ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj both stile and gate , horseway and footpath . xxmaj poor xxmaj tom hath been 
▁ scar'd out of his good wits . xxmaj bless thee , good man 's son , from 
▁ the foul fiend ! xxmaj five fiends have been in poor xxmaj tom at once : of 
▁ lust , as xxmaj obidicut ; xxmaj hobbididence , prince of dumbness ; xxmaj mahu , of 
▁ stealing ; xxmaj modo , of murder ; xxmaj flibbertigibbet , of mopping and 
▁ mowing , who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women . xxmaj so , 
▁ bless thee , master ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj here , take this xxmaj purse , thou whom the heavens ' plagues 
▁ xxmaj have humbled to all strokes . xxmaj that i am wretched 
▁ xxmaj makes thee the happier . xxmaj heavens , deal so still ! 
▁ xxmaj let the superfluous and lust - dieted man , 
▁ xxmaj that slaves your ordinance , that will not see 
▁ xxmaj because he does not feel , feel your pow'r quickly ; 
▁ xxmaj so distribution should undo excess , 
▁ xxmaj and each man have enough . xxmaj dost thou know xxmaj dover ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj ay , master . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj there is a cliff , whose high and bending head 
▁ xxmaj looks fearfully in the confined deep . 
▁ xxmaj bring me but to the very brim of it , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll repair the misery thou dost bear 
▁ xxmaj with something rich about me . xxmaj from that place 
▁ i shall no leading need . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj give me thy arm . 
▁ xxmaj poor xxmaj tom shall lead thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj before the xxmaj duke of xxmaj albany 's xxmaj palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj goneril and [ edmund the ] xxmaj bastard . 

▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj welcome , my lord . i marvel our mild husband 
▁ xxmaj not met us on the way . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj now , where 's your master ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj madam , within , but never man so chang'd . 
▁ i told him of the army that was landed : 
▁ xxmaj he smil'd at it . i told him you were coming : 
▁ xxmaj his answer was , ' the worse . ' xxmaj of xxmaj gloucester 's treachery 
▁ xxmaj and of the loyal service of his son 
▁ xxmaj when i inform'd him , then he call'd me sot 
▁ xxmaj and told me i had turn'd the wrong side out . 
▁ xxmaj what most he should dislike seems pleasant to him ; 
▁ xxmaj what like , offensive . 
▁ xxmaj gon . [ to xxmaj edmund ] xxmaj then shall you go no further . 
▁ xxmaj it is the cowish terror of his spirit , 
▁ xxmaj that dares not undertake . xxmaj he 'll not feel wrongs 
▁ xxmaj which tie him to an answer . xxmaj our wishes on the way 
▁ xxmaj may prove effects . xxmaj back , xxmaj edmund , to my brother . 
▁ xxmaj hasten his musters and conduct his pow'rs . 
▁ i must change arms at home and give the distaff 
▁ xxmaj into my husband 's hands . xxmaj this trusty servant 
▁ xxmaj shall pass between us . xxmaj ere long you are like to hear 
▁ ( if you dare venture in your own behalf ) 
▁ a mistress 's command . xxmaj wear this . [ gives a favour . ] 
▁ xxmaj spare speech . 
▁ xxmaj decline your head . xxmaj this kiss , if it durst speak , 
▁ xxmaj would stretch thy spirits up into the air . 
▁ xxmaj conceive , and fare thee well . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj yours in the ranks of death ! xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj my most dear xxmaj gloucester ! 
▁ xxup o , the difference of man and man ! 
▁ xxmaj to thee a woman 's services are due ; 
▁ xxmaj my fool usurps my body . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj madam , here comes my lord . xxmaj exit . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj albany . 

▁ xxmaj gon . i have been worth the whistle . 
▁ xxmaj alb . o xxmaj goneril , 
▁ xxmaj you are not worth the dust which the rude wind 
▁ xxmaj blows in your face ! i fear your disposition . 
▁ xxmaj that nature which contemns it origin 
▁ xxmaj can not be bordered certain in itself . 
▁ xxmaj she that herself will sliver and disbranch 
▁ xxmaj from her material sap , perforce must wither 
▁ xxmaj and come to deadly use . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj no more ! xxmaj the text is foolish . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile ; 
▁ xxmaj filths savour but themselves . xxmaj what have you done ? 
▁ xxmaj tigers , not daughters , what have you perform'd ? 
▁ a father , and a gracious aged man , 
▁ xxmaj whose reverence even the head - lugg'd bear would lick , 
▁ xxmaj most barbarous , most degenerate , have you madded . 
▁ xxmaj could my good brother suffer you to do it ? 
▁ a man , a prince , by him so benefited ! 
▁ xxmaj if that the heavens do not their visible spirits 
▁ xxmaj send quickly down to tame these vile offences , 
▁ xxmaj it will come , 
▁ xxmaj humanity must perforce prey on itself , 
▁ xxmaj like monsters of the deep . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj milk - liver'd man ! 
▁ xxmaj that bear'st a cheek for blows , a head for wrongs ; 
▁ xxmaj who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning 
▁ xxmaj thine honour from thy suffering ; that not know'st 
▁ xxmaj fools do those villains pity who are punish'd 
▁ xxmaj ere they have done their mischief . xxmaj where 's thy drum ? 
▁ xxmaj france spreads his banners in our noiseless land , 
▁ xxmaj with plumed helm thy state begins to threat , 
▁ xxmaj whiles thou , a moral fool , sit'st still , and criest 
▁ ' alack , why does he so ? ' 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj see thyself , devil ! 
▁ xxmaj proper deformity seems not in the fiend 
▁ xxmaj so horrid as in woman . 
▁ xxmaj gon . o vain fool ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj thou changed and self - cover'd thing , for shame ! 
▁ xxmaj bemonster not thy feature ! xxmaj were't my fitness 
▁ xxmaj to let these hands obey my blood , 
▁ xxmaj they are apt enough to dislocate and tear 
▁ xxmaj thy flesh and bones . xxmaj howe'er thou art a fiend , 
▁ a woman 's shape doth shield thee . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj marry , your manhood mew ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxup o , my good lord , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj cornwall 's dead , 
▁ xxmaj slain by his servant , going to put out 
▁ xxmaj the other eye of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj gloucester 's eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . a servant that he bred , thrill'd with remorse , 
▁ xxmaj oppos'd against the act , bending his sword 
▁ xxmaj to his great master ; who , thereat enrag'd , 
▁ xxmaj flew on him , and amongst them fell'd him dead ; 
▁ xxmaj but not without that harmful stroke which since 
▁ xxmaj hath pluck'd him after . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj this shows you are above , 
▁ xxmaj you justicers , that these our nether crimes 
▁ xxmaj so speedily can venge ! xxmaj but o poor xxmaj gloucester ! 
▁ xxmaj lose he his other eye ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj both , both , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj this letter , madam , craves a speedy answer . 
▁ ' tis from your sister . 
▁ xxmaj gon . [ aside ] xxmaj one way i like this well ; 
▁ xxmaj but being widow , and my xxmaj gloucester with her , 
▁ xxmaj may all the building in my fancy pluck 
▁ xxmaj upon my hateful life . xxmaj another way 
▁ xxmaj the news is not so tart.- xxmaj i 'll read , and answer . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj where was his son when they did take his eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj come with my lady hither . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj he is not here . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj no , my good lord ; i met him back again . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj knows he the wickedness ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj ay , my good lord . ' twas he inform'd against him , 
▁ xxmaj and quit the house on purpose , that their punishment 
▁ xxmaj might have the freer course . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj gloucester , i live 
▁ xxmaj to thank thee for the love thou show'dst the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and to revenge thine eyes . xxmaj come hither , friend . 
▁ xxmaj tell me what more thou know'st . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj french camp near xxmaj dover . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj kent and a xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj why the xxmaj king of xxmaj france is so suddenly gone back know you the 
▁ reason ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj something he left imperfect in the state , which since his 
▁ coming forth is thought of , which imports to the kingdom so much 
▁ fear and danger that his personal return was most required and 
▁ necessary . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj who hath he left behind him general ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj the xxmaj marshal of xxmaj france , xxmaj monsieur xxmaj la xxmaj far . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj did your letters pierce the xxmaj queen to any demonstration of 
▁ grief ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj ay , sir . xxmaj she took them , read them in my presence , 
▁ xxmaj and now and then an ample tear trill'd down 
▁ xxmaj her delicate cheek . xxmaj it seem'd she was a queen 
▁ xxmaj over her passion , who , most rebel - like , 
▁ xxmaj sought to be king o'er her . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxup o , then it mov'd her ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj not to a rage . xxmaj patience and sorrow strove 
▁ xxmaj who should express her goodliest . xxmaj you have seen 
▁ xxmaj sunshine and rain at once : her smiles and tears 
▁ xxmaj were like , a better way . xxmaj those happy smilets 
▁ xxmaj that play'd on her ripe lip seem'd not to know 
▁ xxmaj what guests were in her eyes , which parted thence 
▁ xxmaj as pearls from diamonds dropp'd . xxmaj in brief , 
▁ xxmaj sorrow would be a rarity most belov'd , 
▁ xxmaj if all could so become it . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj made she no verbal question ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj faith , once or twice she heav'd the name of father 
▁ xxmaj pantingly forth , as if it press'd her heart ; 
▁ xxmaj cried ' sisters , sisters ! xxmaj shame of ladies ! xxmaj sisters ! 
▁ xxmaj kent ! father ! sisters ! xxmaj what , i ' th ' storm ? i ' th ' night ? 
▁ xxmaj let pity not be believ'd ! ' xxmaj there she shook 
▁ xxmaj the holy water from her heavenly eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and clamour moisten'd . xxmaj then away she started 
▁ xxmaj to deal with grief alone . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj it is the stars , 
▁ xxmaj the stars above us , govern our conditions ; 
▁ xxmaj else one self mate and mate could not beget 
▁ xxmaj such different issues . xxmaj you spoke not with her since ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj was this before the xxmaj king return'd ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj no , since . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj well , sir , the poor distressed xxmaj lear 's i ' th ' town ; 
▁ xxmaj who sometime , in his better tune , remembers 
▁ xxmaj what we are come about , and by no means 
▁ xxmaj will yield to see his daughter . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj why , good sir ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . a sovereign shame so elbows him ; his own unkindness , 
▁ xxmaj that stripp'd her from his benediction , turn'd her 
▁ xxmaj to foreign casualties , gave her dear rights 
▁ xxmaj to his dog - hearted daughters- these things sting 
▁ xxmaj his mind so venomously that burning shame 
▁ xxmaj detains him from xxmaj cordelia . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj alack , poor gentleman ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj of xxmaj albany 's and xxmaj cornwall 's powers you heard not ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . ' tis so ; they are afoot . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj well , sir , xxmaj i 'll bring you to our master xxmaj lear 
▁ xxmaj and leave you to attend him . xxmaj some dear cause 
▁ xxmaj will in concealment wrap me up awhile . 
▁ xxmaj when i am known aright , you shall not grieve 
▁ xxmaj lending me this acquaintance . i pray you go 
▁ xxmaj along with me . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj french camp . 

 xxmaj enter , with xxmaj drum and xxmaj colours , xxmaj cordelia , xxmaj doctor , and xxmaj soldiers . 

▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj alack , ' tis he ! xxmaj why , he was met even now 
▁ xxmaj as mad as the vex'd sea , singing aloud , 
▁ xxmaj crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow weeds , 
▁ xxmaj with hardocks , hemlock , nettles , cuckoo flow'rs , 
▁ xxmaj darnel , and all the idle weeds that grow 
▁ xxmaj in our sustaining corn . a century send forth . 
▁ xxmaj search every acre in the high - grown field 
▁ xxmaj and bring him to our eye . [ exit an xxmaj officer . ] xxmaj what can man 's 
▁ wisdom 
▁ xxmaj in the restoring his bereaved sense ? 
▁ xxmaj he that helps him take all my outward worth . 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj there is means , madam . 
▁ xxmaj our foster nurse of nature is repose , 
▁ xxmaj the which he lacks . xxmaj that to provoke in him 
▁ xxmaj are many simples operative , whose power 
▁ xxmaj will close the eye of anguish . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj all blest secrets , 
▁ xxmaj all you unpublish'd virtues of the earth , 
▁ xxmaj spring with my tears ! be aidant and remediate 
▁ xxmaj in the good man 's distress ! xxmaj seek , seek for him ! 
▁ xxmaj lest his ungovern'd rage dissolve the life 
▁ xxmaj that wants the means to lead it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj news , madam . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj british pow'rs are marching hitherward . 
▁ xxmaj cor . ' tis known before . xxmaj our preparation stands 
▁ xxmaj in expectation of them . o dear father , 
▁ xxmaj it is thy business that i go about . 
▁ xxmaj therefore great xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj my mourning and important tears hath pitied . 
▁ xxmaj no blown ambition doth our arms incite , 
▁ xxmaj but love , dear love , and our ag'd father 's right . 
▁ xxmaj soon may i hear and see him ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj gloucester 's xxmaj castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj regan and [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj but are my brother 's pow'rs set forth ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj ay , madam . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj himself in person there ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj madam , with much ado . 
▁ xxmaj your sister is the better soldier . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj lord xxmaj edmund spake not with your lord at home ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj no , madam . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj what might import my sister 's letter to him ? 
▁ xxmaj osw . i know not , lady . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj faith , he is posted hence on serious matter . 
▁ xxmaj it was great ignorance , xxmaj gloucester 's eyes being out , 
▁ xxmaj to let him live . xxmaj where he arrives he moves 
▁ xxmaj all hearts against us . xxmaj edmund , i think , is gone , 
▁ xxmaj in pity of his misery , to dispatch 
▁ xxmaj his nighted life ; moreover , to descry 
▁ xxmaj the strength o ' th ' enemy . 
▁ xxmaj osw . i must needs after him , madam , with my letter . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj our troops set forth to - morrow . xxmaj stay with us . 
▁ xxmaj the ways are dangerous . 
▁ xxmaj osw . i may not , madam . 
▁ xxmaj my lady charg'd my duty in this business . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj why should she write to xxmaj edmund ? xxmaj might not you 
▁ xxmaj transport her purposes by word ? xxmaj belike , 
▁ xxmaj something- i know not what- xxmaj i 'll love thee much- 
▁ xxmaj let me unseal the letter . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj madam , i had rather- 
▁ xxmaj reg . i know your lady does not love her husband ; 
▁ i am sure of that ; and at her late being here 
▁ xxmaj she gave strange eliads and most speaking looks 
▁ xxmaj to noble xxmaj edmund . i know you are of her bosom . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxup i , madam ? 
▁ xxmaj reg . i speak in understanding . xxmaj y'are ! i know't . 
▁ xxmaj therefore i do advise you take this note . 
▁ xxmaj my lord is dead ; xxmaj edmund and i have talk'd , 
▁ xxmaj and more convenient is he for my hand 
▁ xxmaj than for your lady 's . xxmaj you may gather more . 
▁ xxmaj if you do find him , pray you give him this ; 
▁ xxmaj and when your mistress hears thus much from you , 
▁ i pray desire her call her wisdom to her . 
▁ xxmaj so farewell . 
▁ xxmaj if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor , 
▁ xxmaj preferment falls on him that cuts him off . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj would i could meet him , madam ! i should show 
▁ xxmaj what party i do follow . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj fare thee well . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj the country near xxmaj dover . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj gloucester , and xxmaj edgar [ like a xxmaj peasant ] . 

▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj when shall i come to th ' top of that same hill ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj you do climb up it now . xxmaj look how we labour . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj methinks the ground is even . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj horrible steep . 
▁ xxmaj hark , do you hear the sea ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj no , truly . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj why , then , your other senses grow imperfect 
▁ xxmaj by your eyes ' anguish . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj so may it be indeed . 
▁ xxmaj methinks thy voice is alter'd , and thou speak'st 
▁ xxmaj in better phrase and matter than thou didst . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj y'are much deceiv'd . xxmaj in nothing am i chang'd 
▁ xxmaj but in my garments . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj methinks y'are better spoken . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj come on , sir ; here 's the place . xxmaj stand still . xxmaj how fearful 
▁ xxmaj and dizzy ' tis to cast one 's eyes so low ! 
▁ xxmaj the crows and choughs that wing the midway air 
▁ xxmaj show scarce so gross as beetles . xxmaj halfway down 
▁ xxmaj hangs one that gathers sampire- dreadful trade ! 
▁ xxmaj methinks he seems no bigger than his head . 
▁ xxmaj the fishermen that walk upon the beach 
▁ xxmaj appear like mice ; and yond tall anchoring bark , 
▁ xxmaj diminish'd to her cock ; her cock , a buoy 
▁ xxmaj almost too small for sight . xxmaj the murmuring surge 
▁ xxmaj that on th ' unnumb'red idle pebble chafes 
▁ xxmaj can not be heard so high . xxmaj i 'll look no more , 
▁ xxmaj lest my brain turn , and the deficient sight 
▁ xxmaj topple down headlong . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj set me where you stand . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj give me your hand . xxmaj you are now within a foot 
▁ xxmaj of th ' extreme verge . xxmaj for all beneath the moon 
▁ xxmaj would i not leap upright . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj let go my hand . 
▁ xxmaj here , friend , is another purse ; in it a jewel 
▁ xxmaj well worth a poor man 's taking . xxmaj fairies and gods 
▁ xxmaj prosper it with thee ! xxmaj go thou further off ; 
▁ xxmaj bid me farewell , and let me hear thee going . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj now fare ye well , good sir . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj with all my heart . 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] . xxmaj why i do trifle thus with his despair 
▁ xxmaj is done to cure it . 
▁ xxmaj glou . o you mighty gods ! xxmaj he kneels . 
▁ xxmaj this world i do renounce , and , in your sights , 
▁ xxmaj shake patiently my great affliction off . 
▁ xxmaj if i could bear it longer and not fall 
▁ xxmaj to quarrel with your great opposeless wills , 
▁ xxmaj my snuff and loathed part of nature should 
▁ xxmaj burn itself out . xxmaj if xxmaj edgar live , xxup o , bless him ! 
▁ xxmaj now , fellow , fare thee well . 
▁ xxmaj he falls [ forward and swoons ] . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj gone , sir , farewell.- 
▁ xxmaj and yet i know not how conceit may rob 
▁ xxmaj the treasury of life when life itself 
▁ xxmaj yields to the theft . xxmaj had he been where he thought , 
▁ xxmaj by this had thought been past.- xxmaj alive or dead ? 
▁ xxmaj ho you , sir ! friend ! xxmaj hear you , sir ? xxmaj speak!- 
▁ xxmaj thus might he pass indeed . xxmaj yet he revives . 
▁ xxmaj what are you , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj away , and let me die . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj hadst thou been aught but gossamer , feathers , air , 
▁ xxmaj so many fadom down precipitating , 
▁ xxmaj thou'dst shiver'd like an egg ; but thou dost breathe ; 
▁ xxmaj hast heavy substance ; bleed'st not ; speak'st ; art sound . 
▁ xxmaj ten masts at each make not the altitude 
▁ xxmaj which thou hast perpendicularly fell . 
▁ xxmaj thy life is a miracle . xxmaj speak yet again . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj but have i fall'n , or no ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj from the dread summit of this chalky bourn . 
▁ xxmaj look up a - height . xxmaj the shrill - gorg'd lark so far 
▁ xxmaj can not be seen or heard . xxmaj do but look up . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj alack , i have no eyes ! 
▁ xxmaj is wretchedness depriv'd that benefit 
▁ xxmaj to end itself by death ? ' twas yet some comfort 
▁ xxmaj when misery could beguile the tyrant 's rage 
▁ xxmaj and frustrate his proud will . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj give me your arm . 
▁ xxmaj up- so . xxmaj how is't ? xxmaj feel you your legs ? xxmaj you stand . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj too well , too well . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj this is above all strangeness . 
▁ xxmaj upon the crown o ' th ' cliff what thing was that 
▁ xxmaj which parted from you ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . a poor unfortunate beggar . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj as i stood here below , methought his eyes 
▁ xxmaj were two full moons ; he had a thousand noses , 
▁ xxmaj horns whelk'd and wav'd like the enridged sea . 
▁ xxmaj it was some fiend . xxmaj therefore , thou happy father , 
▁ xxmaj think that the clearest gods , who make them honours 
▁ xxmaj of men 's impossibility , have preserv'd thee . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i do remember now . xxmaj henceforth xxmaj i 'll bear 
▁ xxmaj affliction till it do cry out itself 
▁ ' enough , enough , ' and die . xxmaj that thing you speak of , 
▁ i took it for a man . xxmaj often ' twould say 
▁ ' the fiend , the fiend'- he led me to that place . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj bear free and patient thoughts . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lear , mad , [ fantastically dressed with weeds ] . 
▁
▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? 
▁ xxmaj the safer sense will ne'er accommodate 
▁ xxmaj his master thus . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , they can not touch me for coming ; 
▁ i am the xxmaj king himself . 
▁ xxmaj edg . o thou side - piercing sight ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj nature 's above art in that respect . xxmaj there 's your press 
▁ money . xxmaj that fellow handles his bow like a crow - keeper . xxmaj draw me 
▁ a clothier 's yard . xxmaj look , look , a mouse ! xxmaj peace , peace ; this piece 
▁ of toasted cheese will do't . xxmaj there 's my gauntlet ; xxmaj i 'll prove it 
▁ on a giant . xxmaj bring up the brown bills . xxup o , well flown , bird ! i ' 
▁ th ' clout , i ' th ' clout ! xxmaj hewgh ! xxmaj give the word . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj sweet marjoram . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj pass . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i know that voice . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj goneril with a white beard ? xxmaj they flatter'd me like a dog , 
▁ and told me i had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones 
▁ were there . xxmaj to say ' ay ' and ' no ' to everything i said ! ' ay ' and 
▁ ' no ' too was no good divinity . xxmaj when the rain came to wet me 
▁ once , and the wind to make me chatter ; when the thunder would 
▁ not peace at my bidding ; there i found 'em , there i smelt 'em 
▁ out . xxmaj go to , they are not men o ' their words ! xxmaj they told me i was 
▁ everything . ' tis a lie- i am not ague - proof . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj the trick of that voice i do well remember . 
▁ xxmaj is't not the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ay , every inch a king ! 
▁ xxmaj when i do stare , see how the subject quakes . 
▁ i pardon that man 's life . xxmaj what was thy cause ? 
▁ xxmaj adultery ? 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt not die . xxmaj die for adultery ? xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj the wren goes to't , and the small gilded fly 
▁ xxmaj does lecher in my sight . 
▁ xxmaj let copulation thrive ; for xxmaj gloucester 's bastard son 
▁ xxmaj was kinder to his father than my daughters 
▁ xxmaj got ' tween the lawful sheets . 
▁ xxmaj to't , luxury , pell - mell ! for i lack soldiers . 
▁ xxmaj behold yond simp'ring dame , 
▁ xxmaj whose face between her forks presageth snow , 
▁ xxmaj that minces virtue , and does shake the head 
▁ xxmaj to hear of pleasure 's name . 
▁ xxmaj the fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't 
▁ xxmaj with a more riotous appetite . 
▁ xxmaj down from the waist they are xxmaj centaurs , 
▁ xxmaj though women all above . 
▁ xxmaj but to the girdle do the gods inherit , 
▁ xxmaj beneath is all the fiend 's . 
▁ xxmaj there 's hell , there 's darkness , there 's the sulphurous pit ; 
▁ burning , scalding , stench , consumption . xxmaj fie , fie , fie ! pah , pah ! 
▁ xxmaj give me an ounce of civet , good apothecary , to sweeten my 
▁ imagination . xxmaj there 's money for thee . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxup o , let me kiss that hand ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj let me wipe it first ; it smells of mortality . 
▁ xxmaj glou . o ruin'd piece of nature ! xxmaj this great world 
▁ xxmaj shall so wear out to naught . xxmaj dost thou know me ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . i remember thine eyes well enough . xxmaj dost thou squiny at me ? 
▁ xxmaj no , do thy worst , blind xxmaj cupid ! xxmaj i 'll not love . xxmaj read thou this 
▁ challenge ; mark but the penning of it . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj were all the letters suns , i could not see one . 
▁ xxmaj edg . [ aside ] i would not take this from report . xxmaj it is , 
▁ xxmaj and my heart breaks at it . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj read . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj what , with the case of eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxup o , ho , are you there with me ? xxmaj no eyes in your head , nor no 
▁ money in your purse ? xxmaj your eyes are in a heavy case , your purse 
▁ in a light . xxmaj yet you see how this world goes . 
▁ xxmaj glou . i see it feelingly . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj what , art mad ? a man may see how the world goes with no eyes . 
▁ xxmaj look with thine ears . xxmaj see how yond justice rails upon yond 
▁ simple thief . xxmaj hark in thine ear . xxmaj change places and , handy - dandy , 
▁ which is the justice , which is the thief ? xxmaj thou hast seen a 
▁ farmer 's dog bark at a beggar ? 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj ay , sir . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj and the creature run from the cur ? xxmaj there thou mightst behold 
▁ the great image of authority : a dog 's obeyed in office . 
▁ xxmaj thou rascal beadle , hold thy bloody hand ! 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou lash that whore ? xxmaj strip thine own back . 
▁ xxmaj thou hotly lusts to use her in that kind 
▁ xxmaj for which thou whip'st her . xxmaj the usurer hangs the cozener . 
▁ xxmaj through tatter'd clothes small vices do appear ; 
▁ xxmaj robes and furr'd gowns hide all . xxmaj plate sin with gold , 
▁ xxmaj and the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks ; 
▁ xxmaj arm it in rags , a pygmy 's straw does pierce it . 
▁ xxmaj none does offend , none- i say none ! xxmaj i 'll able 'em . 
▁ xxmaj take that of me , my friend , who have the power 
▁ xxmaj to seal th ' accuser 's lips . xxmaj get thee glass eyes 
▁ xxmaj and , like a scurvy politician , seem 
▁ xxmaj to see the things thou dost not . xxmaj now , now , now , now ! 
▁ xxmaj pull off my boots . xxmaj harder , harder ! xxmaj so . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxup o , matter and impertinency mix'd ! 
▁ xxmaj reason , in madness ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj if thou wilt weep my fortunes , take my eyes . 
▁ i know thee well enough ; thy name is xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj thou must be patient . xxmaj we came crying hither ; 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st , the first time that we smell the air 
▁ xxmaj we wawl and cry . i will preach to thee . xxmaj mark . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj alack , alack the day ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj when we are born , we cry that we are come 
▁ xxmaj to this great stage of fools . xxmaj this ' a good block . 
▁ xxmaj it were a delicate stratagem to shoe 
▁ a troop of horse with felt . xxmaj i 'll put't in proof , 
▁ xxmaj and when i have stol'n upon these sons - in - law , 
▁ xxmaj then kill , kill , kill , kill , kill , kill ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj gentleman [ with xxmaj attendants ] . 

▁ xxmaj gent . xxup o , here he is ! xxmaj lay hand upon him.- xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj your most dear daughter- 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no rescue ? xxmaj what , a prisoner ? i am even 
▁ xxmaj the natural fool of fortune . xxmaj use me well ; 
▁ xxmaj you shall have ransom . xxmaj let me have a surgeon ; 
▁ i am cut to th ' brains . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj you shall have anything . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no seconds ? xxmaj all myself ? 
▁ xxmaj why , this would make a man a man of salt , 
▁ xxmaj to use his eyes for garden waterpots , 
▁ xxmaj ay , and laying autumn 's dust . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj good sir- 
▁ xxmaj lear . i will die bravely , like a smug bridegroom . xxmaj what ! 
▁ i will be jovial . xxmaj come , come , i am a king ; 
▁ xxmaj my masters , know you that ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj you are a royal one , and we obey you . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj then there 's life in't . xxmaj nay , an you get it , you shall get it 
▁ by running . xxmaj sa , sa , sa , sa ! 
▁ xxmaj exit running . [ attendants follow . ] 
▁ xxmaj gent . a sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch , 
▁ xxmaj past speaking of in a king ! xxmaj thou hast one daughter 
▁ xxmaj who redeems nature from the general curse 
▁ xxmaj which twain have brought her to . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj hail , gentle sir . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj sir , speed you . xxmaj what 's your will ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj do you hear aught , sir , of a battle toward ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj most sure and vulgar . xxmaj every one hears that 
▁ xxmaj which can distinguish sound . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj but , by your favour , 
▁ xxmaj how near 's the other army ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj near and on speedy foot . xxmaj the main descry 
▁ xxmaj stands on the hourly thought . 
▁ xxmaj edg . i thank you sir . xxmaj that 's all . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj though that the xxmaj queen on special cause is here , 
▁ xxmaj her army is mov'd on . 
▁ xxmaj edg . i thank you , sir 
▁ xxmaj exit [ gentleman ] . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj you ever - gentle gods , take my breath from me ; 
▁ xxmaj let not my worser spirit tempt me again 
▁ xxmaj to die before you please ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj well pray you , father . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj now , good sir , what are you ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . a most poor man , made tame to fortune 's blows , 
▁ xxmaj who , by the art of known and feeling sorrows , 
▁ xxmaj am pregnant to good pity . xxmaj give me your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lead you to some biding . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj hearty thanks . 
▁ xxmaj the bounty and the benison of heaven 
▁ xxmaj to boot , and boot ! 

▁ xxmaj enter [ oswald the ] xxmaj steward . 

▁ xxmaj osw . a proclaim'd prize ! xxmaj most happy ! 
▁ xxmaj that eyeless head of thine was first fram'd flesh 
▁ xxmaj to raise my fortunes . xxmaj thou old unhappy traitor , 
▁ xxmaj briefly thyself remember . xxmaj the sword is out 
▁ xxmaj that must destroy thee . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj now let thy friendly hand 
▁ xxmaj put strength enough to't . 
▁ [ edgar interposes . ] 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj wherefore , bold peasant , 
▁ xxmaj dar'st thou support a publish'd traitor ? xxmaj hence ! 
▁ xxmaj lest that th ' infection of his fortune take 
▁ xxmaj like hold on thee . xxmaj let go his arm . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj chill not let go , zir , without vurther ' cagion . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj let go , slave , or thou diest ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj good gentleman , go your gait , and let poor voke pass . xxmaj an chud 
▁ ha ' bin zwagger'd out of my life , ' twould not ha ' bin zo long as 
▁ ' tis by a vortnight . xxmaj nay , come not near th ' old man . xxmaj keep out , 
▁ che vore ye , or xxmaj ise try whether your costard or my ballow be the 
▁ harder . xxmaj chill be plain with you . 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj out , dunghill ! 
▁ xxmaj they fight . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj chill pick your teeth , zir . xxmaj come ! xxmaj no matter vor your foins . 
▁ [ oswald falls . ] 
▁ xxmaj osw . xxmaj slave , thou hast slain me . xxmaj villain , take my purse . 
▁ xxmaj if ever thou wilt thrive , bury my body , 
▁ xxmaj and give the letters which thou find'st about me 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj edmund xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester . xxmaj seek him out 
▁ xxmaj upon the xxmaj british party . xxup o , untimely death ! xxmaj death ! 
▁ xxmaj he dies . 
▁ xxmaj edg . i know thee well . a serviceable villain , 
▁ xxmaj as duteous to the vices of thy mistress 
▁ xxmaj as badness would desire . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj what , is he dead ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj sit you down , father ; rest you . 
▁ xxmaj let 's see his pockets ; these letters that he speaks of 
▁ xxmaj may be my friends . xxmaj he 's dead . i am only sorry 
▁ xxmaj he had no other deathsman . xxmaj let us see . 
▁ xxmaj leave , gentle wax ; and , manners , blame us not . 
▁ xxmaj to know our enemies ' minds , we'ld rip their hearts ; 
▁ xxmaj their papers , is more lawful . xxmaj reads the letter . 

▁ ' let our reciprocal vows be rememb'red . xxmaj you have many 
▁ opportunities to cut him off . xxmaj if your will want not , time and 
▁ place will be fruitfully offer'd . xxmaj there is nothing done , if he 
▁ return the conqueror . xxmaj then am i the prisoner , and his bed my 
▁ jail ; from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me , and supply the 
▁ place for your labour . 
▁ ' your ( wife , so i would say ) affectionate servant , 
▁ ' goneril . ' 

▁ o indistinguish'd space of woman 's will ! 
▁ a plot upon her virtuous husband 's life , 
▁ xxmaj and the exchange my brother ! xxmaj here in the sands 
▁ xxmaj thee xxmaj i 'll rake up , the post unsanctified 
▁ xxmaj of murtherous lechers ; and in the mature time 
▁ xxmaj with this ungracious paper strike the sight 
▁ xxmaj of the death - practis'd xxmaj duke , xxmaj for him ' tis well 
▁ xxmaj that of thy death and business i can tell . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj the xxmaj king is mad . xxmaj how stiff is my vile sense , 
▁ xxmaj that i stand up , and have ingenious feeling 
▁ xxmaj of my huge sorrows ! xxmaj better i were distract . 
▁ xxmaj so should my thoughts be sever'd from my griefs , 
▁ xxmaj and woes by wrong imaginations lose 
▁ xxmaj the knowledge of themselves . 
▁ a drum afar off . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj give me your hand . 
▁ xxmaj far off methinks i hear the beaten drum . 
▁ xxmaj come , father , xxmaj i 'll bestow you with a friend . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup vii . 
 a tent in the xxmaj french camp . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj cordelia , xxmaj kent , xxmaj doctor , and xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj cor . o thou good xxmaj kent , how shall i live and work 
▁ xxmaj to match thy goodness ? xxmaj my life will be too short 
▁ xxmaj and every measure fail me . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj to be acknowledg'd , madam , is o'erpaid . 
▁ xxmaj all my reports go with the modest truth ; 
▁ xxmaj nor more nor clipp'd , but so . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj be better suited . 
▁ xxmaj these weeds are memories of those worser hours . 
▁ i prithee put them off . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj pardon , dear madam . 
▁ xxmaj yet to be known shortens my made intent . 
▁ xxmaj my boon i make it that you know me not 
▁ xxmaj till time and i think meet . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj then be't so , my good lord . [ to the xxmaj doctor ] xxmaj how , does the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj madam , sleeps still . 
▁ xxmaj cor . o you kind gods , 
▁ xxmaj cure this great breach in his abused nature ! 
▁ xxmaj th ' untun'd and jarring senses , xxup o , wind up 
▁ xxmaj of this child - changed father ! 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj so please your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj that we may wake the xxmaj king ? xxmaj he hath slept long . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj be govern'd by your knowledge , and proceed 
▁ xxup i ' th ' sway of your own will . xxmaj is he array'd ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lear in a chair carried by xxmaj servants . 

▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj ay , madam . xxmaj in the heaviness of sleep 
▁ xxmaj we put fresh garments on him . 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj be by , good madam , when we do awake him . 
▁ i doubt not of his temperance . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj very well . 
▁ xxmaj music . 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj please you draw near . xxmaj louder the music there ! 
▁ xxmaj cor . o my dear father , restoration hang 
▁ xxmaj thy medicine on my lips , and let this kiss 
▁ xxmaj repair those violent harms that my two sisters 
▁ xxmaj have in thy reverence made ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj kind and dear princess ! 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj had you not been their father , these white flakes 
▁ xxmaj had challeng'd pity of them . xxmaj was this a face 
▁ xxmaj to be oppos'd against the warring winds ? 
▁ xxmaj to stand against the deep dread - bolted thunder ? 
▁ xxmaj in the most terrible and nimble stroke 
▁ xxmaj of quick cross lightning ? to watch- poor perdu!- 
▁ xxmaj with this thin helm ? xxmaj mine enemy 's dog , 
▁ xxmaj though he had bit me , should have stood that night 
▁ xxmaj against my fire ; and wast thou fain , poor father , 
▁ xxmaj to hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn , 
▁ xxmaj in short and musty straw ? xxmaj alack , alack ! 
▁ ' tis wonder that thy life and wits at once 
▁ xxmaj had not concluded all.- xxmaj he wakes . xxmaj speak to him . 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj madam , do you ; ' tis fittest . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj how does my royal lord ? xxmaj how fares your xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj you do me wrong to take me out o ' th ' grave . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a soul in bliss ; but i am bound 
▁ xxmaj upon a wheel of fire , that mine own tears 
▁ xxmaj do scald like molten lead . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj sir , do you know me ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj you are a spirit , i know . xxmaj when did you die ? 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj still , still , far wide ! 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj he 's scarce awake . xxmaj let him alone awhile . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj where have i been ? xxmaj where am xxup i ? xxmaj fair daylight , 
▁ i am mightily abus'd . i should e'en die with pity , 
▁ xxmaj to see another thus . i know not what to say . 
▁ i will not swear these are my hands . xxmaj let 's see . 
▁ i feel this pin prick . xxmaj would i were assur'd 
▁ xxmaj of my condition ! 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxup o , look upon me , sir , 
▁ xxmaj and hold your hands in benediction o'er me . 
▁ xxmaj no , sir , you must not kneel . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj pray , do not mock me . 
▁ i am a very foolish fond old man , 
▁ xxmaj fourscore and upward , not an hour more nor less ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to deal plainly , 
▁ i fear i am not in my perfect mind . 
▁ xxmaj methinks i should know you , and know this man ; 
▁ xxmaj yet i am doubtful ; for i am mainly ignorant 
▁ xxmaj what place this is ; and all the skill i have 
▁ xxmaj remembers not these garments ; nor i know not 
▁ xxmaj where i did lodge last night . xxmaj do not laugh at me ; 
▁ xxmaj for ( as i am a man ) i think this lady 
▁ xxmaj to be my child xxmaj cordelia . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj and so i am ! i am ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj be your tears wet ? xxmaj yes , faith . i pray weep not . 
▁ xxmaj if you have poison for me , i will drink it . 
▁ i know you do not love me ; for your sisters 
▁ xxmaj have , as i do remember , done me wrong . 
▁ xxmaj you have some cause , they have not . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj no cause , no cause . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj am i in xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj in your own kingdom , sir . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj do not abuse me . 
▁ xxmaj doct . xxmaj be comforted , good madam . xxmaj the great rage 
▁ xxmaj you see is kill'd in him ; and yet it is danger 
▁ xxmaj to make him even o'er the time he has lost . 
▁ xxmaj desire him to go in . xxmaj trouble him no more 
▁ xxmaj till further settling .