xxbos xxmaj cor . xxmaj will't please your xxmaj highness walk ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj you must bear with me . 
▁ xxmaj pray you now , forget and forgive . i am old and foolish . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj manent xxmaj kent and xxmaj gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj holds it true , sir , that the xxmaj duke of xxmaj cornwall was so slain ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj most certain , sir . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj who is conductor of his people ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj as ' tis said , the bastard son of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj they say xxmaj edgar , his banish'd son , is with the xxmaj earl of xxmaj kent 
▁ in xxmaj germany . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj report is changeable . ' tis time to look about ; the powers of 
▁ the kingdom approach apace . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj the arbitrement is like to be bloody . 
▁ xxmaj fare you well , sir . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj my point and period will be throughly wrought , 
▁ xxmaj or well or ill , as this day 's battle 's fought . xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the xxmaj british camp near xxmaj dover . 

 xxmaj enter , with xxmaj drum and xxmaj colours , xxmaj edmund , xxmaj regan , xxmaj gentleman , and xxmaj soldiers . 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj know of the xxmaj duke if his last purpose hold , 
▁ xxmaj or whether since he is advis'd by aught 
▁ xxmaj to change the course . xxmaj he 's full of alteration 
▁ xxmaj and self - reproving . xxmaj bring his constant pleasure . 
▁ [ exit an xxmaj officer . ] 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj our sister 's man is certainly miscarried . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj tis to be doubted , madam . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj now , sweet lord , 
▁ xxmaj you know the goodness i intend upon you . 
▁ xxmaj tell me- but truly- but then speak the truth- 
▁ xxmaj do you not love my sister ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj in honour'd love . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj but have you never found my brother 's way 
▁ xxmaj to the forfended place ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj that thought abuses you . 
▁ xxmaj reg . i am doubtful that you have been conjunct 
▁ xxmaj and bosom'd with her , as far as we call hers . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj no , by mine honour , madam . 
▁ xxmaj reg . i never shall endure her . xxmaj dear my lord , 
▁ xxmaj be not familiar with her . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj fear me not . 
▁ xxmaj she and the xxmaj duke her husband ! 

▁ xxmaj enter , with xxmaj drum and xxmaj colours , xxmaj albany , xxmaj goneril , xxmaj soldiers . 

▁ xxmaj gon . [ aside ] i had rather lose the battle than that sister 
▁ xxmaj should loosen him and me . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj our very loving sister , well bemet . 
▁ xxmaj sir , this i hear : the xxmaj king is come to his daughter , 
▁ xxmaj with others whom the rigour of our state 
▁ xxmaj forc'd to cry out . xxmaj where i could not be honest , 
▁ i never yet was valiant . xxmaj for this business , 
▁ xxmaj it toucheth us as xxmaj france invades our land , 
▁ xxmaj not bolds the xxmaj king , with others whom , i fear , 
▁ xxmaj most just and heavy causes make oppose . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj sir , you speak nobly . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj why is this reason'd ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj combine together ' gainst the enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj for these domestic and particular broils 
▁ xxmaj are not the question here . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj let 's then determine 
▁ xxmaj with th ' ancient of war on our proceeding . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i shall attend you presently at your tent . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj sister , you 'll go with us ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj reg . ' tis most convenient . xxmaj pray you go with us . 
▁ xxmaj gon . [ aside ] xxup o , ho , i know the riddle.- i will go . 

▁ [ as they are going out , ] enter xxmaj edgar [ disguised ] . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj if e'er your xxmaj grace had speech with man so poor , 
▁ xxmaj hear me one word . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj i 'll overtake you.- xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but xxmaj albany and xxmaj edgar ] . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj before you fight the battle , ope this letter . 
▁ xxmaj if you have victory , let the trumpet sound 
▁ xxmaj for him that brought it . xxmaj wretched though i seem , 
▁ i can produce a champion that will prove 
▁ xxmaj what is avouched there . xxmaj if you miscarry , 
▁ xxmaj your business of the world hath so an end , 
▁ xxmaj and machination ceases . xxmaj fortune love you ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj stay till i have read the letter . 
▁ xxmaj edg . i was forbid it . 
▁ xxmaj when time shall serve , let but the herald cry , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll appear again . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj why , fare thee well . i will o'erlook thy paper . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ edgar ] . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj edmund . 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj the enemy 's in view ; draw up your powers . 
▁ xxmaj here is the guess of their true strength and forces 
▁ xxmaj by diligent discovery ; but your haste 
▁ xxmaj is now urg'd on you . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj we will greet the time . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj to both these sisters have i sworn my love ; 
▁ xxmaj each jealous of the other , as the stung 
▁ xxmaj are of the adder . xxmaj which of them shall i take ? 
▁ xxmaj both ? one ? or neither ? xxmaj neither can be enjoy'd , 
▁ xxmaj if both remain alive . xxmaj to take the widow 
▁ xxmaj exasperates , makes mad her sister xxmaj goneril ; 
▁ xxmaj and hardly shall i carry out my side , 
▁ xxmaj her husband being alive . xxmaj now then , we 'll use 
▁ xxmaj his countenance for the battle , which being done , 
▁ xxmaj let her who would be rid of him devise 
▁ xxmaj his speedy taking off . xxmaj as for the mercy 
▁ xxmaj which he intends to xxmaj lear and to xxmaj cordelia- 
▁ xxmaj the battle done , and they within our power , 
▁ xxmaj shall never see his pardon ; for my state 
▁ xxmaj stands on me to defend , not to debate . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 a field between the two camps . 

 xxmaj alarum within . xxmaj enter , with xxmaj drum and xxmaj colours , the xxmaj powers of xxmaj france 
 over the stage , xxmaj cordelia with her xxmaj father in her hand , and exeunt . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar and xxmaj gloucester . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj here , father , take the shadow of this tree 
▁ xxmaj for your good host . xxmaj pray that the right may thrive . 
▁ xxmaj if ever i return to you again , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bring you comfort . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj grace go with you , sir ! 
▁ xxmaj exit [ edgar ] . 

▁ xxmaj alarum and retreat within . xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar , 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj away , old man ! give me thy hand ! away ! 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj lear hath lost , he and his daughter ta'en . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand ! come on ! 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj no further , sir . a man may rot even here . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj what , in ill thoughts again ? xxmaj men must endure 
▁ xxmaj their going hence , even as their coming hither ; 
▁ xxmaj ripeness is all . xxmaj come on . 
▁ xxmaj glou . xxmaj and that 's true too . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj british camp , near xxmaj dover . 

 xxmaj enter , in conquest , with xxmaj drum and xxmaj colours , xxmaj edmund ; xxmaj lear and xxmaj cordelia 
 as prisoners ; xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj captain . 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj some officers take them away . xxmaj good guard 
▁ xxmaj until their greater pleasures first be known 
▁ xxmaj that are to censure them . 
▁ xxmaj cor . xxmaj we are not the first 
▁ xxmaj who with best meaning have incurr'd the worst . 
▁ xxmaj for thee , oppressed king , am i cast down ; 
▁ xxmaj myself could else outfrown false xxmaj fortune 's frown . 
▁ xxmaj shall we not see these daughters and these sisters ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj no , no , no , no ! xxmaj come , let 's away to prison . 
▁ xxmaj we two alone will sing like birds i ' th ' cage . 
▁ xxmaj when thou dost ask me blessing , xxmaj i 'll kneel down 
▁ xxmaj and ask of thee forgiveness . xxmaj so we 'll live , 
▁ xxmaj and pray , and sing , and tell old tales , and laugh 
▁ xxmaj at gilded butterflies , and hear poor rogues 
▁ xxmaj talk of court news ; and we 'll talk with them too- 
▁ xxmaj who loses and who wins ; who 's in , who 's out- 
▁ xxmaj and take upon 's the mystery of things , 
▁ xxmaj as if we were xxmaj god 's spies ; and we 'll wear out , 
▁ xxmaj in a wall'd prison , packs and sects of great ones 
▁ xxmaj that ebb and flow by th ' moon . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj take them away . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj upon such sacrifices , my xxmaj cordelia , 
▁ xxmaj the gods themselves throw incense . xxmaj have i caught thee ? 
▁ xxmaj he that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven 
▁ xxmaj and fire us hence like foxes . xxmaj wipe thine eyes . 
▁ xxmaj the goodyears shall devour 'em , flesh and fell , 
▁ xxmaj ere they shall make us weep ! xxmaj we 'll see 'em starv'd first . 
▁ xxmaj come . xxmaj exeunt [ lear and xxmaj cordelia , guarded ] . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj captain ; hark . 
▁ xxmaj take thou this note [ gives a paper ] . xxmaj go follow them to prison . 
▁ xxmaj one step i have advanc'd thee . xxmaj if thou dost 
▁ xxmaj as this instructs thee , thou dost make thy way 
▁ xxmaj to noble fortunes . xxmaj know thou this , that men 
▁ xxmaj are as the time is . xxmaj to be tender - minded 
▁ xxmaj does not become a sword . xxmaj thy great employment 
▁ xxmaj will not bear question . xxmaj either say thou'lt do't , 
▁ xxmaj or thrive by other means . 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj i 'll do't , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj about it ! and write happy when th ' hast done . 
▁ xxmaj mark- i say , instantly ; and carry it so 
▁ xxmaj as i have set it down . 
▁ xxmaj capt . i can not draw a cart , nor eat dried oats ; 
▁ xxmaj if it be man 's work , xxmaj i 'll do't . xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxmaj albany , xxmaj goneril , xxmaj regan , xxmaj soldiers . 

▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj sir , you have show'd to - day your valiant strain , 
▁ xxmaj and fortune led you well . xxmaj you have the captives 
▁ xxmaj who were the opposites of this day 's strife . 
▁ xxmaj we do require them of you , so to use them 
▁ xxmaj as we shall find their merits and our safety 
▁ xxmaj may equally determine . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj sir , i thought it fit 
▁ xxmaj to send the old and miserable xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj to some retention and appointed guard ; 
▁ xxmaj whose age has charms in it , whose title more , 
▁ xxmaj to pluck the common bosom on his side 
▁ xxmaj and turn our impress'd lances in our eyes 
▁ xxmaj which do command them . xxmaj with him i sent the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj my reason all the same ; and they are ready 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow , or at further space , t ' appear 
▁ xxmaj where you shall hold your session . xxmaj at this time 
▁ xxmaj we sweat and bleed : the friend hath lost his friend ; 
▁ xxmaj and the best quarrels , in the heat , are curs'd 
▁ xxmaj by those that feel their sharpness . 
▁ xxmaj the question of xxmaj cordelia and her father 
▁ xxmaj requires a fitter place . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj sir , by your patience , 
▁ i hold you but a subject of this war , 
▁ xxmaj not as a brother . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj that 's as we list to grace him . 
▁ xxmaj methinks our pleasure might have been demanded 
▁ xxmaj ere you had spoke so far . xxmaj he led our powers , 
▁ xxmaj bore the commission of my place and person , 
▁ xxmaj the which immediacy may well stand up 
▁ xxmaj and call itself your brother . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj not so hot ! 
▁ xxmaj in his own grace he doth exalt himself 
▁ xxmaj more than in your addition . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj in my rights 
▁ xxmaj by me invested , he compeers the best . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj that were the most if he should husband you . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj jesters do oft prove prophets . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj holla , holla ! 
▁ xxmaj that eye that told you so look'd but asquint . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj lady , i am not well ; else i should answer 
▁ xxmaj from a full - flowing stomach . xxmaj general , 
▁ xxmaj take thou my soldiers , prisoners , patrimony ; 
▁ xxmaj dispose of them , of me ; the walls are thine . 
▁ xxmaj witness the world that i create thee here 
▁ xxmaj my lord and master . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj mean you to enjoy him ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj the let - alone lies not in your good will . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj nor in thine , lord . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj half - blooded fellow , yes . 
▁ xxmaj reg . [ to xxmaj edmund ] xxmaj let the drum strike , and prove my title thine . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj stay yet ; hear reason . xxmaj edmund , i arrest thee 
▁ xxmaj on capital treason ; and , in thine attaint , 
▁ xxmaj this gilded serpent [ points to xxmaj goneril ] . xxmaj for your claim , fair 
▁ sister , 
▁ i bar it in the interest of my wife . 
▁ ' tis she is subcontracted to this lord , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , her husband , contradict your banes . 
▁ xxmaj if you will marry , make your loves to me ; 
▁ xxmaj my lady is bespoke . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj an interlude ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj thou art arm'd , xxmaj gloucester . xxmaj let the trumpet sound . 
▁ xxmaj if none appear to prove upon thy person 
▁ xxmaj thy heinous , manifest , and many treasons , 
▁ xxmaj there is my pledge [ throws down a glove ] ! xxmaj i 'll prove it on thy 
▁ heart , 
▁ xxmaj ere i taste bread , thou art in nothing less 
▁ xxmaj than i have here proclaim'd thee . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj sick , xxup o , sick ! 
▁ xxmaj gon . [ aside ] xxmaj if not , xxmaj i 'll ne'er trust medicine . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj there 's my exchange [ throws down a glove ] . xxmaj what in the world 
▁ he is 
▁ xxmaj that names me traitor , villain - like he lies . 
▁ xxmaj call by thy trumpet . xxmaj he that dares approach , 
▁ xxmaj on him , on you , who not ? i will maintain 
▁ xxmaj my truth and honour firmly . 
▁ xxmaj alb . a herald , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj edm . a herald , ho , a herald ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj trust to thy single virtue ; for thy soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj all levied in my name , have in my name 
▁ xxmaj took their discharge . 
▁ xxmaj reg . xxmaj my sickness grows upon me . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj she is not well . xxmaj convey her to my tent . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj regan , led . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj herald . 

▁ xxmaj come hither , herald . xxmaj let the trumpet sound , 
▁ xxmaj and read out this . 
▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj sound , trumpet ! a trumpet sounds . 
▁
▁ xxmaj her . ( reads ) ' if any man of quality or degree within the lists of 
▁ the army will maintain upon xxmaj edmund , supposed xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ that he is a manifold traitor , let him appear by the third sound 
▁ of the trumpet . xxmaj he is bold in his defence . ' 

▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj sound ! xxmaj first trumpet . 
▁ xxmaj her . xxmaj again ! xxmaj second trumpet . 
▁ xxmaj her . xxmaj again ! xxmaj third trumpet . 
▁ xxmaj trumpet answers within . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj edgar , armed , at the third sound , a xxmaj trumpet before him . 

▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj ask him his purposes , why he appears 
▁ xxmaj upon this call o ' th ' trumpet . 
▁ xxmaj her . xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxmaj your name , your quality ? and why you answer 
▁ xxmaj this present summons ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj know my name is lost ; 
▁ xxmaj by treason 's tooth bare - gnawn and canker - bit . 
▁ xxmaj yet am i noble as the adversary 
▁ i come to cope . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj which is that adversary ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj what 's he that speaks for xxmaj edmund xxmaj earl of xxmaj gloucester ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj himself . xxmaj what say'st thou to him ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj draw thy sword , 
▁ xxmaj that , if my speech offend a noble heart , 
▁ xxmaj thy arm may do thee justice . xxmaj here is mine . 
▁ xxmaj behold , it is the privilege of mine honours , 
▁ xxmaj my oath , and my profession . i protest- 
▁ xxmaj maugre thy strength , youth , place , and eminence , 
▁ xxmaj despite thy victor sword and fire - new fortune , 
▁ xxmaj thy valour and thy heart- thou art a traitor ; 
▁ xxmaj false to thy gods , thy brother , and thy father ; 
▁ xxmaj conspirant ' gainst this high illustrious prince ; 
▁ xxmaj and from th ' extremest upward of thy head 
▁ xxmaj to the descent and dust beneath thy foot , 
▁ a most toad - spotted traitor . xxmaj say thou ' no , ' 
▁ xxmaj this sword , this arm , and my best spirits are bent 
▁ xxmaj to prove upon thy heart , whereto i speak , 
▁ xxmaj thou liest . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj in wisdom i should ask thy name ; 
▁ xxmaj but since thy outside looks so fair and warlike , 
▁ xxmaj and that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes , 
▁ xxmaj what safe and nicely i might well delay 
▁ xxmaj by rule of knighthood , i disdain and spurn . 
▁ xxmaj back do i toss those treasons to thy head ; 
▁ xxmaj with the hell - hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart ; 
▁ xxmaj which- for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise- 
▁ xxmaj this sword of mine shall give them instant way 
▁ xxmaj where they shall rest for ever . xxmaj trumpets , speak ! 
▁ xxmaj alarums . xxmaj fight . [ edmund falls . ] 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj save him , save him ! 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj this is mere practice , xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxmaj by th ' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer 
▁ xxmaj an unknown opposite . xxmaj thou art not vanquish'd , 
▁ xxmaj but cozen'd and beguil'd . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj shut your mouth , dame , 
▁ xxmaj or with this paper shall i stop it . [ shows her her letter to 
▁ xxmaj edmund.]- [ to xxmaj edmund ] . xxmaj hold , sir . 
▁ [ to xxmaj goneril ] xxmaj thou worse than any name , read thine own evil . 
▁ xxmaj no tearing , lady ! i perceive you know it . 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj say if i do- the laws are mine , not thine . 
▁ xxmaj who can arraign me for't ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj most monstrous ! 
▁ xxmaj know'st thou this paper ? 
▁ xxmaj gon . xxmaj ask me not what i know . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj go after her . xxmaj she 's desperate ; govern her . 
▁ [ exit an xxmaj officer . ] 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj what , you have charg'd me with , that have i done , 
▁ xxmaj and more , much more . xxmaj the time will bring it out . 
▁ ' tis past , and so am xxup i.- xxmaj but what art thou 
▁ xxmaj that hast this fortune on me ? xxmaj if thou'rt noble , 
▁ i do forgive thee . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj let 's exchange charity . 
▁ i am no less in blood than thou art , xxmaj edmund ; 
▁ xxmaj if more , the more th ' hast wrong'd me . 
▁ xxmaj my name is xxmaj edgar and thy father 's son . 
▁ xxmaj the gods are just , and of our pleasant vices 
▁ xxmaj make instruments to scourge us . 
▁ xxmaj the dark and vicious place where thee he got 
▁ xxmaj cost him his eyes . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj th ' hast spoken right ; ' tis true . 
▁ xxmaj the wheel is come full circle ; i am here . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj methought thy very gait did prophesy 
▁ a royal nobleness . i must embrace thee . 
▁ xxmaj let sorrow split my heart if ever i 
▁ xxmaj did hate thee , or thy father ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj worthy prince , i know't . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj where have you hid yourself ? 
▁ xxmaj how have you known the miseries of your father ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj by nursing them , my lord . xxmaj list a brief tale ; 
▁ xxmaj and when ' tis told , o that my heart would burst ! 
▁ xxmaj the bloody proclamation to escape 
▁ xxmaj that follow'd me so near ( o , our lives ' sweetness ! 
▁ xxmaj that with the pain of death would hourly die 
▁ xxmaj rather than die at once ! ) taught me to shift 
▁ xxmaj into a madman 's rags , t ' assume a semblance 
▁ xxmaj that very dogs disdain'd ; and in this habit 
▁ xxmaj met i my father with his bleeding rings , 
▁ xxmaj their precious stones new lost ; became his guide , 
▁ xxmaj led him , begg'd for him , sav'd him from despair ; 
▁ xxmaj never ( o fault ! ) reveal'd myself unto him 
▁ xxmaj until some half hour past , when i was arm'd , 
▁ xxmaj not sure , though hoping of this good success , 
▁ i ask'd his blessing , and from first to last 
▁ xxmaj told him my pilgrimage . xxmaj but his flaw'd heart 
▁ ( alack , too weak the conflict to support ! ) 
▁ ' twixt two extremes of passion , joy and grief , 
▁ xxmaj burst smilingly . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj this speech of yours hath mov'd me , 
▁ xxmaj and shall perchance do good ; but speak you on ; 
▁ xxmaj you look as you had something more to say . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj if there be more , more woful , hold it in ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am almost ready to dissolve , 
▁ xxmaj hearing of this . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj this would have seem'd a period 
▁ xxmaj to such as love not sorrow ; but another , 
▁ xxmaj to amplify too much , would make much more , 
▁ xxmaj and top extremity . 
▁ xxmaj whilst i was big in clamour , came there a man , 
▁ xxmaj who , having seen me in my worst estate , 
▁ xxmaj shunn'd my abhorr'd society ; but then , finding 
▁ xxmaj who ' twas that so endur'd , with his strong arms 
▁ xxmaj he fastened on my neck , and bellowed out 
▁ xxmaj as he 'd burst heaven ; threw him on my father ; 
▁ xxmaj told the most piteous tale of xxmaj lear and him 
▁ xxmaj that ever ear receiv'd ; which in recounting 
▁ xxmaj his grief grew puissant , and the strings of life 
▁ xxmaj began to crack . xxmaj twice then the trumpets sounded , 
▁ xxmaj and there i left him tranc'd . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj but who was this ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj kent , sir , the banish'd xxmaj kent ; who in disguise 
▁ xxmaj followed his enemy king and did him service 
▁ xxmaj improper for a slave . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj gentleman with a bloody knife . 

▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj help , help ! xxup o , help ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj what kind of help ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj speak , man . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj what means that bloody knife ? 
▁ xxmaj gent . ' tis hot , it smokes . 
▁ xxmaj it came even from the heart of- xxup o ! she 's dead ! 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj who dead ? xxmaj speak , man . 
▁ xxmaj gent . xxmaj your lady , sir , your lady ! and her sister 
▁ xxmaj by her is poisoned ; she hath confess'd it . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i was contracted to them both . xxmaj all three 
▁ xxmaj now marry in an instant . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj kent . 

▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj here comes xxmaj kent . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj produce their bodies , be they alive or dead . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj gentleman . ] 
▁ xxmaj this judgement of the heavens , that makes us tremble 
▁ xxmaj touches us not with pity . xxup o , is this he ? 
▁ xxmaj the time will not allow the compliment 
▁ xxmaj that very manners urges . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i am come 
▁ xxmaj to bid my king and master aye good night . 
▁ xxmaj is he not here ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj great thing of us forgot ! 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj edmund , where 's the xxmaj king ? and where 's xxmaj cordelia ? 
▁ xxmaj the bodies of xxmaj goneril and xxmaj regan are brought in . 
▁ xxmaj seest thou this object , xxmaj kent ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj alack , why thus ? 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj yet xxmaj edmund was belov'd . 
▁ xxmaj the one the other poisoned for my sake , 
▁ xxmaj and after slew herself . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj even so . xxmaj cover their faces . 
▁ xxmaj edm . i pant for life . xxmaj some good i mean to do , 
▁ xxmaj despite of mine own nature . xxmaj quickly send 
▁ ( be brief in't ) to the castle ; for my writ 
▁ xxmaj is on the life of xxmaj lear and on xxmaj cordelia . 
▁ xxmaj nay , send in time . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj run , run , xxup o , run ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj to who , my lord ? xxmaj who has the office ? xxmaj send 
▁ xxmaj thy token of reprieve . 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj well thought on . xxmaj take my sword ; 
▁ xxmaj give it the xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj haste thee for thy life . [ exit xxmaj edgar . ] 
▁ xxmaj edm . xxmaj he hath commission from thy wife and me 
▁ xxmaj to hang xxmaj cordelia in the prison and 
▁ xxmaj to lay the blame upon her own despair 
▁ xxmaj that she fordid herself . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj the gods defend her ! xxmaj bear him hence awhile . 
▁ [ edmund is borne off . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lear , with xxmaj cordelia [ dead ] in his arms , [ edgar , xxmaj captain , 
▁ and others following ] . 

▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj howl , howl , howl , howl ! xxup o , you are men of stone . 
▁ xxmaj had i your tongues and eyes , xxmaj i'ld use them so 
▁ xxmaj that heaven 's vault should crack . xxmaj she 's gone for ever ! 
▁ i know when one is dead , and when one lives . 
▁ xxmaj she 's dead as earth . xxmaj lend me a looking glass . 
▁ xxmaj if that her breath will mist or stain the stone , 
▁ xxmaj why , then she lives . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj is this the promis'd end ? 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj or image of that horror ? 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj fall and cease ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj this feather stirs ; she lives ! xxmaj if it be so , 
▁ xxmaj it is a chance which does redeem all sorrows 
▁ xxmaj that ever i have felt . 
▁ xxmaj kent . o my good master ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj prithee away ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . ' tis noble xxmaj kent , your friend . 
▁ xxmaj lear . a plague upon you , murderers , traitors all ! 
▁ i might have sav'd her ; now she 's gone for ever ! 
▁ xxmaj cordelia , xxmaj cordelia ! stay a little . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj what is't thou say'st , xxmaj her voice was ever soft , 
▁ xxmaj gentle , and low- an excellent thing in woman . 
▁ i kill'd the slave that was a - hanging thee . 
▁ xxmaj capt . ' tis true , my lords , he did . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj did i not , fellow ? 
▁ i have seen the day , with my good biting falchion 
▁ i would have made them skip . i am old now , 
▁ xxmaj and these same crosses spoil me . xxmaj who are you ? 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes are not o ' th ' best . xxmaj i 'll tell you straight . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj if fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated , 
▁ xxmaj one of them we behold . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj this ' a dull sight . xxmaj are you not xxmaj kent ? 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj the same- 
▁ xxmaj your servant xxmaj kent . xxmaj where is your servant xxmaj caius ? 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj he 's a good fellow , i can tell you that . 
▁ xxmaj he 'll strike , and quickly too . xxmaj he 's dead and rotten . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj no , my good lord ; i am the very man- 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj i 'll see that straight . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj that from your first of difference and decay 
▁ xxmaj have followed your sad steps . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj you 're welcome hither . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj nor no man else ! xxmaj all 's cheerless , dark , and deadly . 
▁ xxmaj your eldest daughters have fordone themselves , 
▁ xxmaj and desperately are dead . 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj ay , so i think . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj he knows not what he says ; and vain is it 
▁ xxmaj that we present us to him . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj very bootless . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj captain . 

▁ xxmaj capt . xxmaj edmund is dead , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj that 's but a trifle here . 
▁ xxmaj you lords and noble friends , know our intent . 
▁ xxmaj what comfort to this great decay may come 
▁ xxmaj shall be applied . xxmaj for us , we will resign , 
▁ xxmaj during the life of this old xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj to him our absolute power ; [ to xxmaj edgar and xxmaj kent ] you to your 
▁ rights ; 
▁ xxmaj with boot , and xxmaj such addition as your honours 
▁ xxmaj have more than merited.- xxmaj all friends shall taste 
▁ xxmaj the wages of their virtue , and all foes 
▁ xxmaj the cup of their deservings.- xxup o , see , see ! 
▁ xxmaj lear . xxmaj and my poor fool is hang'd ! xxmaj no , no , no life ! 
▁ xxmaj why should a dog , a horse , a rat , have life , 
▁ xxmaj and thou no breath at all ? xxmaj thou'lt come no more , 
▁ xxmaj never , never , never , never , never ! 
▁ xxmaj pray you undo this button . xxmaj thank you , sir . 
▁ xxmaj do you see this ? xxmaj look on her ! look ! her lips ! 
▁ xxmaj look there , look there ! xxmaj he dies . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj he faints ! xxmaj my lord , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj break , heart ; i prithee break ! 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj look up , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj vex not his ghost . xxup o , let him pass ! xxmaj he hates him 
▁ xxmaj that would upon the rack of this tough world 
▁ xxmaj stretch him out longer . 
▁ xxmaj edg . xxmaj he is gone indeed . 
▁ xxmaj kent . xxmaj the wonder is , he hath endur'd so long . 
▁ xxmaj he but usurp'd his life . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj bear them from hence . xxmaj our present business 
▁ xxmaj is general woe . [ to xxmaj kent and xxmaj edgar ] xxmaj friends of my soul , you 
▁ twain 
▁ xxmaj rule in this realm , and the gor'd state sustain . 
▁ xxmaj kent . i have a journey , sir , shortly to go . 
▁ xxmaj my master calls me ; i must not say no . 
▁ xxmaj alb . xxmaj the weight of this sad time we must obey , 
▁ xxmaj speak what we feel , not what we ought to say . 
▁ xxmaj the oldest have borne most ; we that are young 
▁ xxmaj shall never see so much , nor live so long . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt with a dead march . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 






 1595 

 xxup love 's xxup labour 's xxup lost 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae . 

▁ xxup ferdinand , xxmaj king of xxmaj navarre 
▁ xxup berowne , lord attending on the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup longaville , " " " " " 
▁ xxup dumain , " " " " " 
▁ xxup boyet , lord attending on the xxmaj princess of xxmaj france 
▁ xxup marcade , " " " " " " " 
▁ xxup don xxup adriano xxup de xxup armado , fantastical xxmaj spaniard 
▁ xxup sir xxup nathaniel , a curate 
▁ xxup holofernes , a schoolmaster 
▁ xxup dull , a constable 
▁ xxup costard , a clown 
▁ xxup moth , page to xxmaj armado 
▁ a xxup forester 

▁ xxup the xxup princess xxup of xxup france 
▁ xxup rosaline , lady attending on the xxmaj princess 
▁ xxup maria , " " " " " 
▁ xxup katharine , lady attending on the xxmaj princess 
▁ xxup jaquenetta , a country wench 
▁
▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj attendants , etc . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj navarre 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj navarre . xxmaj the xxmaj king 's park 

 xxmaj enter the xxmaj king , xxup berowne , xxup longaville , and xxup dumain 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj let fame , that all hunt after in their lives , 
▁ xxmaj live regist'red upon our brazen tombs , 
▁ xxmaj and then grace us in the disgrace of death ; 
▁ xxmaj when , spite of cormorant devouring xxmaj time , 
▁ xxmaj th ' endeavour of this present breath may buy 
▁ xxmaj that honour which shall bate his scythe 's keen edge , 
▁ xxmaj and make us heirs of all eternity . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , brave conquerors- for so you are 
▁ xxmaj that war against your own affections 
▁ xxmaj and the huge army of the world 's desires- 
▁ xxmaj our late edict shall strongly stand in force : 
▁ xxmaj navarre shall be the wonder of the world ; 
▁ xxmaj our court shall be a little xxmaj academe , 
▁ xxmaj still and contemplative in living art . 
▁ xxmaj you three , xxmaj berowne , xxmaj dumain , and xxmaj longaville , 
▁ xxmaj have sworn for three years ' term to live with me 
▁ xxmaj my fellow - scholars , and to keep those statutes 
▁ xxmaj that are recorded in this schedule here . 
▁ xxmaj your oaths are pass'd ; and now subscribe your names , 
▁ xxmaj that his own hand may strike his honour down 
▁ xxmaj that violates the smallest branch herein . 
▁ xxmaj if you are arm'd to do as sworn to do , 
▁ xxmaj subscribe to your deep oaths , and keep it too . 
▁ xxup longaville . i am resolv'd ; ' tis but a three years ' fast . 
▁ xxmaj the mind shall banquet , though the body pine . 
▁ xxmaj fat paunches have lean pates ; and dainty bits 
▁ xxmaj make rich the ribs , but bankrupt quite the wits . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj my loving lord , xxmaj dumain is mortified . 
▁ xxmaj the grosser manner of these world 's delights 
▁ xxmaj he throws upon the gross world 's baser slaves ; 
▁ xxmaj to love , to wealth , to pomp , i pine and die , 
▁ xxmaj with all these living in philosophy . 
▁ xxup berowne . i can but say their protestation over ; 
▁ xxmaj so much , dear liege , i have already sworn , 
▁ xxmaj that is , to live and study here three years . 
▁ xxmaj but there are other strict observances , 
▁ xxmaj as : not to see a woman in that term , 
▁ xxmaj which i hope well is not enrolled there ; 
▁ xxmaj and one day in a week to touch no food , 
▁ xxmaj and but one meal on every day beside , 
▁ xxmaj the which i hope is not enrolled there ; 
▁ xxmaj and then to sleep but three hours in the night 
▁ xxmaj and not be seen to wink of all the day- 
▁ xxmaj when i was wo nt to think no harm all night , 
▁ xxmaj and make a dark night too of half the day- 
▁ xxmaj which i hope well is not enrolled there . 
▁ xxup o , these are barren tasks , too hard to keep , 
▁ xxmaj not to see ladies , study , fast , not sleep ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj your oath is pass'd to pass away from these . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj let me say no , my liege , an if you please : 
▁ i only swore to study with your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj and stay here in your court for three years ' space . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj you swore to that , xxmaj berowne , and to the rest . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj by yea and nay , sir , then i swore in jest . 
▁ xxmaj what is the end of study , let me know . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj why , that to know which else we should not know . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj things hid and barr'd , you mean , from common sense ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ay , that is study 's god - like recompense . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj come on , then ; i will swear to study so , 
▁ xxmaj to know the thing i am forbid to know , 
▁ xxmaj as thus : to study where i well may dine , 
▁ xxmaj when i to feast expressly am forbid ; 
▁ xxmaj or study where to meet some mistress fine , 
▁ xxmaj when mistresses from common sense are hid ; 
▁ xxmaj or , having sworn too hard - a - keeping oath , 
▁ xxmaj study to break it , and not break my troth . 
▁ xxmaj if study 's gain be thus , and this be so , 
▁ xxmaj study knows that which yet it doth not know . 
▁ xxmaj swear me to this , and i will ne'er say no . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj these be the stops that hinder study quite , 
▁ xxmaj and train our intellects to vain delight . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj why , all delights are vain ; but that most vain 
▁ xxmaj which , with pain purchas'd , doth inherit pain , 
▁ xxmaj as painfully to pore upon a book 
▁ xxmaj to seek the light of truth ; while truth the while 
▁ xxmaj doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look . 
▁ xxmaj light , seeking light , doth light of light beguile ; 
▁ xxmaj so , ere you find where light in darkness lies , 
▁ xxmaj your light grows dark by losing of your eyes . 
▁ xxmaj study me how to please the eye indeed , 
▁ xxmaj by fixing it upon a fairer eye ; 
▁ xxmaj who dazzling so , that eye shall be his heed , 
▁ xxmaj and give him light that it was blinded by . 
▁ xxmaj study is like the heaven 's glorious sun , 
▁ xxmaj that will not be deep - search'd with saucy looks ; 
▁ xxmaj small have continual plodders ever won , 
▁ xxmaj save base authority from others ' books . 
▁ xxmaj these earthly godfathers of heaven 's lights 
▁ xxmaj that give a name to every fixed star 
▁ xxmaj have no more profit of their shining nights 
▁ xxmaj than those that walk and wot not what they are . 
▁ xxmaj too much to know is to know nought but fame ; 
▁ xxmaj and every godfather can give a name . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how well he 's read , to reason against reading ! 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj proceeded well , to stop all good proceeding ! 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj he weeds the corn , and still lets grow the weeding . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj the spring is near , when green geese are a - breeding . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj how follows that ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj fit in his place and time . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj in reason nothing . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj something then in rhyme . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj berowne is like an envious sneaping frost 
▁ xxmaj that bites the first - born infants of the spring . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj well , say i am ; why should proud summer boast 
▁ xxmaj before the birds have any cause to sing ? 
▁ xxmaj why should i joy in any abortive birth ? 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj christmas i no more desire a rose 
▁ xxmaj than wish a snow in xxmaj may 's new - fangled shows ; 
▁ xxmaj but like of each thing that in season grows ; 
▁ xxmaj so you , to study now it is too late , 
▁ xxmaj climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj well , sit out ; go home , xxmaj berowne ; adieu . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj no , my good lord ; i have sworn to stay with you ; 
▁ xxmaj and though i have for barbarism spoke more 
▁ xxmaj than for that angel knowledge you can say , 
▁ xxmaj yet confident xxmaj i 'll keep what i have swore , 
▁ xxmaj and bide the penance of each three years ' day . 
▁ xxmaj give me the paper ; let me read the same ; 
▁ xxmaj and to the strictest decrees xxmaj i 'll write my name . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how well this yielding rescues thee from shame ! 
▁ xxup berowne . [ reads ] ' item . xxmaj that no woman shall come within a mile of 
▁ my court'- xxmaj hath this been proclaimed ? 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj four days ago . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj let 's see the penalty . [ reads ] ' -on pain of losing her 
▁ tongue . ' xxmaj who devis'd this penalty ? 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj marry , that did xxup i. 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj sweet lord , and why ? 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj to fright them hence with that dread penalty . 
▁ xxup berowne . a dangerous law against gentility . 
▁ [ reads ] ' item . xxmaj if any man be seen to talk with a woman within 
▁ the term of three years , he shall endure such public shame as the 
▁ rest of the court can possibly devise . ' 
▁ xxmaj this article , my liege , yourself must break ; 
▁ xxmaj for well you know here comes in embassy 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french king 's daughter , with yourself to speak- 
▁ a mild of grace and complete majesty- 
▁ xxmaj about surrender up of xxmaj aquitaine 
▁ xxmaj to her decrepit , sick , and bedrid father ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore this article is made in vain , 
▁ xxmaj or vainly comes th ' admired princess hither . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what say you , lords ? xxmaj why , this was quite forgot . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj so study evermore is over - shot . 
▁ xxmaj while it doth study to have what it would , 
▁ xxmaj it doth forget to do the thing it should ; 
▁ xxmaj and when it hath the thing it hunteth most , 
▁ ' tis won as towns with fire- so won , so lost . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj we must of force dispense with this decree ; 
▁ xxmaj she must lie here on mere necessity . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj necessity will make us all forsworn 
▁ xxmaj three thousand times within this three years ' space ; 
▁ xxmaj for every man with his affects is born , 
▁ xxmaj not by might mast'red , but by special grace . 
▁ xxmaj if i break faith , this word shall speak for me : 
▁ i am forsworn on mere necessity . 
▁ xxmaj so to the laws at large i write my name ; [ subscribes ] 
▁ xxmaj and he that breaks them in the least degree 
▁ xxmaj stands in attainder of eternal shame . 
▁ xxmaj suggestions are to other as to me ; 
▁ xxmaj but i believe , although i seem so loath , 
▁ i am the last that will last keep his oath . 
▁ xxmaj but is there no quick recreation granted ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ay , that there is . xxmaj our court , you know , is haunted 
▁ xxmaj with a refined traveller of xxmaj spain , 
▁ a man in all the world 's new fashion planted , 
▁ xxmaj that hath a mint of phrases in his brain ; 
▁ xxmaj one who the music of his own vain tongue 
▁ xxmaj doth ravish like enchanting harmony ; 
▁ a man of complements , whom right and wrong 
▁ xxmaj have chose as umpire of their mutiny . 
▁ xxmaj this child of fancy , that xxmaj armado hight , 
▁ xxmaj for interim to our studies shall relate , 
▁ xxmaj in high - born words , the worth of many a knight 
▁ xxmaj from tawny xxmaj spain lost in the world 's debate . 
▁ xxmaj how you delight , my lords , i know not , xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj but i protest i love to hear him lie , 
▁ xxmaj and i will use him for my minstrelsy . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj armado is a most illustrious wight , 
▁ a man of fire - new words , fashion 's own knight . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj costard the swain and he shall be our sport ; 
▁ xxmaj and so to study three years is but short . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dull , a constable , with a letter , and xxup costard 

▁ xxup dull . xxmaj which is the xxmaj duke 's own person ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this , fellow . xxmaj what wouldst ? 
▁ xxup dull . i myself reprehend his own person , for i am his xxmaj grace 's 
▁ farborough ; but i would see his own person in flesh and blood . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this is he . 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj signior xxmaj arme- xxmaj arme- commends you . xxmaj there 's villainy abroad ; 
▁ this letter will tell you more . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj sir , the contempts thereof are as touching me . 
▁ xxup king . a letter from the magnificent xxmaj armado . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj how low soever the matter , i hope in xxmaj god for high words . 
▁ xxup longaville . a high hope for a low heaven . xxmaj god grant us patience ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj to hear , or forbear hearing ? 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj to hear meekly , sir , and to laugh moderately ; or , to 
▁ forbear both . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj well , sir , be it as the style shall give us cause to climb 
▁ in the merriness . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj the matter is to me , sir , as concerning xxmaj jaquenetta . 
▁ xxmaj the manner of it is , i was taken with the manner . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj in what manner ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj in manner and form following , sir ; all those three : i was 
▁ seen with her in the manor - house , sitting with her upon the form , 
▁ and taken following her into the park ; which , put together , is in 
▁ manner and form following . xxmaj now , sir , for the manner- it is the 
▁ manner of a man to speak to a woman . xxmaj for the form- in some form . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj for the following , sir ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj as it shall follow in my correction ; and xxmaj god defend the 
▁ right ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj will you hear this letter with attention ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj as we would hear an oracle . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh . 
▁ xxup king . [ reads ] ' great deputy , the welkin 's vicegerent and sole 
▁ dominator of xxmaj navarre , my soul 's earth 's god and body 's fost'ring 
▁ patron'- 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj not a word of xxmaj costard yet . 
▁ xxup king . [ reads ] ' so it is'- 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj it may be so ; but if he say it is so , he is , in telling 
▁ true , but so . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj be to me , and every man that dares not fight ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no words ! 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj of other men 's secrets , i beseech you . 
▁ xxup king . [ reads ] ' so it is , besieged with sable - coloured melancholy , i 
▁ did commend the black oppressing humour to the most wholesome 
▁ physic of thy health - giving air ; and , as i am a gentleman , betook 
▁ myself to walk . xxmaj the time xxmaj when ? xxmaj about the sixth hour ; when beasts 
▁ most graze , birds best peck , and men sit down to that nourishment 
▁ which is called supper . xxmaj so much for the time xxmaj when . xxmaj now for the 
▁ ground xxmaj which ? which , i mean , i upon ; it is ycleped thy park . xxmaj then 
▁ for the place xxmaj where ? where , i mean , i did encounter that obscene 
▁ and most prepost'rous event that draweth from my snow - white pen 
▁ the ebon - coloured ink which here thou viewest , beholdest , 
▁ surveyest , or seest . xxmaj but to the place xxmaj where ? xxmaj it standeth 
▁ north - north - east and by east from the west corner of thy 
▁ curious - knotted garden . xxmaj there did i see that low - spirited swain , 
▁ that base minnow of thy mirth , ' 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj me ? 
▁ xxup king . ' that unlettered small - knowing soul , ' 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj me ? 
▁ xxup king . ' that shallow vassal , ' 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj still me ? 
▁ xxup king . ' which , as i remember , hight xxmaj costard , ' 
▁ xxup costard . xxup o , me ! 
▁ xxup king . ' sorted and consorted , contrary to thy established proclaimed 
▁ edict and continent canon ; which , with , xxup o , with- but with this i 
▁ passion to say wherewith- ' 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj with a wench . 
▁ xxmaj king . ' with a child of our grandmother xxmaj eve , a female ; or , for thy 
▁ more sweet understanding , a woman . xxmaj him xxup i , as my ever - esteemed 
▁ duty pricks me on , have sent to thee , to receive the meed of 
▁ punishment , by thy sweet xxmaj grace 's officer , xxmaj antony xxmaj dull , a man of 
▁ good repute , carriage , bearing , and estimation . ' 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj me , an't shall please you ; i am xxmaj antony xxmaj dull . 
▁ xxup king . ' for xxmaj jaquenetta- so is the weaker vessel called , which i 
▁ apprehended with the aforesaid swain- i keep her as a vessel of 
▁ thy law 's fury ; and shall , at the least of thy sweet notice , 
▁ bring her to trial . xxmaj thine , in all compliments of devoted and 
▁ heart - burning heat of duty , 
▁ xxup don xxup adriano xxup de xxup armado . ' 

▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this is not so well as i look'd for , but the best that 
▁ ever i heard . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj ay , the best for the worst . xxmaj but , sirrah , what say you to 
▁ this ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj sir , i confess the wench . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj did you hear the proclamation ? 
▁ xxup costard . i do confess much of the hearing it , but little of the 
▁ marking of it . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj it was proclaimed a year 's imprisonment to be taken with a 
▁ wench . 
▁ xxup costard . i was taken with none , sir ; i was taken with a damsel . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj well , it was proclaimed damsel . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj this was no damsel neither , sir ; she was a virgin . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj it is so varied too , for it was proclaimed virgin . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj if it were , i deny her virginity ; i was taken with a maid . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj this ' maid ' not serve your turn , sir . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj this maid will serve my turn , sir . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj sir , i will pronounce your sentence : you shall fast a week 
▁ with bran and water . 
▁ xxup costard . i had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and xxmaj don xxmaj armado shall be your keeper . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj berowne , see him delivered o'er ; 
▁ xxmaj and go we , lords , to put in practice that 
▁ xxmaj which each to other hath so strongly sworn . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup king , xxup longaville , and xxup dumain 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj i 'll lay my head to any good man 's hat 
▁ xxmaj these oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , come on . 
▁ xxup costard . i suffer for the truth , sir ; for true it is i was taken 
▁ with xxmaj jaquenetta , and xxmaj jaquenetta is a true girl ; and therefore 
▁ welcome the sour cup of prosperity ! xxmaj affliction may one day smile 
▁ again ; and till then , sit thee down , sorrow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter xxup armado and xxup moth , his page 

▁ xxup armado . xxmaj boy , what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows 
▁ melancholy ? 
▁ xxup moth . a great sign , sir , that he will look sad . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj why , sadness is one and the self - same thing , dear imp . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj no , no ; o xxmaj lord , sir , no ! 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj how canst thou part sadness and melancholy , my tender 
▁ juvenal ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj by a familiar demonstration of the working , my tough signior . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj why tough signior ? xxmaj why tough signior ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj why tender juvenal ? xxmaj why tender juvenal ? 
▁ xxup armado . i spoke it , tender juvenal , as a congruent epitheton 
▁ appertaining to thy young days , which we may nominate tender . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj and xxup i , tough signior , as an appertinent title to your old 
▁ time , which we may name tough . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj pretty and apt . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj how mean you , sir ? i pretty , and my saying apt ? or i apt , and 
▁ my saying pretty ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj thou pretty , because little . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj little pretty , because little . xxmaj wherefore apt ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj and therefore apt , because quick . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj speak you this in my praise , master ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj in thy condign praise . 
▁ xxup moth . i will praise an eel with the same praise . 
▁ xxup armado . that an eel is ingenious ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj that an eel is quick . 
▁ xxup armado . i do say thou art quick in answers ; thou heat'st my blood . 
▁ xxup moth . i am answer'd , sir . 
▁ xxup armado . i love not to be cross'd . 
▁ xxup moth . [ aside ] xxmaj he speaks the mere contrary : crosses love not him . 
▁ xxup armado . i have promised to study three years with the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj you may do it in an hour , sir . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj impossible . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj how many is one thrice told ? 
▁ xxup armado . i am ill at reck'ning ; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj you are a gentleman and a gamester , sir . 
▁ xxup armado . i confess both ; they are both the varnish of a complete 
▁ man . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj then i am sure you know how much the gross sum of deuce - ace 
▁ amounts to . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj it doth amount to one more than two .