xxbos xxup moth . xxmaj which the base vulgar do call three . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj true . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj why , sir , is this such a piece of study ? xxmaj now here is three 
▁ studied ere ye'll thrice wink ; and how easy it is to put ' years ' 
▁ to the word ' three , ' and study three years in two words , the 
▁ dancing horse will tell you . 
▁ xxup armado . a most fine figure ! 
▁ xxup moth . [ aside ] xxmaj to prove you a cipher . 
▁ xxup armado . i will hereupon confess i am in love . xxmaj and as it is base for 
▁ a soldier to love , so am i in love with a base wench . xxmaj if drawing 
▁ my sword against the humour of affection would deliver me from 
▁ the reprobate thought of it , i would take xxmaj desire prisoner , and 
▁ ransom him to any xxmaj french courtier for a new - devis'd curtsy . i 
▁ think scorn to sigh ; methinks i should out - swear xxmaj cupid . xxmaj comfort 
▁ me , boy ; what great men have been in love ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj hercules , master . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj most sweet xxmaj hercules ! xxmaj more authority , dear boy , name more ; 
▁ and , sweet my child , let them be men of good repute and carriage . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj samson , master ; he was a man of good carriage , great 
▁ carriage , for he carried the town gates on his back like a 
▁ porter ; and he was in love . 
▁ xxup armado . o well - knit xxmaj samson ! strong - jointed xxmaj samson ! i do excel thee 
▁ in my rapier as much as thou didst me in carrying gates . i am in 
▁ love too . xxmaj who was xxmaj samson 's love , my dear xxmaj moth ? 
▁ xxup moth . a woman , master . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj of what complexion ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj of all the four , or the three , or the two , or one of the 
▁ four . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj tell me precisely of what complexion . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj of the sea - water green , sir . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj is that one of the four complexions ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj as i have read , sir ; and the best of them too . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj green , indeed , is the colour of lovers ; but to have a love 
▁ of that colour , methinks xxmaj samson had small reason for it . xxmaj he 
▁ surely affected her for her wit . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj it was so , sir ; for she had a green wit . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj my love is most immaculate white and red . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj most maculate thoughts , master , are mask'd under such 
▁ colours . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj define , define , well - educated infant . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj my father 's wit my mother 's tongue assist me ! 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sweet invocation of a child ; most pretty , and pathetical ! 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj if she be made of white and red , 
▁ xxmaj her faults will ne'er be known ; 
▁ xxmaj for blushing cheeks by faults are bred , 
▁ xxmaj and fears by pale white shown . 
▁ xxmaj then if she fear , or be to blame , 
▁ xxmaj by this you shall not know ; 
▁ xxmaj for still her cheeks possess the same 
▁ xxmaj which native she doth owe . 
▁ a dangerous rhyme , master , against the reason of white and red . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj is there not a ballad , boy , of the xxmaj king and the xxmaj beggar ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj the world was very guilty of such a ballad some three ages 
▁ since ; but i think now ' tis not to be found ; or if it were , it 
▁ would neither serve for the writing nor the tune . 
▁ xxup armado . i will have that subject newly writ o'er , that i may 
▁ example my digression by some mighty precedent . xxmaj boy , i do love 
▁ that country girl that i took in the park with the rational hind 
▁ xxmaj costard ; she deserves well . 
▁ xxup moth . [ aside ] xxmaj to be whipt ; and yet a better love than my master . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sing , boy ; my spirit grows heavy in love . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj and that 's great marvel , loving a light wench . 
▁ xxup armado . i say , sing . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj forbear till this company be past . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dull , xxup costard , and xxup jaquenetta 

▁ xxup dull . xxmaj sir , the xxmaj duke 's pleasure is that you keep xxmaj costard safe ; and 
▁ you must suffer him to take no delight nor no penance ; but ' a 
▁ must fast three days a week . xxmaj for this damsel , i must keep her at 
▁ the park ; she is allow'd for the day - woman . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxup armado . i do betray myself with blushing . xxmaj maid ! 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj man ! 
▁ xxup armado . i will visit thee at the lodge . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj that 's hereby . 
▁ xxup armado . i know where it is situate . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj lord , how wise you are ! 
▁ xxup armado . i will tell thee wonders . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj with that face ? 
▁ xxup armado . i love thee . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj so i heard you say . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj and so , farewell . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj fair weather after you ! 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj come , xxmaj jaquenetta , away . xxmaj exit with xxup jaquenetta 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj villain , thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be 
▁ pardoned . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj well , sir , i hope when i do it i shall do it on a full 
▁ stomach . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj thou shalt be heavily punished . 
▁ xxup costard . i am more bound to you than your fellows , for they are but 
▁ lightly rewarded . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj take away this villain ; shut him up . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj come , you transgressing slave , away . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj let me not be pent up , sir ; i will fast , being loose . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj no , sir ; that were fast , and loose . xxmaj thou shalt to prison . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj well , if ever i do see the merry days of desolation that i 
▁ have seen , some shall see . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj what shall some see ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj nay , nothing , xxmaj master xxmaj moth , but what they look upon . xxmaj it is 
▁ not for prisoners to be too silent in their words , and therefore 
▁ i will say nothing . i thank xxmaj god i have as little patience as 
▁ another man , and therefore i can be quiet . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup moth and xxup costard 
▁ xxup armado . i do affect the very ground , which is base , where her shoe , 
▁ which is baser , guided by her foot , which is basest , doth tread . 
▁ i shall be forsworn- which is a great argument of falsehood- if i 
▁ love . xxmaj and how can that be true love which is falsely attempted ? 
▁ xxmaj love is a familiar ; xxmaj love is a devil . xxmaj there is no evil angel but 
▁ xxmaj love . xxmaj yet was xxmaj samson so tempted , and he had an excellent 
▁ strength ; yet was xxmaj solomon so seduced , and he had a very good wit . 
▁ xxmaj cupid 's butt - shaft is too hard for xxmaj hercules ' club , and therefore 
▁ too much odds for a xxmaj spaniard 's rapier . xxmaj the first and second cause 
▁ will not serve my turn ; the passado he respects not , the duello 
▁ he regards not ; his disgrace is to be called boy , but his glory 
▁ is to subdue men . xxmaj adieu , valour ; rust , rapier ; be still , drum ; 
▁ for your manager is in love ; yea , he loveth . xxmaj assist me , some 
▁ extemporal god of rhyme , for i am sure i shall turn sonnet . 
▁ xxmaj devise , wit ; write , pen ; for i am for whole volumes in folio . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter the xxup princess xxup of xxup france , with three attending ladies , 
 xxup rosaline , xxup maria , xxup katharine , xxup boyet , and two other xxup lords 

▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj now , madam , summon up your dearest spirits . 
▁ xxmaj consider who the xxmaj king your father sends , 
▁ xxmaj to whom he sends , and what 's his embassy : 
▁ xxmaj yourself , held precious in the world 's esteem , 
▁ xxmaj to parley with the sole inheritor 
▁ xxmaj of all perfections that a man may owe , 
▁ xxmaj matchless xxmaj navarre ; the plea of no less weight 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj aquitaine , a dowry for a queen . 
▁ xxmaj be now as prodigal of all dear grace 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj nature was in making graces dear , 
▁ xxmaj when she did starve the general world beside 
▁ xxmaj and prodigally gave them all to you . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj good xxmaj lord xxmaj boyet , my beauty , though but mean , 
▁ xxmaj needs not the painted flourish of your praise . 
▁ xxmaj beauty is bought by judgment of the eye , 
▁ xxmaj not utt'red by base sale of chapmen 's tongues ; 
▁ i am less proud to hear you tell my worth 
▁ xxmaj than you much willing to be counted wise 
▁ xxmaj in spending your wit in the praise of mine . 
▁ xxmaj but now to task the tasker : good xxmaj boyet , 
▁ xxmaj you are not ignorant all - telling fame 
▁ xxmaj doth noise abroad xxmaj navarre hath made a vow , 
▁ xxmaj till painful study shall outwear three years , 
▁ xxmaj no woman may approach his silent court . 
▁ xxmaj therefore to 's seemeth it a needful course , 
▁ xxmaj before we enter his forbidden gates , 
▁ xxmaj to know his pleasure ; and in that behalf , 
▁ xxmaj bold of your worthiness , we single you 
▁ xxmaj as our best - moving fair solicitor . 
▁ xxmaj tell him the daughter of the xxmaj king of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj on serious business , craving quick dispatch , 
▁ xxmaj importunes personal conference with his xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxmaj haste , signify so much ; while we attend , 
▁ xxmaj like humble - visag'd suitors , his high will . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj proud of employment , willingly i go . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj all pride is willing pride , and yours is so . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup boyet 
▁ xxmaj who are the votaries , my loving lords , 
▁ xxmaj that are vow - fellows with this virtuous duke ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj lord xxmaj longaville is one . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj know you the man ? 
▁ xxup maria . i know him , madam ; at a marriage feast , 
▁ xxmaj between xxmaj lord xxmaj perigort and the beauteous heir 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj jaques xxmaj falconbridge , solemnized 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj normandy , saw i this xxmaj longaville . 
▁ a man of sovereign parts , peerless esteem'd , 
▁ xxmaj well fitted in arts , glorious in arms ; 
▁ xxmaj nothing becomes him ill that he would well . 
▁ xxmaj the only soil of his fair virtue 's gloss , 
▁ xxmaj if virtue 's gloss will stain with any soil , 
▁ xxmaj is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a will , 
▁ xxmaj whose edge hath power to cut , whose will still wills 
▁ xxmaj it should none spare that come within his power . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj some merry mocking lord , belike ; is't so ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj they say so most that most his humours know . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj such short - liv'd wits do wither as they grow . 
▁ xxmaj who are the rest ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj the young xxmaj dumain , a well - accomplish'd youth , 
▁ xxmaj of all that virtue love for virtue loved ; 
▁ xxmaj most power to do most harm , least knowing ill , 
▁ xxmaj for he hath wit to make an ill shape good , 
▁ xxmaj and shape to win grace though he had no wit . 
▁ i saw him at the xxmaj duke xxmaj alencon 's once ; 
▁ xxmaj and much too little of that good i saw 
▁ xxmaj is my report to his great worthiness . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj another of these students at that time 
▁ xxmaj was there with him , if i have heard a truth . 
▁ xxmaj berowne they call him ; but a merrier man , 
▁ xxmaj within the limit of becoming mirth , 
▁ i never spent an hour 's talk withal . 
▁ xxmaj his eye begets occasion for his wit , 
▁ xxmaj for every object that the one doth catch 
▁ xxmaj the other turns to a mirth - moving jest , 
▁ xxmaj which his fair tongue , conceit 's expositor , 
▁ xxmaj delivers in such apt and gracious words 
▁ xxmaj that aged ears play truant at his tales , 
▁ xxmaj and younger hearings are quite ravished ; 
▁ xxmaj so sweet and voluble is his discourse . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj god bless my ladies ! xxmaj are they all in love , 
▁ xxmaj that every one her own hath garnished 
▁ xxmaj with such bedecking ornaments of praise ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj here comes xxmaj boyet . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup boyet 

▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj now , what admittance , lord ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj navarre had notice of your fair approach , 
▁ xxmaj and he and his competitors in oath 
▁ xxmaj were all address'd to meet you , gentle lady , 
▁ xxmaj before i came . xxmaj marry , thus much i have learnt : 
▁ xxmaj he rather means to lodge you in the field , 
▁ xxmaj like one that comes here to besiege his court , 
▁ xxmaj than seek a dispensation for his oath , 
▁ xxmaj to let you enter his unpeopled house . 
▁ [ the xxup ladies - in - waiting mask ] 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup king , xxup longaville , xxup dumain , xxup berowne , 
▁ and xxup attendants 

▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj navarre . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj fair xxmaj princess , welcome to the court of xxmaj navarre . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . ' fair ' i give you back again ; and ' welcome ' i 
▁ have not yet . xxmaj the roof of this court is too high to be yours , and 
▁ welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you shall be welcome , madam , to my court . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . i will be welcome then ; conduct me thither . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj hear me , dear lady : i have sworn an oath- 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj our xxmaj lady help my lord ! xxmaj he 'll be forsworn . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj not for the world , fair madam , by my will . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj why , will shall break it ; will , and nothing 
▁ else . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj your ladyship is ignorant what it is . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj were my lord so , his ignorance were wise , 
▁ xxmaj where now his knowledge must prove ignorance . 
▁ i hear your xxmaj grace hath sworn out house - keeping . 
▁ ' tis deadly sin to keep that oath , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj and sin to break it . 
▁ xxmaj but pardon me , i am too sudden bold ; 
▁ xxmaj to teach a teacher ill beseemeth me . 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming , 
▁ xxmaj and suddenly resolve me in my suit . [ giving a paper ] 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj madam , i will , if suddenly i may . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxup you xxmaj will the sooner that i were away , 
▁ xxmaj for you 'll prove perjur'd if you make me stay . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj did not i dance with you in xxmaj brabant once ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj did not i dance with you in xxmaj brabant once ? 
▁ xxup berowne . i know you did . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj how needless was it then to ask the question ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj you must not be so quick . 
▁ xxup katharine . ' tis long of you , that spur me with such questions . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj your wit 's too hot , it speeds too fast , ' twill tire . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj not till it leave the rider in the mire . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj what time o ' day ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj the hour that fools should ask . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj now fair befall your mask ! 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj fair fall the face it covers ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj and send you many lovers ! 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj amen , so you be none . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj nay , then will i be gone . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj madam , your father here doth intimate 
▁ xxmaj the payment of a hundred thousand crowns ; 
▁ xxmaj being but the one half of an entire sum 
▁ xxmaj disbursed by my father in his wars . 
▁ xxmaj but say that he or we , as neither have , 
▁ xxmaj receiv'd that sum , yet there remains unpaid 
▁ a hundred thousand more , in surety of the which , 
▁ xxmaj one part of xxmaj aquitaine is bound to us , 
▁ xxmaj although not valued to the money 's worth . 
▁ xxmaj if then the xxmaj king your father will restore 
▁ xxmaj but that one half which is unsatisfied , 
▁ xxmaj we will give up our right in xxmaj aquitaine , 
▁ xxmaj and hold fair friendship with his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj but that , it seems , he little purposeth , 
▁ xxmaj for here he doth demand to have repaid 
▁ a hundred thousand crowns ; and not demands , 
▁ xxmaj on payment of a hundred thousand crowns , 
▁ xxmaj to have his title live in xxmaj aquitaine ; 
▁ xxmaj which we much rather had depart withal , 
▁ xxmaj and have the money by our father lent , 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj aquitaine so gelded as it is . 
▁ xxmaj dear xxmaj princess , were not his requests so far 
▁ xxmaj from reason 's yielding , your fair self should make 
▁ a yielding ' gainst some reason in my breast , 
▁ xxmaj and go well satisfied to xxmaj france again . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj you do the xxmaj king my father too much wrong , 
▁ xxmaj and wrong the reputation of your name , 
▁ xxmaj in so unseeming to confess receipt 
▁ xxmaj of that which hath so faithfully been paid . 
▁ xxup king . i do protest i never heard of it ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if you prove it , xxmaj i 'll repay it back 
▁ xxmaj or yield up xxmaj aquitaine . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj we arrest your word . 
▁ xxmaj boyet , you can produce acquittances 
▁ xxmaj for such a sum from special officers 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj charles his father . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj satisfy me so . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj so please your xxmaj grace , the packet is not come , 
▁ xxmaj where that and other specialties are bound ; 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow you shall have a sight of them . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj it shall suffice me ; at which interview 
▁ xxmaj all liberal reason i will yield unto . 
▁ xxmaj meantime receive such welcome at my hand 
▁ xxmaj as honour , without breach of honour , may 
▁ xxmaj make tender of to thy true worthiness . 
▁ xxmaj you may not come , fair xxmaj princess , within my gates ; 
▁ xxmaj but here without you shall be so receiv'd 
▁ xxmaj as you shall deem yourself lodg'd in my heart , 
▁ xxmaj though so denied fair harbour in my house . 
▁ xxmaj your own good thoughts excuse me , and farewell . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow shall we visit you again . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj sweet health and fair desires consort your 
▁ xxmaj grace ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj thy own wish wish i thee in every place . 
▁ xxmaj exit with attendants 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj lady , i will commend you to mine own heart . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj pray you , do my commendations ; 
▁ i would be glad to see it . 
▁ xxup berowne . i would you heard it groan . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj is the fool sick ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj sick at the heart . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj alack , let it blood . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj would that do it good ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj my physic says ' ay . ' 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj will xxup you prick't with your eye ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj no point , with my knife . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj now , xxmaj god save thy life ! 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj and yours from long living ! 
▁ xxup berowne . i can not stay thanksgiving . [ retiring ] 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj sir , i pray you , a word : what lady is that same ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj the heir of xxmaj alencon , xxmaj katharine her name . 
▁ xxup dumain . a gallant lady ! xxmaj monsieur , fare you well . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup longaville . i beseech you a word : what is she in the white ? 
▁ xxup boyet . a woman sometimes , an you saw her in the light . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj perchance light in the light . i desire her name . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj she hath but one for herself ; to desire that were a shame . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj pray you , sir , whose daughter ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj her mother 's , i have heard . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj god 's blessing on your beard ! 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj good sir , be not offended ; 
▁ xxmaj she is an heir of xxmaj falconbridge . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj nay , my choler is ended . 
▁ xxmaj she is a most sweet lady . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj not unlike , sir ; that may be . xxmaj exit xxup longaville 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj what 's her name in the cap ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj rosaline , by good hap . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj is she wedded or no ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj to her will , sir , or so . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj you are welcome , sir ; adieu ! 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj farewell to me , sir , and welcome to you . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup berowne . xxup ladies xxmaj unmask 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj that last is xxmaj berowne , the merry mad - cap lord ; 
▁ xxmaj not a word with him but a jest . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj and every jest but a word . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj it was well done of you to take him at his 
▁ word . 
▁ xxup boyet . i was as willing to grapple as he was to board . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj two hot sheeps , marry ! 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj and wherefore not ships ? 
▁ xxmaj no sheep , sweet lamb , unless we feed on your lips . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj you sheep and i pasture- shall that finish the jest ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj so you grant pasture for me . [ offering to kiss her ] 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj not so , gentle beast ; 
▁ xxmaj my lips are no common , though several they be . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj belonging to whom ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj to my fortunes and me . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj good wits will be jangling ; but , gentles , 
▁ agree ; 
▁ xxmaj this civil war of wits were much better used 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj navarre and his book - men , for here ' tis abused . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj if my observation , which very seldom lies , 
▁ xxmaj by the heart 's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes , 
▁ xxmaj deceive me not now , xxmaj navarre is infected . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj with what ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj with that which we lovers entitle ' affected . ' 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj your reason ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj why , all his behaviours did make their retire 
▁ xxmaj to the court of his eye , peeping thorough desire . 
▁ xxmaj his heart , like an agate , with your print impressed , 
▁ xxmaj proud with his form , in his eye pride expressed ; 
▁ xxmaj his tongue , all impatient to speak and not see , 
▁ xxmaj did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be ; 
▁ xxmaj all senses to that sense did make their repair , 
▁ xxmaj to feel only looking on fairest of fair . 
▁ xxmaj methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye , 
▁ xxmaj as jewels in crystal for some prince to buy ; 
▁ xxmaj who , tend'ring their own worth from where they were glass'd , 
▁ xxmaj did point you to buy them , along as you pass'd . 
▁ xxmaj his face 's own margent did quote such amazes 
▁ xxmaj that all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give you xxmaj aquitaine and all that is his , 
▁ xxmaj an you give him for my sake but one loving kiss . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj come , to our pavilion . xxmaj boyet is dispos'd . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj but to speak that in words which his eye hath disclos'd ; 
▁ i only have made a mouth of his eye , 
▁ xxmaj by adding a tongue which i know will not lie . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj thou art an old love - monger , and speakest skilfully . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj he is xxmaj cupid 's grandfather , and learns news of him . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj then was xxmaj venus like her mother ; for her father is but 
▁ grim . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj do you hear , my mad wenches ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj what , then ; do you see ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ay , our way to be gone . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj you are too hard for me . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter xxup armado and xxup moth 

▁ xxup armado . xxmaj warble , child ; make passionate my sense of hearing . 
▁ [ moth sings xxmaj concolinel ] 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sweet air ! xxmaj go , tenderness of years , take this key , give 
▁ enlargement to the swain , bring him festinately hither ; i must 
▁ employ him in a letter to my love . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj master , will you win your love with a xxmaj french brawl ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj how meanest thou ? xxmaj brawling in xxmaj french ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj no , my complete master ; but to jig off a tune at the tongue 's 
▁ end , canary to it with your feet , humour it with turning up your 
▁ eyelids , sigh a note and sing a note , sometime through the 
▁ throat , as if you swallowed love with singing love , sometime 
▁ through the nose , as if you snuff'd up love by smelling love , 
▁ with your hat penthouse - like o'er the shop of your eyes , with 
▁ your arms cross'd on your thin - belly doublet , like a rabbit on a 
▁ spit , or your hands in your pocket , like a man after the old 
▁ painting ; and keep not too long in one tune , but a snip and away . 
▁ xxmaj these are complements , these are humours ; these betray nice 
▁ wenches , that would be betrayed without these ; and make them men 
▁ of note- do you note me?- that most are affected to these . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj how hast thou purchased this experience ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj by my penny of observation . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj but xxup o- but xxup o- 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj the hobby - horse is forgot . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj call'st thou my love ' hobby - horse ' ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj no , master ; the hobby - horse is but a colt , and your love 
▁ perhaps a hackney . xxmaj but have you forgot your love ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj almost i had . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj negligent student ! learn her by heart . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj by heart and in heart , boy . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj and out of heart , master ; all those three i will prove . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj what wilt thou prove ? 
▁ xxup moth . a man , if i live ; and this , by , in , and without , upon the 
▁ instant . xxmaj by heart you love her , because your heart can not come by 
▁ her ; in heart you love her , because your heart is in love with 
▁ her ; and out of heart you love her , being out of heart that you 
▁ can not enjoy her . 
▁ xxup armado . i am all these three . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj and three times as much more , and yet nothing at all . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj fetch hither the swain ; he must carry me a letter . 
▁ xxup moth . a message well sympathiz'd- a horse to be ambassador for an 
▁ ass . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj ha , ha , what sayest thou ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj marry , sir , you must send the ass upon the horse , for he is 
▁ very slow - gaited . xxmaj but i go . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the way is but short ; away . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj as swift as lead , sir . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the meaning , pretty ingenious ? 
▁ xxmaj is not lead a metal heavy , dull , and slow ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj minime , honest master ; or rather , master , no . 
▁ xxup armado . i say lead is slow . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj you are too swift , sir , to say so : 
▁ xxmaj is that lead slow which is fir'd from a gun ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sweet smoke of rhetoric ! 
▁ xxmaj he reputes me a cannon ; and the bullet , that 's he ; 
▁ i shoot thee at the swain . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj thump , then , and i flee . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup armado . a most acute juvenal ; volable and free of grace ! 
▁ xxmaj by thy favour , sweet welkin , i must sigh in thy face ; 
▁ xxmaj most rude melancholy , valour gives thee place . 
▁ xxmaj my herald is return'd . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup moth with xxup costard 

▁ xxup moth . a wonder , master ! here 's a costard broken in a shin . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj some enigma , some riddle ; come , thy l'envoy ; begin . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj no egma , no riddle , no l'envoy ; no salve in the mail , sir . 
▁ xxup o , sir , plantain , a plain plantain ; no l'envoy , no l'envoy ; no 
▁ salve , sir , but a plantain ! 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj by virtue thou enforcest laughter ; thy silly thought , my 
▁ spleen ; the heaving of my lungs provokes me to ridiculous 
▁ smiling . xxup o , pardon me , my stars ! xxmaj doth the inconsiderate take 
▁ salve for l'envoy , and the word ' l'envoy ' for a salve ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj do the wise think them other ? xxmaj is not l'envoy a salve ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj no , page ; it is an epilogue or discourse to make plain 
▁ xxmaj some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain . 
▁ i will example it : 
▁ xxmaj the fox , the ape , and the humble - bee , 
▁ xxmaj were still at odds , being but three . 
▁ xxmaj there 's the moral . xxmaj now the l'envoy . 
▁ xxup moth . i will add the l'envoy . xxmaj say the moral again . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the fox , the ape , and the humble - bee , 
▁ xxmaj were still at odds , being but three . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj until the goose came out of door , 
▁ xxmaj and stay'd the odds by adding four . 
▁ xxmaj now will i begin your moral , and do you follow with my l'envoy . 
▁ xxmaj the fox , the ape , and the humble - bee , 
▁ xxmaj were still at odds , being but three . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj until the goose came out of door , 
▁ xxmaj staying the odds by adding four . 
▁ xxup moth . a good l'envoy , ending in the goose ; would you desire more ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj the boy hath sold him a bargain , a goose , that 's flat . 
▁ xxmaj sir , your pennyworth is good , an your goose be fat . 
▁ xxmaj to sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose ; 
▁ xxmaj let me see : a fat l'envoy ; ay , that 's a fat goose . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj come hither , come hither . xxmaj how did this argument begin ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj by saying that a costard was broken in a shin . 
▁ xxmaj then call'd you for the l'envoy . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj true , and i for a plantain . xxmaj thus came your argument in ; 
▁ xxmaj then the boy 's fat l'envoy , the goose that you bought ; 
▁ xxmaj and he ended the market . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj but tell me : how was there a costard broken in a shin ? 
▁ xxup moth . i will tell you sensibly . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj thou hast no feeling of it , xxmaj moth ; i will speak that 
▁ l'envoy . 
▁ xxup i , xxmaj costard , running out , that was safely within , 
▁ xxmaj fell over the threshold and broke my shin . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj we will talk no more of this matter . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj till there be more matter in the shin . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sirrah xxmaj costard . i will enfranchise thee . 
▁ xxup costard . xxup o , xxmaj marry me to one xxmaj frances ! i smell some l'envoy , some 
▁ goose , in this . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj by my sweet soul , i mean setting thee at liberty , 
▁ enfreedoming thy person ; thou wert immured , restrained , 
▁ captivated , bound . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj true , true ; and now you will be my purgation , and let me 
▁ loose . 
▁ xxup armado . i give thee thy liberty , set thee from durance ; and , in 
▁ lieu thereof , impose on thee nothing but this : bear this 
▁ significant [ giving a letter ] to the country maid xxmaj jaquenetta ; 
▁ there is remuneration , for the best ward of mine honour is 
▁ rewarding my dependents . xxmaj moth , follow . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj like the sequel , xxup i. xxmaj signior xxmaj costard , adieu . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj my sweet ounce of man 's flesh , my incony xxmaj jew ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup moth 
▁ xxmaj now will i look to his remuneration . xxmaj remuneration ! xxup o , that 's the 
▁ xxmaj latin word for three farthings . xxmaj three farthings- remuneration . 
▁ ' what 's the price of this inkle?'- ' one penny . '- ' no , xxmaj i 'll give 
▁ you a remuneration . ' xxmaj why , it carries it . xxmaj remuneration ! xxmaj why , it is 
▁ a fairer name than xxmaj french crown . i will never buy and sell out of 
▁ this word . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup berowne 

▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj my good knave xxmaj costard , exceedingly well met ! 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj pray you , sir , how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for 
▁ a remuneration ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj what is a remuneration ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj marry , sir , halfpenny farthing . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj why , then , three - farthing worth of silk . 
▁ xxup costard . i thank your worship . xxmaj god be wi ' you ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj stay , slave ; i must employ thee . 
▁ xxmaj as thou wilt win my favour , good my knave , 
▁ xxmaj do one thing for me that i shall entreat . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj when would you have it done , sir ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this afternoon . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj well , i will do it , sir ; fare you well . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj thou knowest not what it is . 
▁ xxup costard . i shall know , sir , when i have done it . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj why , villain , thou must know first . 
▁ xxup costard . i will come to your worship to - morrow morning . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj it must be done this afternoon . 
▁ xxmaj hark , slave , it is but this : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj princess comes to hunt here in the park , 
▁ xxmaj and in her train there is a gentle lady ; 
▁ xxmaj when tongues speak sweetly , then they name her name , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj rosaline they call her . xxmaj ask for her , 
▁ xxmaj and to her white hand see thou do commend 
▁ xxmaj this seal'd - up counsel . xxmaj there 's thy guerdon ; go . 
▁ [ giving him a shilling ] 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj gardon , o sweet gardon ! better than remuneration ; a 
▁ ' leven - pence farthing better ; most sweet gardon ! i will do it , 
▁ sir , in print . xxmaj gardon- remuneration ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj and xxup i , forsooth , in love ; xxup i , that have been love 's whip ; 
▁ a very beadle to a humorous sigh ; 
▁ a critic , nay , a night - watch constable ; 
▁ a domineering pedant o'er the boy , 
▁ xxmaj than whom no mortal so magnificent ! 
▁ xxmaj this wimpled , whining , purblind , wayward boy , 
▁ xxmaj this senior - junior , giant - dwarf , xxmaj dan xxmaj cupid ; 
▁ xxmaj regent of love - rhymes , lord of folded arms , 
▁ xxmaj th ' anointed sovereign of sighs and groans , 
▁ xxmaj liege of all loiterers and malcontents , 
▁ xxmaj dread prince of plackets , king of codpieces , 
▁ xxmaj sole imperator , and great general 
▁ xxmaj of trotting paritors . o my little heart ! 
▁ xxmaj and i to be a corporal of his field , 
▁ xxmaj and wear his colours like a tumbler 's hoop ! 
▁ xxmaj what ! i love , i sue , i seek a wife- 
▁ a woman , that is like a xxmaj german clock , 
▁ xxmaj still a - repairing , ever out of frame , 
▁ xxmaj and never going aright , being a watch , 
▁ xxmaj but being watch'd that it may still go right ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , to be perjur'd , which is worst of all ; 
▁ xxmaj and , among three , to love the worst of all , 
▁ a whitely wanton with a velvet brow , 
▁ xxmaj with two pitch balls stuck in her face for eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , and , by heaven , one that will do the deed , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj argus were her eunuch and her guard . 
▁ xxmaj and i to sigh for her ! to watch for her ! 
▁ xxmaj to pray for her ! xxmaj go to ; it is a plague 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj cupid will impose for my neglect 
▁ xxmaj of his almighty dreadful little might . 
▁ xxmaj well , i will love , write , sigh , pray , sue , and groan : 
▁ xxmaj some men must love my lady , and some xxmaj joan . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter the xxup princess , xxup rosaline , xxup maria , xxup katharine , xxup boyet , xxup lords , xxup attendants , 
 and a xxup forester 

▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj was that the xxmaj king that spurr'd his horse so 
▁ hard 
▁ xxmaj against the steep uprising of the hill ? 
▁ xxup boyet . i know not ; but i think it was not he . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj whoe'er ' a was , ' a show'd a mounting mind . 
▁ xxmaj well , lords , to - day we shall have our dispatch ; 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj saturday we will return to xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj then , forester , my friend , where is the bush 
▁ xxmaj that we must stand and play the murderer in ? 
▁ xxup forester . xxmaj hereby , upon the edge of yonder coppice ; 
▁ a stand where you may make the fairest shoot . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . i thank my beauty i am fair that shoot , 
▁ xxmaj and thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot . 
▁ xxup forester . xxmaj pardon me , madam , for i meant not so . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj what , what ? xxmaj first praise me , and again say no ? 
▁ o short - liv'd pride ! xxmaj not fair ? xxmaj alack for woe ! 
▁ xxup forester . xxmaj yes , madam , fair . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj nay , never paint me now ; 
▁ xxmaj where fair is not , praise can not mend the brow . 
▁ xxmaj here , good my glass , take this for telling true : 
▁ [ xxmaj giving him money ] 
▁ xxmaj fair payment for foul words is more than due . 
▁ xxup forester . xxmaj nothing but fair is that which you inherit . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj see , see , my beauty will be sav'd by merit . 
▁ o heresy in fair , fit for these days ! 
▁ a giving hand , though foul , shall have fair praise . 
▁ xxmaj but come , the bow . xxmaj now mercy goes to kill , 
▁ xxmaj and shooting well is then accounted ill ; 
▁ xxmaj thus will i save my credit in the shoot : 
▁ xxmaj not wounding , pity would not let me do't ; 
▁ xxmaj if wounding , then it was to show my skill , 
▁ xxmaj that more for praise than purpose meant to kill . 
▁ xxmaj and , out of question , so it is sometimes : 
▁ xxmaj glory grows guilty of detested crimes , 
▁ xxmaj when , for fame 's sake , for praise , an outward part , 
▁ xxmaj we bend to that the working of the heart ; 
▁ xxmaj as i for praise alone now seek to spill 
▁ xxmaj the poor deer 's blood that my heart means no ill . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj do not curst wives hold that self - sovereignty 
▁ xxmaj only for praise sake , when they strive to be 
▁ xxmaj lords o'er their lords ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj only for praise ; and praise we may afford 
▁ xxmaj to any lady that subdues a lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup costard 

▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj here comes a member of the commonwealth . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj god dig - you - den all ! xxmaj pray you , which is the head lady ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj thou shalt know her , fellow , by the rest that 
▁ have no heads . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj which is the greatest lady , the highest ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj the thickest and the tallest . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj the thickest and the tallest ! xxmaj it is so ; truth is truth . 
▁ xxmaj an your waist , mistress , were as slender as my wit , 
▁ xxmaj one o ' these maids ' girdles for your waist should be fit . 
▁ xxmaj are not you the chief woman ? xxmaj you are the thickest here . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj what 's your will , sir ? xxmaj what 's your will ? 
▁ xxup costard . i have a letter from xxmaj monsieur xxmaj berowne to one 
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj rosaline . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxup o , thy letter , thy letter ! xxmaj he 's a good friend 
▁ of mine . 
▁ xxmaj stand aside , good bearer . xxmaj boyet , you can carve . 
▁ xxmaj break up this capon . 
▁ xxup boyet . i am bound to serve . 
▁ xxmaj this letter is mistook ; it importeth none here . 
▁ xxmaj it is writ to xxmaj jaquenetta . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj we will read it , i swear . 
▁ xxmaj break the neck of the wax , and every one give ear . 
▁ xxup boyet . [ reads ] ' by heaven , that thou art fair is most infallible ; 
▁ true that thou art beauteous ; truth itself that thou art lovely . 
▁ xxmaj more fairer than fair , beautiful than beauteous , truer than truth 
▁ itself , have commiseration on thy heroical vassal . xxmaj the 
▁ magnanimous and most illustrate king xxmaj cophetua set eye upon the 
▁ pernicious and indubitate beggar xxmaj zenelophon ; and he it was that 
▁ might rightly say , ' veni , vidi , vici ' ; which to annothanize in 
▁ the vulgar,- o base and obscure vulgar!- videlicet , xxmaj he came , saw , 
▁ and overcame . xxmaj he came , one ; saw , two ; overcame , three . xxmaj who came?- 
▁ the king . xxmaj why did he come?- to see . xxmaj why did he see?-to overcome . 
▁ xxmaj to whom came he?- to the beggar . xxmaj what saw he?- the beggar . xxmaj who 
▁ overcame he?- the beggar . xxmaj the conclusion is victory ; on whose 
▁ side?- the king 's . xxmaj the captive is enrich'd ; on whose side?- the 
▁ beggar 's . xxmaj the catastrophe is a nuptial ; on whose side?- the 
▁ king 's . xxmaj no , on both in one , or one in both . i am the king , for so 
▁ stands the comparison ; thou the beggar , for so witnesseth thy 
▁ lowliness . xxmaj shall i command thy love ? i may . xxmaj shall i enforce thy 
▁ love ? i could . xxmaj shall i entreat thy love ? i will . xxmaj what shalt thou 
▁ exchange for rags?- robes , for tittles?- titles , for thyself ? 
▁ -me . xxmaj thus expecting thy reply , i profane my lips on thy foot , my 
▁ eyes on thy picture , and my heart on thy every part . 
▁ xxmaj thine in the dearest design of industry , 
▁ xxup don xxup adriano xxup de xxup armado . 

▁ ' thus dost thou hear the xxmaj nemean lion roar 
▁ ' gainst thee , thou lamb , that standest as his prey ; 
▁ xxmaj submissive fall his princely feet before , 
▁ xxmaj and he from forage will incline to play . 
▁ xxmaj but if thou strive , poor soul , what are thou then ? 
▁ xxmaj food for his rage , repasture for his den . ' 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj what plume of feathers is he that indited this 
▁ letter ? 
▁ xxmaj what vane ? xxmaj what weathercock ? xxmaj did you ever hear better ? 
▁ xxup boyet . i am much deceived but i remember the style . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj else your memory is bad , going o'er it 
▁ erewhile . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj this xxmaj armado is a xxmaj spaniard , that keeps here in court ; 
▁ a phantasime , a xxmaj monarcho , and one that makes sport 
▁ xxmaj to the xxmaj prince and his book - mates . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj thou fellow , a word . 
▁ xxmaj who gave thee this letter ? 
▁ xxup costard . i told you : my lord . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj to whom shouldst thou give it ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj from my lord to my lady . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj from which lord to which lady ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj from my xxmaj lord xxmaj berowne , a good master of mine , 
▁ xxmaj to a lady of xxmaj france that he call'd xxmaj rosaline . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj thou hast mistaken his letter . xxmaj come , lords , 
▁ away . 
▁ [ to xxup rosaline ] xxmaj here , sweet , put up this ; ' twill be thine another 
▁ day . xxmaj exeunt xxup princess and xxup train 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj who is the shooter ? who is the shooter ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj shall i teach you to know ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj ay , my continent of beauty . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj why , she that bears the bow . 
▁ xxmaj finely put off ! 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj my lady goes to kill horns ; but , if thou marry , 
▁ xxmaj hang me by the neck , if horns that year miscarry . 
▁ xxmaj finely put on ! 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj well then , i am the shooter . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj and who is your deer ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj if we choose by the horns , yourself come not near . 
▁ xxmaj finely put on indeed ! 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj you xxmaj still wrangle with her , xxmaj boyet , and she strikes at the 
▁ brow . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj but she herself is hit lower . xxmaj have i hit her now ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj shall i come upon thee with an old saying , that was a man 
▁ when xxmaj king xxmaj pepin of xxmaj france was a little boy , as touching the hit 
▁ it ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj so i may answer thee with one as old , that was a woman when 
▁ xxmaj queen xxmaj guinever of xxmaj britain was a little wench , as touching the hit 
▁ it . 
▁ xxup rosaline . [ singing ] 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not hit it , hit it , hit it , 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not hit it , my good man . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj an i can not , can not , can not , 
▁ xxmaj an i can not , another can . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup rosaline and xxup katharine 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj by my troth , most pleasant ! xxmaj how both did fit it ! 
▁ xxup maria . a mark marvellous well shot ; for they both did hit it . 
▁ xxup boyet . a mark ! xxup o , mark but that mark ! a mark , says my lady ! 
▁ xxmaj let the mark have a prick in't , to mete at , if it may be . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj wide o ' the bow - hand ! xxup i ' faith , your hand is out . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj indeed , ' a must shoot nearer , or he 'll ne'er hit the 
▁ clout . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj an if my hand be out , then belike your hand is in . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj come , come , you talk greasily ; your lips grow foul . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj she 's too hard for you at pricks , sir ; challenge her to 
▁ bowl . 
▁ xxup boyet . i fear too much rubbing ; good - night , my good owl . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup boyet and xxup maria 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj by my soul , a swain , a most simple clown ! 
▁ xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord ! how the ladies and i have put him down ! 
▁ xxup o ' my troth , most sweet jests , most incony vulgar wit ! 
▁ xxmaj when it comes so smoothly off , so obscenely , as it were , so fit . 
▁ xxmaj armado a th ' t'one side- xxup o , a most dainty man ! 
▁ xxmaj to see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan ! 
▁ xxmaj to see him kiss his hand , and how most sweetly ' a will swear ! 
▁ xxmaj and his page a t ' other side , that handful of wit ! 
▁ xxmaj ah , heavens , it is a most pathetical nit ! 
▁ xxmaj sola , sola ! xxmaj exit xxup costard 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj from the shooting within , enter xxup holofernes , xxup sir xxup nathaniel , and xxup dull 

▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj very reverent sport , truly ; and done in the testimony of 
▁ a good conscience . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj the deer was , as you know , sanguis , in blood ; ripe as 
▁ the pomewater , who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo , 
▁ the sky , the welkin , the heaven ; and anon falleth like a crab on 
▁ the face of terra , the soil , the land , the earth . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj truly , xxmaj master xxmaj holofernes , the epithets are sweetly 
▁ varied , like a scholar at the least ; but , sir , i assure ye it was 
▁ a buck of the first head . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj sir xxmaj nathaniel , haud credo . 
▁ xxup dull . ' twas not a haud credo ; ' twas a pricket . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj most barbarous intimation ! yet a kind of insinuation , 
▁ as it were , in via , in way , of explication ; facere , as it were , 
▁ replication , or rather , ostentare , to show , as it were , his 
▁ inclination , after his undressed , unpolished , uneducated , 
▁ unpruned , untrained , or rather unlettered , or ratherest 
▁ unconfirmed fashion , to insert again my haud credo for a deer . 
▁ xxup dull . i xxmaj said the deer was not a haud credo ; ' twas a pricket . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj twice - sod simplicity , bis coctus ! 
▁ o thou monster xxmaj ignorance , how deformed dost thou look ! 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj sir , he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred in 
▁ a book ; 
▁ xxmaj he hath not eat paper , as it were ; he hath not drunk ink ; his 
▁ intellect is not replenished ; he is only an animal , only sensible 
▁ in the duller parts ; 
▁ xxmaj and such barren plants are set before us that we thankful should 
▁ be- 
▁ xxmaj which we of taste and feeling are- for those parts that do 
▁ fructify in us more than he . 
▁ xxmaj for as it would ill become me to be vain , indiscreet , or a fool , 
▁ xxmaj so , were there a patch set on learning , to see him in a school . 
▁ xxmaj but , omne bene , say xxup i , being of an old father 's mind : 
▁ xxmaj many can brook the weather that love not the wind . 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj you two are book - men : can you tell me by your wit 
▁ xxmaj what was a month old at xxmaj cain 's birth that 's not five weeks old as 
▁ yet ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj dictynna , goodman xxmaj dull ; xxmaj dictynna , goodman xxmaj dull . 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj what is xxmaj dictynna ? 
▁ xxup nathaniel . a title to xxmaj phoebe , to xxmaj luna , to the moon . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj the moon was a month old when xxmaj adam was no more , 
▁ xxmaj and raught not to five weeks when he came to five - score . 
▁ xxmaj th ' allusion holds in the exchange . 
▁ xxup dull . ' tis true , indeed ; the collusion holds in the exchange . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj god comfort thy capacity ! i say th ' allusion holds in 
▁ the exchange . 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj and i say the polusion holds in the exchange ; for the moon is 
▁ never but a month old ; and i say , beside , that ' twas a pricket 
▁ that the xxmaj princess kill'd . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj sir xxmaj nathaniel , will you hear an extemporal epitaph on 
▁ the death of the deer ? xxmaj and , to humour the ignorant , call the deer 
▁ the xxmaj princess kill'd a pricket . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj perge , good xxmaj master xxmaj holofernes , perge , so it shall please 
▁ you to abrogate scurrility . 
▁ xxup holofernes . i xxmaj will something affect the letter , for it argues 
▁ facility . 
▁
▁ xxmaj the preyful xxmaj princess pierc'd and prick'd a pretty pleasing 
▁ pricket . 
▁ xxmaj some say a sore ; but not a sore till now made sore with shooting . 
▁ xxmaj the dogs did yell ; put el to sore , then sorel jumps from thicket- 
▁ xxmaj or pricket sore , or else sorel ; the people fall a - hooting . 
▁ xxmaj if sore be sore , then l to sore makes fifty sores o ' sorel . 
▁ xxmaj of one sore i an hundred make by adding but one more xxup l. 

▁ xxup nathaniel . a rare talent ! 
▁ xxup dull . [ aside ] xxmaj if a talent be a claw , look how he claws him with a 
▁ talent . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj this is a gift that i have , simple , simple ; a foolish 
▁ extravagant spirit , full of forms , figures , shapes , objects , 
▁ ideas , apprehensions , motions , revolutions . xxmaj these are begot in 
▁ the ventricle of memory , nourish'd in the womb of pia mater , and 
▁ delivered upon the mellowing of occasion . xxmaj but the gift is good in 
▁ those in whom it is acute , and i am thankful for it . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj sir , i praise the xxmaj lord for you , and so may my 
▁ parishioners ; for their sons are well tutor'd by you , and their 
▁ daughters profit very greatly under you . xxmaj you are a good member of 
▁ the commonwealth . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj mehercle , if their sons be ingenious , they shall want 
▁ no instruction ; if their daughters be capable , i will put it to 
▁ them ; but , vir sapit qui pauca loquitur . a soul feminine saluteth 
▁ us . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jaquenetta and xxup costard 

▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj god give you good morrow , xxmaj master xxmaj person . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj master xxmaj person , quasi pers - one . xxmaj and if one should be 
▁ pierc'd which is the one ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj marry , xxmaj master xxmaj schoolmaster , he that is likest to a 
▁ hogshead . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj piercing a hogshead ! a good lustre of conceit in a turf 
▁ of earth ; fire enough for a flint , pearl enough for a swine ; ' tis 
▁ pretty ; it is well . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj parson , be so good as read me this letter ; 
▁ it was given me by xxmaj costard , and sent me from xxmaj don xxmaj armado . i 
▁ beseech you read it . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj fauste , precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra 
▁ xxmaj ruminat- 
▁ and so forth . xxmaj ah , good old xxmaj mantuan ! i may speak of thee as 
▁ the traveller doth of xxmaj venice : 
▁ xxmaj venetia , xxmaj venetia , 
▁ xxmaj chi non ti vede , non ti pretia . 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj mantuan , old xxmaj mantuan ! xxmaj who understandeth thee not , 
▁ loves thee not- 
▁ xxmaj ut , re , sol , la , mi , fa . 
▁ xxmaj under pardon , sir , what are the contents ? or rather as 
▁ xxmaj horace says in his- xxmaj what , my soul , verses ? 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj ay , sir , and very learned . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj let me hear a staff , a stanze , a verse ; lege , domine . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . [ reads ] ' if love make me forsworn , how shall i swear to 
▁ love ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , never faith could hold , if not to beauty vowed ! 
▁ xxmaj though to myself forsworn , to thee xxmaj i 'll faithful prove ; 
▁ xxmaj those thoughts to me were oaks , to thee like osiers bowed . 
▁ xxmaj study his bias leaves , and makes his book thine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj where all those pleasures live that art would comprehend . 
▁ xxmaj if knowledge be the mark , to know thee shall suffice ; 
▁ xxmaj well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend ; 
▁ xxmaj all ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder ; 
▁ xxmaj which is to me some praise that i thy parts admire . 
▁ xxmaj thy eye xxmaj jove 's lightning bears , thy voice his dreadful thunder , 
▁ xxmaj which , not to anger bent , is music and sweet fire . 
▁ xxmaj celestial as thou art , xxup o , pardon love this wrong , 
▁ xxmaj that singes heaven 's praise with such an earthly tongue . ' 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj you find not the apostrophas , and so miss the accent : 
▁ let me supervise the canzonet . xxmaj here are only numbers ratified ; 
▁ but , for the elegancy , facility , and golden cadence of poesy , 
▁ caret . xxmaj ovidius xxmaj naso was the man . xxmaj and why , indeed , ' naso ' but for 
▁ smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy , the jerks of 
▁ invention ? xxmaj imitari is nothing : so doth the hound his master , the 
▁ ape his keeper , the tired horse his rider . xxmaj but , damosella virgin , 
▁ was this directed to you ? 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj ay , sir , from one xxmaj monsieur xxmaj berowne , one of the strange 
▁ queen 's lords . 
▁ xxup holofernes . i will overglance the superscript : ' to the snow - white 
▁ hand of the most beauteous xxmaj lady xxmaj rosaline . ' i will look again on 
▁ the intellect of the letter , for the nomination of the party 
▁ writing to the person written unto : ' your xxmaj ladyship 's in all 
▁ desired employment , xxmaj berowne . ' xxmaj sir xxmaj nathaniel , this xxmaj berowne is one 
▁ of the votaries with the xxmaj king ; and here he hath framed a letter 
▁ to a sequent of the stranger queen 's which accidentally , or by 
▁ the way of progression , hath miscarried . xxmaj trip and go , my sweet ; 
▁ deliver this paper into the royal hand of the xxmaj king ; it may 
▁ concern much . xxmaj stay not thy compliment ; i forgive thy duty . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj good xxmaj costard , go with me . xxmaj sir , xxmaj god save your life ! 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj have with thee , my girl . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup costard and xxup jaquenetta 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj sir , you have done this in the fear of xxmaj god , very 
▁ religiously ; and , as a certain father saith- 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj sir , tell not me of the father ; i do fear colourable 
▁ colours . xxmaj but to return to the verses : did they please you , xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj nathaniel ? 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj marvellous well for the pen . 
▁ xxup holofernes . i do dine to - day at the father 's of a certain pupil of 
▁ mine ; where , if , before repast , it shall please you to gratify 
▁ the table with a grace , i will , on my privilege i have with the 
▁ parents of the foresaid child or pupil , undertake your ben 
▁ venuto ; where i will prove those verses to be very unlearned , 
▁ neither savouring of poetry , wit , nor invention . i beseech your 
▁ society . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj and thank you too ; for society , saith the text , is the 
▁ happiness of life . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj and certes , the text most infallibly concludes it .