xxbos [ to xxup dull ] xxmaj sir , i do invite you too ; you shall not say me nay : 
▁ pauca verba . xxmaj away ; the gentles are at their game , and we will to 
▁ our recreation . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter xxup berowne , with a paper his band , alone 

▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj the xxmaj king he is hunting the deer : i am coursing myself . 
▁ xxmaj they have pitch'd a toil : i am tolling in a pitch- pitch that 
▁ defiles . xxmaj defile ! a foul word . xxmaj well , ' set thee down , sorrow ! ' for 
▁ so they say the fool said , and so say xxup i , and i am the fool . xxmaj well 
▁ proved , wit . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , this love is as mad as xxmaj ajax : it kills 
▁ sheep ; it kills me- i a sheep . xxmaj well proved again o ' my side . i 
▁ will not love ; if i do , hang me . xxup i ' faith , i will not . xxup o , but her 
▁ eye ! xxmaj by this light , but for her eye , i would not love her- yes , 
▁ for her two eyes . xxmaj well , i do nothing in the world but lie , and 
▁ lie in my throat . xxmaj by heaven , i do love ; and it hath taught me to 
▁ rhyme , and to be melancholy ; and here is part of my rhyme , and 
▁ here my melancholy . xxmaj well , she hath one o ' my sonnets already ; the 
▁ clown bore it , the fool sent it , and the lady hath it : sweet 
▁ clown , sweeter fool , sweetest lady ! xxmaj by the world , i would not 
▁ care a pin if the other three were in . xxmaj here comes one with a 
▁ paper ; xxmaj god give him grace to groan ! 
▁ [ climbs into a tree ] 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king , with a paper 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj ay me ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj shot , by heaven ! xxmaj proceed , sweet xxmaj cupid ; thou hast thump'd 
▁ him with thy bird - bolt under the left pap . xxmaj in faith , secrets ! 
▁ xxup king . [ reads ] 
▁ ' so sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not 
▁ xxmaj to those fresh morning drops upon the rose , 
▁ xxmaj as thy eye - beams , when their fresh rays have smote 
▁ xxmaj the night of dew that on my cheeks down flows ; 
▁ xxmaj nor shines the silver moon one half so bright 
▁ xxmaj through the transparent bosom of the deep , 
▁ xxmaj as doth thy face through tears of mine give light . 
▁ xxmaj thou shin'st in every tear that i do weep ; 
▁ xxmaj no drop but as a coach doth carry thee ; 
▁ xxmaj so ridest thou triumphing in my woe . 
▁ xxmaj do but behold the tears that swell in me , 
▁ xxmaj and they thy glory through my grief will show . 
▁ xxmaj but do not love thyself ; then thou wilt keep 
▁ xxmaj my tears for glasses , and still make me weep . 
▁ o queen of queens ! how far dost thou excel 
▁ xxmaj no thought can think nor tongue of mortal tell . ' 
▁ xxmaj how shall she know my griefs ? xxmaj i 'll drop the paper- 
▁ xxmaj sweet leaves , shade folly . xxmaj who is he comes here ? 
▁ [ steps aside ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup longaville , with a paper 

▁ xxmaj what , xxmaj longaville , and reading ! xxmaj listen , car . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj now , in thy likeness , one more fool appear ! 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj ay me , i am forsworn ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj why , he comes in like a perjure , wearing papers . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj in love , i hope ; sweet fellowship in shame ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj one drunkard loves another of the name . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj am i the first that have been perjur'd so ? 
▁ xxup berowne . i could put thee in comfort : not by two that i know ; 
▁ xxmaj thou makest the triumviry , the corner - cap of society , 
▁ xxmaj the shape of xxmaj love 's xxmaj tyburn that hangs up simplicity . 
▁ xxup longaville . i fear these stubborn lines lack power to move . 
▁ o sweet xxmaj maria , empress of my love ! 
▁ xxmaj these numbers will i tear , and write in prose . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxup o , rhymes are guards on wanton xxmaj cupid 's hose : 
▁ xxmaj disfigure not his slop . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj this same shall go . [ he reads the sonnet ] 
▁ ' did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye , 
▁ ' gainst whom the world can not hold argument , 
▁ xxmaj persuade my heart to this false perjury ? 
▁ xxmaj vows for thee broke deserve not punishment . 
▁ a woman i forswore ; but i will prove , 
▁ xxmaj thou being a goddess , i forswore not thee : 
▁ xxmaj my vow was earthly , thou a heavenly love ; 
▁ xxmaj thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me . 
▁ xxmaj vows are but breath , and breath a vapour is ; 
▁ xxmaj then thou , fair sun , which on my earth dost shine , 
▁ xxmaj exhal'st this vapour - vow ; in thee it is . 
▁ xxmaj if broken , then it is no fault of mine ; 
▁ xxmaj if by me broke , what fool is not so wise 
▁ xxmaj to lose an oath to win a paradise ? ' 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this is the liver - vein , which makes flesh a deity , 
▁ a green goose a goddess- pure , pure idolatry . 
▁ xxmaj god amend us , xxmaj god amend ! xxmaj we are much out o ' th ' way . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup dumain , with a paper 

▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj by whom shall i send this?- xxmaj company ! xxmaj stay . 
▁ [ steps aside ] 
▁ xxup berowne . ' all hid , all hid'- an old infant play . 
▁ xxmaj like a demigod here sit i in the sky , 
▁ xxmaj and wretched fools ' secrets heedfully o'er - eye . 
▁ xxmaj more sacks to the mill ! o heavens , i have my wish ! 
▁ xxmaj dumain transformed ! xxmaj four woodcocks in a dish ! 
▁ xxup dumain . o most divine xxmaj kate ! 
▁ xxup berowne . o most profane coxcomb ! 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj by heaven , the wonder in a mortal eye ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj by earth , she is not , corporal : there you lie . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj her amber hairs for foul hath amber quoted . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj an amber - colour'd raven was well noted . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj as upright as the cedar . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj stoop , i say ; 
▁ xxmaj her shoulder is with child . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj as fair as day . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj ay , as some days ; but then no sun must shine . 
▁ xxup dumain . o that i had my wish ! 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj and i had mine ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and i mine too,.good xxmaj lord ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj amen , so i had mine ! xxmaj is not that a good word ? 
▁ xxup dumain . i would forget her ; but a fever she 
▁ xxmaj reigns in my blood , and will rememb'red be . 
▁ xxup berowne . a fever in your blood ? xxmaj why , then incision 
▁ xxmaj would let her out in saucers . xxmaj sweet misprision ! 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj once more xxmaj i 'll read the ode that i have writ . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj once more xxmaj i 'll mark how love can vary wit . 
▁ xxup dumain . [ reads ] 
▁ ' on a day - alack the day!- 
▁ xxmaj love , whose month is ever xxmaj may , 
▁ xxmaj spied a blossom passing fair 
▁ xxmaj playing in the wanton air . 
▁ xxmaj through the velvet leaves the wind , 
▁ xxmaj all unseen , can passage find ; 
▁ xxmaj that the lover , sick to death , 
▁ xxmaj wish'd himself the heaven 's breath . 
▁ " air , " quoth he " thy cheeks may blow ; 
▁ xxmaj air , would i might triumph so ! 
▁ xxmaj but , alack , my hand is sworn 
▁ xxmaj ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn ; 
▁ xxmaj vow , alack , for youth unmeet , 
▁ xxmaj youth so apt to pluck a sweet . 
▁ xxmaj do not call it sin in me 
▁ xxmaj that i am forsworn for thee ; 
▁ xxmaj thou for whom xxmaj jove would swear 
▁ xxmaj juno but an xxmaj ethiope were ; 
▁ xxmaj and deny himself for xxmaj jove , 
▁ xxmaj turning mortal for thy love . " ' 
▁ xxmaj this will i send ; and something else more plain 
▁ xxmaj that shall express my true love 's fasting pain . 
▁ xxup o , would the xxmaj king , xxmaj berowne and xxmaj longaville , 
▁ xxmaj were lovers too ! xxmaj ill , to example ill , 
▁ xxmaj would from my forehead wipe a perjur'd note ; 
▁ xxmaj for none offend where all alike do dote . 
▁ xxup longaville . [ advancing ] xxmaj dumain , thy love is far from charity , 
▁ xxmaj that in love 's grief desir'st society ; 
▁ xxmaj you may look pale , but i should blush , i know , 
▁ xxmaj to be o'erheard and taken napping so . 
▁ xxup king . [ advancing ] xxmaj come , sir , you blush ; as his , your case is such . 
▁ xxmaj you chide at him , offending twice as much : 
▁ xxmaj you do not love xxmaj maria ! xxmaj longaville 
▁ xxmaj did never sonnet for her sake compile ; 
▁ xxmaj nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart 
▁ xxmaj his loving bosom , to keep down his heart . 
▁ i have been closely shrouded in this bush , 
▁ xxmaj and mark'd you both , and for you both did blush . 
▁ i heard your guilty rhymes , observ'd your fashion , 
▁ xxmaj saw sighs reek from you , noted well your passion . 
▁ ' ay me ! ' says one . ' o xxmaj jove ! ' the other cries . 
▁ xxmaj one , her hairs were gold ; crystal the other 's eyes . 
▁ [ to xxup longaville ] xxmaj you would for paradise break faith and troth ; 
▁ [ to xxmaj dumain ] xxmaj and xxmaj jove for your love would infringe an oath . 
▁ xxmaj what will xxmaj berowne say when that he shall hear 
▁ xxmaj faith infringed which such zeal did swear ? 
▁ xxmaj how will he scorn , how will he spend his wit ! 
▁ xxmaj how will he triumph , leap , and laugh at it ! 
▁ xxmaj for all the wealth that ever i did see , 
▁ i would not have him know so much by me . 
▁ xxup berowne . [ descending ] xxmaj now step i forth to whip hypocrisy , 
▁ xxmaj ah , good my liege , i pray thee pardon me . 
▁ xxmaj good heart , what grace hast thou thus to reprove 
▁ xxmaj these worms for loving , that art most in love ? 
▁ xxmaj your eyes do make no coaches ; in your tears 
▁ xxmaj there is no certain princess that appears ; 
▁ xxmaj you 'll not be perjur'd ; ' tis a hateful thing ; 
▁ xxmaj tush , none but minstrels like of sonneting . 
▁ xxmaj but are you not ashamed ? xxmaj nay , are you not , 
▁ xxmaj all three of you , to be thus much o'ershot ? 
▁ xxmaj you found his mote ; the xxmaj king your mote did see ; 
▁ xxmaj but i a beam do find in each of three . 
▁ xxup o , what a scene of fool'ry have i seen , 
▁ xxmaj of sighs , of groans , of sorrow , and of teen ! 
▁ xxup o , me , with what strict patience have i sat , 
▁ xxmaj to see a king transformed to a gnat ! 
▁ xxmaj to see great xxmaj hercules whipping a gig , 
▁ xxmaj and profound xxmaj solomon to tune a jig , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj nestor play at push - pin with the boys , 
▁ xxmaj and critic xxmaj timon laugh at idle toys ! 
▁ xxmaj where lies thy grief , xxup o , tell me , good xxmaj dumain ? 
▁ xxmaj and , gentle xxmaj longaville , where lies thy pain ? 
▁ xxmaj and where my liege 's ? xxmaj all about the breast . 
▁ a caudle , ho ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj too bitter is thy jest . 
▁ xxmaj are we betrayed thus to thy over - view ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj not you by me , but i betrayed to you . 
▁ i that am honest , i that hold it sin 
▁ xxmaj to break the vow i am engaged in ; 
▁ i am betrayed by keeping company 
▁ xxmaj with men like you , men of inconstancy . 
▁ xxmaj when shall you see me write a thing in rhyme ? 
▁ xxmaj or groan for xxmaj joan ? or spend a minute 's time 
▁ xxmaj in pruning me ? xxmaj when shall you hear that i 
▁ xxmaj will praise a hand , a foot , a face , an eye , 
▁ a gait , a state , a brow , a breast , a waist , 
▁ a leg , a limb- 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj soft ! whither away so fast ? 
▁ a true man or a thief that gallops so ? 
▁ xxup berowne . i post from love ; good lover , let me go . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jaquenetta and xxup costard 

▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj god bless the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what present hast thou there ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj some certain treason . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what makes treason here ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj nay , it makes nothing , sir . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj if it mar nothing neither , 
▁ xxmaj the treason and you go in peace away together . 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . i beseech your xxmaj grace , let this letter be read ; 
▁ xxmaj our person misdoubts it : ' twas treason , he said . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj berowne , read it over . [ berowne reads the letter ] 
▁ xxmaj where hadst thou it ? 
▁ xxup jaquenetta . xxmaj of xxmaj costard . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj where hadst thou it ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj of xxmaj dun xxmaj adramadio , xxmaj dun xxmaj adramadio . 
▁ [ berowne tears the letter ] 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what is in you ? xxmaj why dost thou tear it ? 
▁ xxup berowne . a toy , my liege , a toy ! xxmaj your xxmaj grace needs not fear it . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj it did move him to passion , and therefore let 's hear 
▁ it . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj it is xxmaj berowne 's writing , and here is his name . 
▁ [ gathering up the pieces ] 
▁ xxup berowne . [ xxmaj to xxup costard ] xxmaj ah , you whoreson loggerhead , you were born 
▁ to do me shame . 
▁ xxmaj guilty , my lord , guilty ! i confess , i confess . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj that you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess ; 
▁ xxmaj he , he , and you- and you , my liege!- and i 
▁ xxmaj are pick - purses in love , and we deserve to die . 
▁ xxup o , dismiss this audience , and i shall tell you more . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj now the number is even . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj true , true , we are four . 
▁ xxmaj will these turtles be gone ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj hence , sirs , away . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj walk aside the true folk , and let the traitors stay . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup costard and xxup jaquenetta 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj sweet lords , sweet lovers , xxup o , let us embrace ! 
▁ xxmaj as true we are as flesh and blood can be . 
▁ xxmaj the sea will ebb and flow , heaven show his face ; 
▁ xxmaj young blood doth not obey an old decree . 
▁ xxmaj we can not cross the cause why we were born , 
▁ xxmaj therefore of all hands must we be forsworn . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what , did these rent lines show some love of thine ? 
▁ xxup berowne . ' did they ? ' quoth you . xxmaj who sees the heavenly xxmaj rosaline 
▁ xxmaj that , like a rude and savage man of xxmaj inde 
▁ xxmaj at the first op'ning of the gorgeous east , 
▁ xxmaj bows not his vassal head and , strucken blind , 
▁ xxmaj kisses the base ground with obedient breast ? 
▁ xxmaj what peremptory eagle - sighted eye 
▁ xxmaj dares look upon the heaven of her brow 
▁ xxmaj that is not blinded by her majesty ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what zeal , what fury hath inspir'd thee now ? 
▁ xxmaj my love , her mistress , is a gracious moon ; 
▁ xxmaj she , an attending star , scarce seen a light . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj my eyes are then no eyes , nor i xxmaj berowne . 
▁ xxup o , but for my love , day would turn to night ! 
▁ xxmaj of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty 
▁ xxmaj do meet , as at a fair , in her fair cheek , 
▁ xxmaj where several worthies make one dignity , 
▁ xxmaj where nothing wants that want itself doth seek . 
▁ xxmaj lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues- 
▁ xxmaj fie , painted rhetoric ! xxup o , she needs it not ! 
▁ xxmaj to things of sale a seller 's praise belongs : 
▁ xxmaj she passes praise ; then praise too short doth blot . 
▁ a wither'd hermit , five - score winters worn , 
▁ xxmaj might shake off fifty , looking in her eye . 
▁ xxmaj beauty doth varnish age , as if new - born , 
▁ xxmaj and gives the crutch the cradle 's infancy . 
▁ xxup o , ' tis the sun that maketh all things shine ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj by heaven , thy love is black as ebony . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj is ebony like her ? o wood divine ! 
▁ a wife of such wood were felicity . 
▁ xxup o , who can give an oath ? xxmaj where is a book ? 
▁ xxmaj that i may swear beauty doth beauty lack , 
▁ xxmaj if that she learn not of her eye to look . 
▁ xxmaj no face is fair that is not full so black . 
▁ xxup king . o paradox ! xxmaj black is the badge of hell , 
▁ xxmaj the hue of dungeons , and the school of night ; 
▁ xxmaj and beauty 's crest becomes the heavens well . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj devils soonest tempt , resembling spirits of light . 
▁ xxup o , if in black my lady 's brows be deckt , 
▁ xxmaj it mourns that painting and usurping hair 
▁ xxmaj should ravish doters with a false aspect ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore is she born to make black fair . 
▁ xxmaj her favour turns the fashion of the days ; 
▁ xxmaj for native blood is counted painting now ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore red that would avoid dispraise 
▁ xxmaj paints itself black , to imitate her brow . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj to look like her are chimney - sweepers black . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj and since her time are colliers counted bright . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and xxmaj ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj dark needs no candles now , for dark is light . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj your mistresses dare never come in rain 
▁ xxmaj for fear their colours should be wash'd away . 
▁ xxup king . ' twere good yours did ; for , sir , to tell you plain , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find a fairer face not wash'd to - day . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj i 'll prove her fair , or talk till doomsday here . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no devil will fright thee then so much as she . 
▁ xxup dumain . i never knew man hold vile stuff so dear . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj look , here 's thy love : my foot and her face see . 
▁ [ showing his shoe ] 
▁ xxup berowne . xxup o , if the streets were paved with thine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj her feet were much too dainty for such tread ! 
▁ xxup dumain . o vile ! xxmaj then , as she goes , what upward lies 
▁ xxmaj the street should see as she walk'd overhead . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj but what of this ? xxmaj are we not all in love ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj nothing so sure ; and thereby all forsworn . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj then leave this chat ; and , good xxmaj berowne , now prove 
▁ xxmaj our loving lawful , and our faith not torn . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj ay , marry , there ; some flattery for this evil . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxup o , some authority how to proceed ; 
▁ xxmaj some tricks , some quillets , how to cheat the devil ! 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj some salve for perjury . 
▁ xxup berowne . ' tis more than need . 
▁ xxmaj have at you , then , affection 's men - at - arms . 
▁ xxmaj consider what you first did swear unto : 
▁ xxmaj to fast , to study , and to see no woman- 
▁ xxmaj flat treason ' gainst the kingly state of youth . 
▁ xxmaj say , can you fast ? xxmaj your stomachs are too young , 
▁ xxmaj and abstinence engenders maladies . 
▁ xxmaj and , where that you you have vow'd to study , lords , 
▁ xxmaj in that each of you have forsworn his book , 
▁ xxmaj can you still dream , and pore , and thereon look ? 
▁ xxmaj for when would you , my lord , or you , or you , 
▁ xxmaj have found the ground of study 's excellence 
▁ xxmaj without the beauty of a woman 's face ? 
▁ xxmaj from women 's eyes this doctrine i derive : 
▁ xxmaj they are the ground , the books , the academes , 
▁ xxmaj from whence doth spring the true xxmaj promethean fire . 
▁ xxmaj why , universal plodding poisons up 
▁ xxmaj the nimble spirits in the arteries , 
▁ xxmaj as motion and long - during action tires 
▁ xxmaj the sinewy vigour of the traveller . 
▁ xxmaj now , for not looking on a woman 's face , 
▁ xxmaj you have in that forsworn the use of eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and study too , the causer of your vow ; 
▁ xxmaj for where is author in the world 
▁ xxmaj teaches such beauty as a woman 's eye ? 
▁ xxmaj learning is but an adjunct to ourself , 
▁ xxmaj and where we are our learning likewise is ; 
▁ xxmaj then when ourselves we see in ladies ' eyes , 
▁ xxmaj with ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj do we not likewise see our learning there ? 
▁ xxup o , we have made a vow to study , lords , 
▁ xxmaj and in that vow we have forsworn our books . 
▁ xxmaj for when would you , my liege , or you , or you , 
▁ xxmaj in leaden contemplation have found out 
▁ xxmaj such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes 
▁ xxmaj of beauty 's tutors have enrich'd you with ? 
▁ xxmaj other slow arts entirely keep the brain ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , finding barren practisers , 
▁ xxmaj scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil ; 
▁ xxmaj but love , first learned in a lady 's eyes , 
▁ xxmaj lives not alone immured in the brain , 
▁ xxmaj but with the motion of all elements 
▁ xxmaj courses as swift as thought in every power , 
▁ xxmaj and gives to every power a double power , 
▁ xxmaj above their functions and their offices . 
▁ xxmaj it adds a precious seeing to the eye : 
▁ a lover 's eyes will gaze an eagle blind . 
▁ a lover 's ear will hear the lowest sound , 
▁ xxmaj when the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd . 
▁ xxmaj love 's feeling is more soft and sensible 
▁ xxmaj than are the tender horns of cockled snails : 
▁ xxmaj love 's tongue proves dainty xxmaj bacchus gross in taste . 
▁ xxmaj for valour , is not xxmaj love a xxmaj hercules , 
▁ xxmaj still climbing trees in the xxmaj hesperides ? 
▁ xxmaj subtle as xxmaj sphinx ; as sweet and musical 
▁ xxmaj as bright xxmaj apollo 's lute , strung with his hair . 
▁ xxmaj and when xxmaj love speaks , the voice of all the gods 
▁ xxmaj make heaven drowsy with the harmony . 
▁ xxmaj never durst poet touch a pen to write 
▁ xxmaj until his ink were temp'red with xxmaj love 's sighs ; 
▁ xxup o , then his lines would ravish savage ears , 
▁ xxmaj and plant in tyrants mild humility . 
▁ xxmaj from women 's eyes this doctrine i derive . 
▁ xxmaj they sparkle still the right xxmaj promethean fire ; 
▁ xxmaj they are the books , the arts , the academes , 
▁ xxmaj that show , contain , and nourish , all the world , 
▁ xxmaj else none at all in aught proves excellent . 
▁ xxmaj then fools you were these women to forswear ; 
▁ xxmaj or , keeping what is sworn , you will prove fools . 
▁ xxmaj for wisdom 's sake , a word that all men love ; 
▁ xxmaj or for xxmaj love 's sake , a word that loves all men ; 
▁ xxmaj or for men 's sake , the authors of these women ; 
▁ xxmaj or women 's sake , by whom we men are men- 
▁ xxmaj let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths . 
▁ xxmaj it is religion to be thus forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj for charity itself fulfils the law , 
▁ xxmaj and who can sever love from charity ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj saint xxmaj cupid , then ! and , soldiers , to the field ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj advance your standards , and upon them , lords ; 
▁ xxmaj pell - mell , down with them ! be first advis'd , 
▁ xxmaj in conflict , that you get the sun of them . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj now to plain - dealing ; lay these glozes by . 
▁ xxmaj shall we resolve to woo these girls of xxmaj france ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj and win them too ; therefore let us devise 
▁ xxmaj some entertainment for them in their tents . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj first , from the park let us conduct them thither ; 
▁ xxmaj then homeward every man attach the hand 
▁ xxmaj of his fair mistress . xxmaj in the afternoon 
▁ xxmaj we will with some strange pastime solace them , 
▁ xxmaj such as the shortness of the time can shape ; 
▁ xxmaj for revels , dances , masks , and merry hours , 
▁ xxmaj forerun fair xxmaj love , strewing her way with flowers . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj away , away ! xxmaj no time shall be omitted 
▁ xxmaj that will betime , and may by us be fitted . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj allons ! allons ! xxmaj sow'd cockle reap'd no corn , 
▁ xxmaj and justice always whirls in equal measure . 
▁ xxmaj light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj if so , our copper buys no better treasure . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter xxup holofernes , xxup sir xxup nathaniel , and xxup dull 

▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj satis quod sufficit . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . i praise xxmaj god for you , sir . xxmaj your reasons at dinner have 
▁ been sharp and sententious ; pleasant without scurrility , witty 
▁ without affection , audacious without impudency , learned without 
▁ opinion , and strange without heresy . i did converse this quondam 
▁ day with a companion of the xxmaj king 's who is intituled , nominated , 
▁ or called , xxmaj don xxmaj adriano de xxmaj armado . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj novi hominem tanquam te . xxmaj his humour is lofty , his 
▁ discourse peremptory , his tongue filed , his eye ambitious , his 
▁ gait majestical and his general behaviour vain , ridiculous , and 
▁ thrasonical . xxmaj he is too picked , too spruce , too affected , too odd , 
▁ as it were , too peregrinate , as i may call it . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . a most singular and choice epithet . 
▁ [ draws out his table - book ] 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj he draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than 
▁ the staple of his argument . i abhor such fanatical phantasimes , 
▁ such insociable and point - devise companions ; such rackers of 
▁ orthography , as to speak ' dout ' fine , when he should say ' doubt ' ; 
▁ ' det ' when he should pronounce ' debt'- d , e , b , t , not d , e , t. 
▁ xxmaj he clepeth a calf ' cauf , ' half ' hauf ' ; neighbour vocatur 
▁ ' nebour ' ; ' neigh ' abbreviated ' ne . ' xxmaj this is abhominable- which he 
▁ would call ' abbominable . ' xxmaj it insinuateth me of insanie : ne 
▁ intelligis , domine ? to make frantic , lunatic . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj laus xxmaj deo , bone intelligo . 
▁ xxup holofernes . ' bone'?- ' bone ' for ' bene . ' xxmaj priscian a little 
▁ scratch'd ; ' twill serve . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup armado , xxup moth , and xxup costard 

▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj videsne quis venit ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj video , et gaudeo . 
▁ xxup armado . [ to xxup moth ] xxmaj chirrah ! 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj quare ' chirrah , ' not ' sirrah ' ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj men of peace , well encount'red . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj most military sir , salutation . 
▁ xxup moth . [ aside to xxup costard ] xxmaj they have been at a great feast of 
▁ languages and stol'n the scraps . 
▁ xxup costard . xxup o , they have liv'd long on the alms - basket of words . i 
▁ marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word , for thou are 
▁ not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus ; thou art 
▁ easier swallowed than a flap - dragon . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj peace ! the peal begins . 
▁ xxup armado . [ to xxup holofernes ] xxmaj monsieur , are you not lett'red ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj yes , yes ; he teaches boys the hornbook . xxmaj what is a , b , spelt 
▁ backward with the horn on his head ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj ba , pueritia , with a horn added . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj ba , most silly sheep with a horn . xxmaj you hear his learning . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj quis , quis , thou consonant ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj the third of the five vowels , if xxmaj you repeat them ; or the 
▁ fifth , if xxup i. 
▁ xxup holofernes . i will repeat them : a , e , xxup i- 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj the sheep ; the other two concludes it : o , xxup u. 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj now , by the salt wave of the xxmaj mediterraneum , a sweet touch , 
▁ a quick venue of wit- snip , snap , quick and home . xxmaj it rejoiceth my 
▁ intellect . xxmaj true wit ! 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj offer'd by a child to an old man ; which is wit - old . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj what is the figure ? xxmaj what is the figure ? 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj horns . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj thou disputes like an infant ; go whip thy gig . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj lend me your horn to make one , and i will whip about your 
▁ infamy circum circa- a gig of a cuckold 's horn . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj an i had but one penny in the world , thou shouldst have it 
▁ to buy ginger - bread . xxmaj hold , there is the very remuneration i had 
▁ of thy master , thou halfpenny purse of wit , thou pigeon - egg of 
▁ discretion . xxup o , an the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but 
▁ my bastard , what a joyful father wouldst thou make me ! xxmaj go to ; 
▁ thou hast it ad dunghill , at the fingers ' ends , as they say . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxup o , i smell false xxmaj latin ; ' dunghill ' for unguem . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj arts - man , preambulate ; we will be singuled from the 
▁ barbarous . xxmaj do you not educate youth at the charge - house on the 
▁ top of the mountain ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj or mons , the hill . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj at your sweet pleasure , for the mountain . 
▁ xxup holofernes . i do , sans question . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sir , it is the xxmaj king 's most sweet pleasure and affection to 
▁ congratulate the xxmaj princess at her pavilion , in the posteriors of 
▁ this day ; which the rude multitude call the afternoon . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj the posterior of the day , most generous sir , is liable , 
▁ congruent , and measurable , for the afternoon . xxmaj the word is well 
▁ cull'd , chose , sweet , and apt , i do assure you , sir , i do assure . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sir , the xxmaj king is a noble gentleman , and my familiar , i do 
▁ assure ye , very good friend . xxmaj for what is inward between us , let 
▁ it pass . i do beseech thee , remember thy courtesy . i beseech 
▁ thee , apparel thy head . xxmaj and among other importunate and most 
▁ serious designs , and of great import indeed , too- but let that 
▁ pass ; for i must tell thee it will please his xxmaj grace , by the 
▁ world , sometime to lean upon my poor shoulder , and with his royal 
▁ finger thus dally with my excrement , with my mustachio ; but , 
▁ sweet heart , let that pass . xxmaj by the world , i recount no fable : 
▁ some certain special honours it pleaseth his greatness to impart 
▁ to xxmaj armado , a soldier , a man of travel , that hath seen the world ; 
▁ but let that pass . xxmaj the very all of all is- but , sweet heart , i do 
▁ implore secrecy- that the xxmaj king would have me present the 
▁ xxmaj princess , sweet chuck , with some delightful ostentation , or show , 
▁ or pageant , or antic , or firework . xxmaj now , understanding that the 
▁ curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions and sudden 
▁ breaking - out of mirth , as it were , i have acquainted you withal , 
▁ to the end to crave your assistance . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj sir , you shall present before her the xxmaj nine xxmaj worthies . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj nathaniel , as concerning some entertainment of time , some 
▁ show in the posterior of this day , to be rend'red by our 
▁ assistance , the xxmaj king 's command , and this most gallant , 
▁ illustrate , and learned gentleman , before the xxmaj princess- i say 
▁ none so fit as to present the xxmaj nine xxmaj worthies . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj where will you find men worthy enough to present them ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj joshua , yourself ; myself , xxmaj alexander ; this gallant 
▁ gentleman , xxmaj judas xxmaj maccabaeus ; this swain , because of his great 
▁ limb or joint , shall pass xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great ; the page , xxmaj hercules . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj pardon , sir ; error : he is not quantity enough for that 
▁ xxmaj worthy 's thumb ; he is not so big as the end of his club . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj shall i have audience ? xxmaj he shall present xxmaj hercules in 
▁ minority : his enter and exit shall be strangling a snake ; and i 
▁ will have an apology for that purpose . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj an excellent device ! xxmaj so , if any of the audience hiss , you may 
▁ cry ' well done , xxmaj hercules ; now thou crushest the snake ! ' xxmaj that is 
▁ the way to make an offence gracious , though few have the grace to 
▁ do it . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj for the rest of the xxmaj worthies ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . i will play three myself . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj thrice - worthy gentleman ! 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj shall i tell you a thing ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj we attend . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj we will have , if this fadge not , an antic . i beseech you , 
▁ follow . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj via , goodman xxmaj dull ! xxmaj thou has spoken no word all this 
▁ while . 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj nor understood none neither , sir . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj allons ! we will employ thee . 
▁ xxup dull . xxmaj i 'll make one in a dance , or so , or i will play 
▁ xxmaj on the tabor to the xxmaj worthies , and let them dance the hay . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj most dull , honest xxmaj dull ! xxmaj to our sport , away . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the park 

 xxmaj enter the xxup princess , xxup maria , xxup katharine , and xxup rosaline 

▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj sweet hearts , we shall be rich ere we depart , 
▁ xxmaj if fairings come thus plentifully in . 
▁ a lady wall'd about with diamonds ! 
▁ xxmaj look you what i have from the loving xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj madam , came nothing else along with that ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj nothing but this ! xxmaj yes , as much love in rhyme 
▁ xxmaj as would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper 
▁ xxmaj writ o ' both sides the leaf , margent and all , 
▁ xxmaj that he was fain to seal on xxmaj cupid 's name . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj that was the way to make his godhead wax ; 
▁ xxmaj for he hath been five thousand year a boy . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj ay , and a shrewd unhappy gallows too . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj you 'll ne'er be friends with him : ' a kill'd your sister . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj he made her melancholy , sad , and heavy ; 
▁ xxmaj and so she died . xxmaj had she been light , like you , 
▁ xxmaj of such a merry , nimble , stirring spirit , 
▁ xxmaj she might ' a been a grandam ere she died . 
▁ xxmaj and so may you ; for a light heart lives long . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj what 's your dark meaning , mouse , of this light word ? 
▁ xxup katharine . a light condition in a beauty dark . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj we need more light to find your meaning out . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj you 'll mar the light by taking it in snuff ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore xxmaj i 'll darkly end the argument . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj look what you do , you do it still i ' th ' dark . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj so do not you ; for you are a light wench . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj indeed , i weigh not you ; and therefore light . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj you weigh me not ? xxup o , that 's you care not for me . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj great reason ; for ' past cure is still past care . ' 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj well bandied both ; a set of wit well play'd . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj rosaline , you have a favour too ? 
▁ xxmaj who sent it ? and what is it ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . i would you knew . 
▁ xxmaj an if my face were but as fair as yours , 
▁ xxmaj my favour were as great : be witness this . 
▁ xxmaj nay , i have verses too , i thank xxmaj berowne ; 
▁ xxmaj the numbers true , and , were the numb'ring too , 
▁ i were the fairest goddess on the ground . 
▁ i am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs . 
▁ xxup o , he hath drawn my picture in his letter ! 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj anything like ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj much in the letters ; nothing in the praise . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj beauteous as ink- a good conclusion . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj fair as a text b in a copy - book . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj ware pencils , ho ! xxmaj let me not die your debtor , 
▁ xxmaj my red dominical , my golden letter : 
▁ o that your face were not so full of xxmaj o 's ! 
▁ xxup katharine . a pox of that jest ! and i beshrew all shrows ! 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj but , xxmaj katharine , what was sent to you from fair 
▁ xxmaj dumain ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj madam , this glove . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj did he not send you twain ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj yes , madam ; and , moreover , 
▁ xxmaj some thousand verses of a faithful lover ; 
▁ a huge translation of hypocrisy , 
▁ xxmaj vilely compil'd , profound simplicity . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj this , and these pearl , to me sent xxmaj longaville ; 
▁ xxmaj the letter is too long by half a mile . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . i think no less . xxmaj dost thou not wish in heart 
▁ xxmaj the chain were longer and the letter short ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ay , or i would these hands might never part . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj we are wise girls to mock our lovers so . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj they are worse fools to purchase mocking so . 
▁ xxmaj that same xxmaj berowne xxmaj i 'll torture ere i go . 
▁ o that i knew he were but in by th ' week ! 
▁ xxmaj how i would make him fawn , and beg , and seek , 
▁ xxmaj and wait the season , and observe the times , 
▁ xxmaj and spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes , 
▁ xxmaj and shape his service wholly to my hests , 
▁ xxmaj and make him proud to make me proud that jests ! 
▁ xxmaj so pertaunt - like would i o'ersway his state 
▁ xxmaj that he should be my fool , and i his fate . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj none are so surely caught , when they are 
▁ catch'd , 
▁ xxmaj as wit turn'd fool ; folly , in wisdom hatch'd , 
▁ xxmaj hath wisdom 's warrant and the help of school , 
▁ xxmaj and wit 's own grace to grace a learned fool . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj the blood of youth burns not with such excess 
▁ xxmaj as gravity 's revolt to wantonness . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj folly in fools bears not so strong a note 
▁ xxmaj as fool'ry in the wise when wit doth dote , 
▁ xxmaj since all the power thereof it doth apply 
▁ xxmaj to prove , by wit , worth in simplicity . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup boyet 

▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj here comes xxmaj boyet , and mirth is in his face . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxup o , i am stabb'd with laughter ! xxmaj where 's her xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj thy news , xxmaj boyet ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj prepare , madam , prepare ! 
▁ xxmaj arm , wenches , arm ! xxmaj encounters mounted are 
▁ xxmaj against your peace . xxmaj love doth approach disguis'd , 
▁ xxmaj armed in arguments ; you 'll be surpris'd . 
▁ xxmaj muster your wits ; stand in your own defence ; 
▁ xxmaj or hide your heads like cowards , and fly hence . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj saint xxmaj dennis to xxmaj saint xxmaj cupid ! xxmaj what are they 
▁ xxmaj that charge their breath against us ? xxmaj say , scout , say . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj under the cool shade of a sycamore 
▁ i thought to close mine eyes some half an hour ; 
▁ xxmaj when , lo , to interrupt my purpos'd rest , 
▁ xxmaj toward that shade i might behold addrest 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king and his companions ; warily 
▁ i stole into a neighbour thicket by , 
▁ xxmaj and overheard what you shall overhear- 
▁ xxmaj that , by and by , disguis'd they will be here . 
▁ xxmaj their herald is a pretty knavish page , 
▁ xxmaj that well by heart hath conn'd his embassage . 
▁ xxmaj action and accent did they teach him there : 
▁ ' thus must thou speak ' and ' thus thy body bear , ' 
▁ xxmaj and ever and anon they made a doubt 
▁ xxmaj presence majestical would put him out ; 
▁ ' for ' quoth the xxmaj king ' an angel shalt thou see ; 
▁ xxmaj yet fear not thou , but speak audaciously . ' 
▁ xxmaj the boy replied ' an angel is not evil ; 
▁ i should have fear'd her had she been a devil . ' 
▁ xxmaj with that all laugh'd , and clapp'd him on the shoulder , 
▁ xxmaj making the bold wag by their praises bolder . 
▁ xxmaj one rubb'd his elbow , thus , and fleer'd , and swore 
▁ a better speech was never spoke before . 
▁ xxmaj another with his finger and his thumb 
▁ xxmaj cried ' via ! we will do't , come what will come . ' 
▁ xxmaj the third he caper'd , and cried ' all goes well . ' 
▁ xxmaj the fourth turn'd on the toe , and down he fell . 
▁ xxmaj with that they all did tumble on the ground , 
▁ xxmaj with such a zealous laughter , so profound , 
▁ xxmaj that in this spleen ridiculous appears , 
▁ xxmaj to check their folly , passion 's solemn tears . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj but what , but what , come they to visit us ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj they do , they do , and are apparell'd thus , 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj muscovites or xxmaj russians , as i guess . 
▁ xxmaj their purpose is to parley , court , and dance ; 
▁ xxmaj and every one his love - feat will advance 
▁ xxmaj unto his several mistress ; which they 'll know 
▁ xxmaj by favours several which they did bestow . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj and will they so ? xxmaj the gallants shall be task'd , 
▁ xxmaj for , ladies , we will every one be mask'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and not a man of them shall have the grace , 
▁ xxmaj despite of suit , to see a lady 's face . 
▁ xxmaj hold , xxmaj rosaline , this favour thou shalt wear , 
▁ xxmaj and then the xxmaj king will court thee for his dear ; 
▁ xxmaj hold , take thou this , my sweet , and give me thine , 
▁ xxmaj so shall xxmaj berowne take me for xxmaj rosaline . 
▁ xxmaj and change you favours too ; so shall your loves 
▁ xxmaj woo contrary , deceiv'd by these removes . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj come on , then , wear the favours most in sight . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj but , in this changing , what is your intent ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj the effect of my intent is to cross theirs . 
▁ xxmaj they do it but in mocking merriment , 
▁ xxmaj and mock for mock is only my intent . 
▁ xxmaj their several counsels they unbosom shall 
▁ xxmaj to loves mistook , and so be mock'd withal 
▁ xxmaj upon the next occasion that we meet 
▁ xxmaj with visages display'd to talk and greet . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj but shall we dance , if they desire us to't ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj no , to the death , we will not move a foot , 
▁ xxmaj nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace ; 
▁ xxmaj but while ' tis spoke each turn away her face . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj why , that contempt will kill the speaker 's heart , 
▁ xxmaj and quite divorce his memory from his part . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj therefore i do it ; and i make no doubt 
▁ xxmaj the rest will ne'er come in , if he be out . 
▁ xxmaj there 's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown , 
▁ xxmaj to make theirs ours , and ours none but our own ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall we stay , mocking intended game , 
▁ xxmaj and they well mock'd depart away with shame . 
▁ [ trumpet sounds within ] 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj the trumpet sounds ; be mask'd ; the maskers come . 
▁ [ the xxup ladies mask ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup blackamoors music , xxup moth as xxmaj prologue , the 
▁ xxup king and his xxup lords as maskers , in the guise of xxmaj russians 

▁ xxup moth . xxmaj all hail , the richest heauties on the earth ! 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj beauties no richer than rich taffeta . 
▁ xxup moth . a holy parcel of the fairest dames 
▁ [ the xxup ladies turn their backs to him ] 
▁ xxmaj that ever turn'd their- backs- to mortal views ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj their eyes , villain , their eyes . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj that ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views ! 
▁ xxmaj out- 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj true ; out indeed . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj out of your favours , heavenly spirits , vouchsafe 
▁ xxmaj not to behold- 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj once to behold , rogue . 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj once to behold with your sun - beamed eyes- with your 
▁ sun - beamed eyes- 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj they will not answer to that epithet ; 
▁ xxmaj you were best call it ' daughter - beamed eyes . ' 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj they do not mark me , and that brings me out . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj is this your perfectness ? xxmaj be gone , you rogue . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup moth 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj what would these strangers ? xxmaj know their minds , xxmaj boyet . 
▁ xxmaj if they do speak our language , ' tis our will 
▁ xxmaj that some plain man recount their purposes . 
▁ xxmaj know what they would . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj what would you with the xxmaj princess ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj nothing but peace and gentle visitation . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj what would they , say they ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj nothing but peace and gentle visitation . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj why , that they have ; and bid them so be gone . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj she says you have it , and you may be gone . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj say to her we have measur'd many miles 
▁ xxmaj to tread a measure with her on this grass . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj they say that they have measur'd many a mile 
▁ xxmaj to tread a measure with you on this grass . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj it is not so . xxmaj ask them how many inches 
▁ xxmaj is in one mile ? xxmaj if they have measured many , 
▁ xxmaj the measure , then , of one is eas'ly told . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj if to come hither you have measur'd miles , 
▁ xxmaj and many miles , the xxmaj princess bids you tell 
▁ xxmaj how many inches doth fill up one mile . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj tell her we measure them by weary steps . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj she hears herself . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj how many weary steps 
▁ xxmaj of many weary miles you have o'ergone 
▁ xxmaj are numb'red in the travel of one mile ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj we number nothing that we spend for you ; 
▁ xxmaj our duty is so rich , so infinite , 
▁ xxmaj that we may do it still without accompt . 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face , 
▁ xxmaj that we , like savages , may worship it . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj my face is but a moon , and clouded too . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj blessed are clouds , to do as such clouds do . 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe , bright moon , and these thy stars , to shine , 
▁ xxmaj those clouds removed , upon our watery eyne . 
▁ xxup rosaline . o vain petitioner ! beg a greater matter ; 
▁ xxmaj thou now requests but moonshine in the water . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj then in our measure do but vouchsafe one change . 
▁ xxmaj thou bid'st me beg ; this begging is not strange . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj play , music , then . xxmaj nay , you must do it soon . 
▁ xxmaj not yet ? xxmaj no dance ! xxmaj thus change i like the moon . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj will you not dance ? xxmaj how come you thus estranged ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj you took the moon at full ; but now she 's changed . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj yet still she is the xxmaj moon , and i the xxmaj man . 
▁ xxmaj the music plays ; vouchsafe some motion to it . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj our ears vouchsafe it . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj but your legs should do it . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj since you are strangers , and come here by chance , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll not be nice ; take hands . xxmaj we will not dance . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj why take we hands then ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj only to part friends . 
▁ xxmaj curtsy , sweet hearts ; and so the measure ends . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj more measure of this measure ; be not nice . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj we can afford no more at such a price . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj price you yourselves . xxmaj what buys your company ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj your absence only . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj that can never be . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj then can not we be bought ; and so adieu- 
▁ xxmaj twice to your visor and half once to you . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj if you deny to dance , let 's hold more chat . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj in private then . 
▁ xxup king . i am best pleas'd with that . [ they converse apart ] 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj white - handed mistress , one sweet word with thee . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj honey , and milk , and sugar ; there is three . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj nay , then , two treys , an if you grow so nice , 
▁ xxmaj metheglin , wort , and malmsey ; well run dice ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's half a dozen sweets . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj seventh sweet , adieu ! 
▁ xxmaj since you can cog , xxmaj i 'll play no more with you . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj one word in secret . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj let it not be sweet . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj thou grievest my gall . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj gall ! bitter . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj therefore meet . [ they converse apart ] 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj will you vouchsafe with me to change a word ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj name it . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj fair lady- 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj say you so ? xxmaj fair lord- 
▁ xxmaj take that for your fair lady . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj please it you , 
▁ xxmaj as much in private , and xxmaj i 'll bid adieu . 
▁ [ they converse apart ] 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj what , was your vizard made without a tongue ? 
▁ xxup longaville . i know the reason , lady , why you ask . 
▁ xxup katharine . o for your reason ! xxmaj quickly , sir ; i long . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj you have a double tongue within your mask , 
▁ xxmaj and would afford my speechless vizard half . 
▁ xxup katharine . ' veal ' quoth the xxmaj dutchman . xxmaj is not ' veal ' a calf ? 
▁ xxup longaville . a calf , fair lady ! 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj no , a fair lord calf . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj let 's part the word . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll not be your half . 
▁ xxmaj take all and wean it ; it may prove an ox . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj look how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks ! 
▁ xxmaj will you give horns , chaste lady ? xxmaj do not so . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj then die a calf , before your horns do grow . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj one word in private with you ere i die . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj bleat softly , then ; the butcher hears you cry . 
▁ [ they converse apart ] 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj the tongues of mocking wenches are as keen 
▁ xxmaj as is the razor 's edge invisible , 
▁ xxmaj cutting a smaller hair than may be seen , 
▁ xxmaj above the sense of sense ; so sensible 
▁ xxmaj seemeth their conference ; their conceits have wings , 
▁ xxmaj fleeter than arrows , bullets , wind , thought , swifter things . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj not one word more , my maids ; break off , break off . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj by heaven , all dry - beaten with pure scoff ! 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj farewell , mad wenches ; you have simple wits . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup king , xxup lords , and xxup blackamoors 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj twenty adieus , my frozen xxmaj muscovits . 
▁ xxmaj are these the breed of wits so wondered at ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj tapers they are , with your sweet breaths puff'd out . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj well - liking wits they have ; gross , gross ; fat , fat . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . o poverty in wit , kingly - poor flout ! 
▁ xxmaj will they not , think you , hang themselves to - night ? 
▁ xxmaj or ever but in vizards show their faces ? 
▁ xxmaj this pert xxmaj berowne was out of count'nance quite . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj they were all in lamentable cases ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king was weeping - ripe for a good word . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj berowne did swear himself out of all suit . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj dumain was at my service , and his sword . 
▁ ' no point ' quoth xxup i ; my servant straight was mute . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj lord xxmaj longaville said i came o'er his heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and trow you what he call'd me ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj qualm , perhaps . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj yes , in good faith . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj go , sickness as thou art ! 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj well , better wits have worn plain statute - caps . 
▁ xxmaj but will you hear ? xxmaj the xxmaj king is my love sworn . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj and quick xxmaj berowne hath plighted faith to me . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj and xxmaj longaville was for my service born . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj dumain is mine , as sure as bark on tree . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj madam , and pretty mistresses , give ear : 
▁ xxmaj immediately they will again be here 
▁ xxmaj in their own shapes ; for it can never be 
▁ xxmaj they will digest this harsh indignity . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj will they return ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj they will , they will , xxmaj god knows , 
▁ xxmaj and leap for joy , though they are lame with blows ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , change favours ; and , when they repair , 
▁ xxmaj blow like sweet roses in this summer air . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj how blow ? how blow ? xxmaj speak to be understood . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud : 
▁ xxmaj dismask'd , their damask sweet commixture shown , 
▁ xxmaj are angels vailing clouds , or roses blown . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj avaunt , perplexity ! xxmaj what shall we do 
▁ xxmaj if they return in their own shapes to woo ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj good madam , if by me you 'll be advis'd , 
▁ xxmaj let 's mock them still , as well known as disguis'd . 
▁ xxmaj let us complain to them what fools were here , 
▁ xxmaj disguis'd like xxmaj muscovites , in shapeless gear ; 
▁ xxmaj and wonder what they were , and to what end 
▁ xxmaj their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd , 
▁ xxmaj and their rough carriage so ridiculous , 
▁ xxmaj should be presented at our tent to us . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj ladies , withdraw ; the gallants are at hand . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj whip to our tents , as roes run o'er land . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup princess , xxup rosaline , xxup katharine , and xxup maria 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the xxup king , xxup berowne , xxup longaville , and xxup dumain , 
▁ in their proper habits 

▁ xxup king . xxmaj fair sir , xxmaj god save you ! xxmaj where 's the xxmaj princess ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj gone to her tent . xxmaj please it your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj command me any service to her thither ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj that she vouchsafe me audience for one word . 
▁ xxup boyet . i will ; and so will she , i know , my lord . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease , 
▁ xxmaj and utters it again when xxmaj god doth please . 
▁ xxmaj he is wit 's pedlar , and retails his wares 
▁ xxmaj at wakes , and wassails , meetings , markets , fairs ; 
▁ xxmaj and we that sell by gross , the xxmaj lord doth know , 
▁ xxmaj have not the grace to grace it with such show . 
▁ xxmaj this gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve ; 
▁ xxmaj had he been xxmaj adam , he had tempted xxmaj eve . 
▁ ' a can carve too , and lisp ; why this is he 
▁ xxmaj that kiss'd his hand away in courtesy ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the ape of form , xxmaj monsieur the xxmaj nice , 
▁ xxmaj that , when he plays at tables , chides the dice 
▁ xxmaj in honourable terms ; nay , he can sing 
▁ a mean most meanly ; and in ushering , 
▁ xxmaj mend him who can . xxmaj the ladies call him sweet ; 
▁ xxmaj the stairs , as he treads on them , kiss his feet . 
▁ xxmaj this is the flow'r that smiles on every one , 
▁ xxmaj to show his teeth as white as whales - bone ; 
▁ xxmaj and consciences that will not die in debt 
▁ xxmaj pay him the due of ' honey - tongued xxmaj boyet . ' 
▁ xxup king . a blister on his sweet tongue , with my heart , 
▁ xxmaj that put xxmaj armado 's page out of his part ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the xxup princess , ushered by xxup boyet ; xxup rosaline , 
▁ xxup maria , and xxup katharine 

▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj see where it comes ! xxmaj behaviour , what wert thou 
▁ xxmaj till this man show'd thee ? xxmaj and what art thou now ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj all hail , sweet madam , and fair time of day ! 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . ' fair ' in ' all hail ' is foul , as i conceive . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj construe my speeches better , if you may . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj then wish me better ; i will give you leave . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj we came to visit you , and purpose now 
▁ xxmaj to lead you to our court ; vouchsafe it then . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj this field shall hold me , and so hold your vow : 
▁ xxmaj nor xxmaj god , nor xxup i , delights in perjur'd men . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj rebuke me not for that which you provoke . 
▁ xxmaj the virtue of your eye must break my oath . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj you nickname virtue : vice you should have 
▁ spoke ; 
▁ xxmaj for virtue 's office never breaks men 's troth . 
▁ xxmaj now by my maiden honour , yet as pure 
▁ xxmaj as the unsullied lily , i protest , 
▁ a world of torments though i should endure , 
▁ i would not yield to be your house 's guest ; 
▁ xxmaj so much i hate a breaking cause to be 
▁ xxmaj of heavenly oaths , vowed with integrity . 
▁ xxup king . xxup o , you have liv'd in desolation here , 
▁ xxmaj unseen , unvisited , much to our shame . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj not so , my lord ; it is not so , i swear ; 
▁ xxmaj we have had pastimes here , and pleasant game ; 
▁ a mess of xxmaj russians left us but of late . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how , madam ! xxmaj russians ! 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj ay , in truth , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj trim gallants , full of courtship and of state . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj madam , speak true . xxmaj it is not so , my lord .