xxbos xxmaj my lady , to the manner of the days , 
▁ xxmaj in courtesy gives undeserving praise . 
▁ xxmaj we four indeed confronted were with four 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj russian habit ; here they stayed an hour 
▁ xxmaj and talk'd apace ; and in that hour , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj they did not bless us with one happy word . 
▁ i dare not call them fools ; but this i think , 
▁ xxmaj when they are thirsty , fools would fain have drink . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this jest is dry to me . xxmaj fair gentle sweet , 
▁ xxmaj your wit makes wise things foolish ; when we greet , 
▁ xxmaj with eyes best seeing , heaven 's fiery eye , 
▁ xxmaj by light we lose light ; your capacity 
▁ xxmaj is of that nature that to your huge store 
▁ xxmaj wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj this proves you wise and rich , for in my eye- 
▁ xxup berowne . i am a fool , and full of poverty . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj but that you take what doth to you belong , 
▁ xxmaj it were a fault to snatch words from my tongue . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxup o , i am yours , and all that i possess . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj all the fool mine ? 
▁ xxup berowne . i can not give you less . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj which of the vizards was it that you wore ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj where ? when ? what vizard ? xxmaj why demand you this ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj there , then , that vizard ; that superfluous case 
▁ xxmaj that hid the worse and show'd the better face . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj we were descried ; they 'll mock us now downright . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj let us confess , and turn it to a jest . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj amaz'd , my lord ? xxmaj why looks your xxmaj highness sad ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj help , hold his brows ! he 'll swoon ! xxmaj why look you pale ? 
▁ xxmaj sea - sick , i think , coming from xxmaj muscovy . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury . 
▁ xxmaj can any face of brass hold longer out ? 
▁ xxmaj here stand xxup i , lady- dart thy skill at me , 
▁ xxmaj bruise me with scorn , confound me with a flout , 
▁ xxmaj thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance , 
▁ xxmaj cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will wish thee never more to dance , 
▁ xxmaj nor never more in xxmaj russian habit wait . 
▁ xxup o , never will i trust to speeches penn'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor to the motion of a school - boy 's tongue , 
▁ xxmaj nor never come in vizard to my friend , 
▁ xxmaj nor woo in rhyme , like a blind harper 's song . 
▁ xxmaj taffeta phrases , silken terms precise , 
▁ xxmaj three - pil'd hyperboles , spruce affectation , 
▁ xxmaj figures pedantical- these summer - flies 
▁ xxmaj have blown me full of maggot ostentation . 
▁ i do forswear them ; and i here protest , 
▁ xxmaj by this white glove- how white the hand , xxmaj god knows!- 
▁ xxmaj henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd 
▁ xxmaj in russet yeas , and honest kersey noes . 
▁ xxmaj and , to begin , wench- so xxmaj god help me , law!- 
▁ xxmaj my love to thee is sound , sans crack or flaw . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj sans ' sans , ' i pray you . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj yet i have a trick 
▁ xxmaj of the old rage ; bear with me , i am sick ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave it by degrees . xxmaj soft , let us see- 
▁ xxmaj write ' lord have mercy on us ' on those three ; 
▁ xxmaj they are infected ; in their hearts it lies ; 
▁ xxmaj they have the plague , and caught it of your eyes . 
▁ xxmaj these lords are visited ; you are not free , 
▁ xxmaj for the xxmaj lord 's tokens on you do i see . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj no , they are free that gave these tokens to us . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj our states are forfeit ; seek not to undo us . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj it is not so ; for how can this be true , 
▁ xxmaj that you stand forfeit , being those that sue ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj peace ; for i will not have to do with you . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj nor shall not , if i do as i intend . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj speak for yourselves ; my wit is at an end . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj teach us , sweet madam , for our rude transgression 
▁ xxmaj some fair excuse . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj the fairest is confession . 
▁ xxmaj were not you here but even now , disguis'd ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj madam , i was . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj and were you well advis'd ? 
▁ xxup king . i was , fair madam . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj when you then were here , 
▁ xxmaj what did you whisper in your lady 's ear ? 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj that more than all the world i did respect her . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj when she shall challenge this , you will reject 
▁ her . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj upon mine honour , no . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj peace , peace , forbear ; 
▁ xxmaj your oath once broke , you force not to forswear . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj despise me when i break this oath of mine . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . i will ; and therefore keep it . xxmaj rosaline , 
▁ xxmaj what did the xxmaj russian whisper in your ear ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj madam , he swore that he did hold me dear 
▁ xxmaj as precious eyesight , and did value me 
▁ xxmaj above this world ; adding thereto , moreover , 
▁ xxmaj that he would we d me , or else die my lover . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj god give thee joy of him ! xxmaj the noble lord 
▁ xxmaj most honourably doth uphold his word . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj what mean you , madam ? xxmaj by my life , my troth , 
▁ i never swore this lady such an oath . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj by heaven , you did ; and , to confirm it plain , 
▁ xxmaj you gave me this ; but take it , sir , again . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj my faith and this the xxmaj princess i did give ; 
▁ i knew her by this jewel on her sleeve . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj pardon me , sir , this jewel did she wear ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj lord xxmaj berowne , i thank him , is my dear . 
▁ xxmaj what , will you have me , or your pearl again ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj neither of either ; i remit both twain . 
▁ i see the trick on't : here was a consent , 
▁ xxmaj knowing aforehand of our merriment , 
▁ xxmaj to dash it like a xxmaj christmas comedy . 
▁ xxmaj some carry - tale , some please - man , some slight zany , 
▁ xxmaj some mumble - news , some trencher - knight , some xxmaj dick , 
▁ xxmaj that smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick 
▁ xxmaj to make my lady laugh when she 's dispos'd , 
▁ xxmaj told our intents before ; which once disclos'd , 
▁ xxmaj the ladies did change favours ; and then we , 
▁ xxmaj following the signs , woo'd but the sign of she . 
▁ xxmaj now , to our perjury to add more terror , 
▁ xxmaj we are again forsworn in will and error . 
▁ xxmaj much upon this it is ; [ to xxup boyet ] and might not you 
▁ xxmaj forestall our sport , to make us thus untrue ? 
▁ xxmaj do not you know my lady 's foot by th ' squier , 
▁ xxmaj and laugh upon the apple of her eye ? 
▁ xxmaj and stand between her back , sir , and the fire , 
▁ xxmaj holding a trencher , jesting merrily ? 
▁ xxmaj you put our page out . xxmaj go , you are allow'd ; 
▁ xxmaj die when you will , a smock shall be your shroud . 
▁ xxmaj you leer upon me , do you ? xxmaj there 's an eye 
▁ xxmaj wounds like a leaden sword . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj full merrily 
▁ xxmaj hath this brave manage , this career , been run . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj lo , he is tilting straight ! xxmaj peace ; i have done . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup costard 

▁ xxmaj welcome , pure wit ! xxmaj thou part'st a fair fray . 
▁ xxup costard . o xxmaj lord , sir , they would know 
▁ xxmaj whether the three xxmaj worthies shall come in or no ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj what , are there but three ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj no , sir ; but it is vara fine , 
▁ xxmaj for every one pursents three . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj and three times thrice is nine . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj not so , sir ; under correction , sir , 
▁ i hope it is not so . 
▁ xxmaj you can not beg us , sir , i can assure you , sir ; we know what we 
▁ know ; 
▁ i hope , sir , three times thrice , sir- 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj is not nine . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj under correction , sir , we know whereuntil it doth amount . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj by xxmaj jove , i always took three threes for nine . 
▁ xxup costard . o xxmaj lord , sir , it were pity you should get your living by 
▁ reck'ning , sir . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj how much is it ? 
▁ xxup costard . o xxmaj lord , sir , the parties themselves , the actors , sir , will 
▁ show whereuntil it doth amount . xxmaj for mine own part , i am , as they 
▁ say , but to parfect one man in one poor man , xxmaj pompion the xxmaj great , 
▁ sir . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj art thou one of the xxmaj worthies ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj it pleased them to think me worthy of xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great ; 
▁ for mine own part , i know not the degree of the xxmaj worthy ; but i am 
▁ to stand for him . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj go , bid them prepare . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj we will turn it finely off , sir ; we will take some care . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup costard 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj berowne , they will shame us ; let them not approach . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj we are shame - proof , my lord , and ' tis some policy 
▁ xxmaj to have one show worse than the xxmaj king 's and his company . 
▁ xxup king . i say they shall not come . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj nay , my good lord , let me o'errule you now . 
▁ xxmaj that sport best pleases that doth least know how ; 
▁ xxmaj where zeal strives to content , and the contents 
▁ xxmaj dies in the zeal of that which it presents . 
▁ xxmaj their form confounded makes most form in mirth , 
▁ xxmaj when great things labouring perish in their birth . 
▁ xxup berowne . a right description of our sport , my lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup armado 

▁ xxup armado . xxmaj anointed , i implore so much expense of thy royal sweet 
▁ breath as will utter a brace of words . 
▁ [ converses apart with the xxup king , and delivers a paper ] 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj doth this man serve xxmaj god ? 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj why ask you ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . ' a speaks not like a man of xxmaj god his making . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj that is all one , my fair , sweet , honey monarch ; for , i 
▁ protest , the schoolmaster is exceeding fantastical ; too too vain , 
▁ too too vain ; but we will put it , as they say , to fortuna de la 
▁ guerra . i wish you the peace of mind , most royal couplement ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup armado 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj here is like to be a good presence of xxmaj worthies . xxmaj he presents 
▁ xxmaj hector of xxmaj troy ; the swain , xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great ; the parish curate , 
▁ xxmaj alexander ; xxmaj arinado 's page , xxmaj hercules ; the pedant , xxmaj judas 
▁ xxmaj maccabaeus . 
▁ xxmaj and if these four xxmaj worthies in their first show thrive , 
▁ xxmaj these four will change habits and present the other five . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj there is five in the first show . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj you are deceived , ' tis not so . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj the pedant , the braggart , the hedge - priest , the fool , and 
▁ the boy : 
▁ xxmaj abate throw at novum , and the whole world again 
▁ xxmaj can not pick out five such , take each one in his vein . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the ship is under sail , and here she comes amain . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup costard , armed for xxup pompey 

▁ xxup costard . i xxmaj pompey am- 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj you lie , you are not he . 
▁ xxup costard . i xxmaj pompey am- 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj with libbard 's head on knee . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj well said , old mocker ; i must needs be friends with thee . 
▁ xxup costard . i xxmaj pompey am , xxmaj pompey surnam'd the xxmaj big- 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj the xxmaj great . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj it is xxmaj great , sir . 
▁ xxmaj pompey surnam'd the xxmaj great , 
▁ xxmaj that oft in field , with targe and shield , did make my foe to 
▁ sweat ; 
▁ xxmaj and travelling along this coast , i bere am come by chance , 
▁ xxmaj and lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of xxmaj france . 

▁ xxmaj if your ladyship would say ' thanks , xxmaj pompey , ' i had done . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj great thanks , great xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup costard . ' tis not so much worth ; but i hope i was perfect . 
▁ i made a little fault in xxmaj great . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj my hat to a halfpenny , xxmaj pompey proves the best xxmaj worthy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup nathaniel , for xxup alexander 

▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj when in the world i liv'd , i was the world 's commander ; 
▁ xxmaj by east , west , north , and south , i spread my conquering might . 
▁ xxmaj my scutcheon plain declares that i am xxmaj alisander- 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj your nose says , no , you are not ; for it stands to right . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj your nose smells ' no ' in this , most tender - smelling 
▁ knight . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj the conqueror is dismay'd . xxmaj proceed , good 
▁ xxmaj alexander . 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj when in the world i liv'd , i was the world 's commander- 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj most true , ' tis right , you were so , xxmaj alisander . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great ! 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj your servant , and xxmaj costard . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj take away the conqueror , take away xxmaj alisander . 
▁ xxup costard . [ to xxmaj sir xxmaj nathaniel ] xxup o , xxmaj sir , you have overthrown xxmaj alisander 
▁ the conqueror ! xxmaj you will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for 
▁ this . xxmaj your lion , that holds his poleaxe sitting on a close - stool , 
▁ will be given to xxmaj ajax . xxmaj he will be the ninth xxmaj worthy . a conqueror 
▁ and afeard to speak ! xxmaj run away for shame , xxmaj alisander . 
▁ [ sir xxmaj nathaniel retires ] xxmaj there , an't shall please you , a foolish 
▁ mild man ; an honest man , look you , and soon dash'd . xxmaj he is a 
▁ marvellous good neighbour , faith , and a very good bowler ; but for 
▁ xxmaj alisander- alas ! you see how ' tis- a little o'erparted . xxmaj but there 
▁ are xxmaj worthies a - coming will speak their mind in some other sort . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj stand aside , good xxmaj pompey . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup holofernes , for xxup judas ; and xxup moth , for xxup hercules 

▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj great xxmaj hercules is presented by this imp , 
▁ xxmaj whose club kill'd xxmaj cerberus , that three - headed canus ; 
▁ xxmaj and when be was a babe , a child , a shrimp , 
▁ xxmaj thus did he strangle serpents in his manus . 
▁ xxmaj quoniam he seemeth in minority , 
▁ xxmaj ergo i come with this apology . 
▁ xxmaj keep some state in thy exit , and vanish . [ moth retires ] 
▁ xxmaj judas i am- 
▁ xxup dumain . a xxmaj judas ! 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj not xxmaj iscariot , sir . 
▁ xxmaj judas i am , ycliped xxmaj maccabaeus . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj judas xxmaj maccabaeus clipt is plain xxmaj judas . 
▁ xxup berowne . a kissing traitor . xxmaj how art thou prov'd xxmaj judas ? 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj judas i am- 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj the more shame for you , xxmaj judas ! 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj what mean you , sir ? 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj to make xxmaj judas hang himself . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj begin , sir ; you are my elder . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj well followed : xxmaj judas was hanged on an elder . 
▁ xxup holofernes . i will not be put out of countenance . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj because thou hast no face . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj what is this ? 
▁ xxup boyet . a cittern - head . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj the head of a bodkin . 
▁ xxup berowne . a death 's face in a ring . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj the face of an old xxmaj roman coin , scarce seen . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj the pommel of xxmaj coesar 's falchion . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj the carv'd - bone face on a flask . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj saint xxmaj george 's half - cheek in a brooch . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj ay , and in a brooch of lead . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj ay , and worn in the cap of a tooth - drawer . xxmaj and now , 
▁ forward ; for we have put thee in countenance . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj you have put me out of countenance . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj false : we have given thee faces . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj but you have outfac'd them all . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj an thou wert a lion we would do so . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj therefore , as he is an ass , let him go . 
▁ xxmaj and so adieu , sweet xxmaj jude ! xxmaj nay , why dost thou stay ? 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj for the latter end of his name . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj for the ass to the xxmaj jude ; give it him- xxmaj jud - as , away . 
▁ xxup holofernes . xxmaj this is not generous , not gentle , not humble . 
▁ xxup boyet . a light for xxmaj monsieur xxmaj judas ! xxmaj it grows dark , he may stumble . 
▁ [ holofernes retires ] 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj maccabaeus , how hath he been baited ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup armado , for xxup hector 

▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj hide thy head , xxmaj achilles ; here comes xxmaj hector in arms . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj though my mocks come home by me , i will now be merry . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj hector was but a xxmaj troyan in respect of this . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj but is this xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxup dumain . i think xxmaj hector was not so clean - timber'd . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj his leg is too big for xxmaj hector 's . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj more calf , certain . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj no ; he is best indued in the small . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj this can not be xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj he 's a god or a painter , for he makes faces . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the armipotent xxmaj mars , of lances the almighty , 
▁ xxmaj gave xxmaj hector a gift- 
▁ xxup dumain . a gilt nutmeg . 
▁ xxup berowne . a lemon . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj stuck with cloves . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj no , cloven . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxmaj the armipotent xxmaj mars , of lances the almighty , 
▁ xxmaj gave xxmaj hector a gift , the heir of xxmaj ilion ; 
▁ a man so breathed that certain he would fight ye , 
▁ xxmaj from morn till night out of his pavilion . 
▁ i am that flower- 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj that mint . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj that columbine . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sweet xxmaj lord xxmaj longaville , rein thy tongue . 
▁ xxup longaville . i must rather give it the rein , for it runs against 
▁ xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj ay , and xxmaj hector 's a greyhound . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the sweet war - man is dead and rotten ; sweet chucks , beat 
▁ not the bones of the buried ; when he breathed , he was a man . xxmaj but 
▁ i will forward with my device . [ to the xxup princess ] xxmaj sweet royalty , 
▁ bestow on me the sense of hearing . 

▁ [ berowne steps forth , and speaks to xxup costard ] 

▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj speak , brave xxmaj hector ; we are much delighted . 
▁ xxup armado . i do adore thy sweet xxmaj grace 's slipper . 
▁ xxup boyet . [ aside to xxup dumain ] xxmaj loves her by the foot . 
▁ xxup dumain . [ aside to xxup boyet ] xxmaj he may not by the yard . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj this xxmaj hector far surmounted xxmaj hannibal- 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj the party is gone , fellow xxmaj hector , she is gone ; she is two 
▁ months on her way . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj what meanest thou ? 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj faith , unless you play the honest xxmaj troyan , the poor wench 
▁ is cast away . xxmaj she 's quick ; the child brags in her belly already ; 
▁ ' tis yours . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj dost thou infamonize me among potentates ? xxmaj thou shalt die . 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj then shall xxmaj hector be whipt for xxmaj jaquenetta that is quick by 
▁ him , and hang'd for xxmaj pompey that is dead by him . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj most rare xxmaj pompey ! 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj renowned xxmaj pompey ! 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj greater than xxmaj great ! xxmaj great , great , great xxmaj pompey ! xxmaj pompey the 
▁ xxmaj huge ! 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj hector trembles . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj pompey is moved . xxmaj more xxmaj ates , more xxmaj ates ! xxmaj stir them on ! stir 
▁ them on ! 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj hector will challenge him . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj ay , if ' a have no more man 's blood in his belly than will 
▁ sup a flea . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj by the xxmaj north xxmaj pole , i do challenge thee . 
▁ xxup costard . i will not fight with a pole , like a xxmaj northern man ; xxmaj i 'll 
▁ slash ; xxmaj i 'll do it by the sword . i bepray you , let me borrow my 
▁ arms again . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj room for the incensed xxmaj worthies ! 
▁ xxup costard . xxmaj i 'll do it in my shirt . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj most resolute xxmaj pompey ! 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj master , let me take you a buttonhole lower . xxmaj do you not see 
▁ xxmaj pompey is uncasing for the combat ? xxmaj what mean you ? xxmaj you will lose 
▁ your reputation . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj gentlemen and soldiers , pardon me ; i will not combat in my 
▁ shirt . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj you may not deny it : xxmaj pompey hath made the challenge . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sweet bloods , i both may and will . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj what reason have you for ' t ? 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the naked truth of it is : i have no shirt ; i go woolward 
▁ for penance . 
▁ xxup boyet . xxmaj true , and it was enjoined him in xxmaj rome for want of linen ; 
▁ since when , xxmaj i 'll be sworn , he wore none but a dishclout of 
▁ xxmaj jaquenetta 's , and that ' a wears next his heart for a favour . 

▁ xxmaj enter as messenger , xxup monsieur xxup marcade 

▁ xxup marcade . xxmaj god save you , madam ! 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj marcade ; 
▁ xxmaj but that thou interruptest our merriment . 
▁ xxup marcade . i am sorry , madam ; for the news i bring 
▁ xxmaj is heavy in my tongue . xxmaj the xxmaj king your father- 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj dead , for my life ! 
▁ xxup marcade . xxmaj even so ; my tale is told . 
▁ xxup berowne . worthies away ; the scene begins to cloud . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj for mine own part , i breathe free breath . i have seen the 
▁ day of wrong through the little hole of discretion , and i will 
▁ right myself like a soldier . xxmaj exeunt xxup worthies 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj how fares your xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj boyet , prepare ; i will away to - night . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj madam , not so ; i do beseech you stay . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj prepare , i say . i thank you , gracious lords , 
▁ xxmaj for all your fair endeavours , and entreat , 
▁ xxmaj out of a new - sad soul , that you vouchsafe 
▁ xxmaj in your rich wisdom to excuse or hide 
▁ xxmaj the liberal opposition of our spirits , 
▁ xxmaj if over - boldly we have borne ourselves 
▁ xxmaj in the converse of breath- your gentleness 
▁ xxmaj was guilty of it . xxmaj farewell , worthy lord . 
▁ a heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue . 
▁ xxmaj excuse me so , coming too short of thanks 
▁ xxmaj for my great suit so easily obtain'd . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj the extreme parts of time extremely forms 
▁ xxmaj all causes to the purpose of his speed ; 
▁ xxmaj and often at his very loose decides 
▁ xxmaj that which long process could not arbitrate . 
▁ xxmaj and though the mourning brow of progeny 
▁ xxmaj forbid the smiling courtesy of love 
▁ xxmaj the holy suit which fain it would convince , 
▁ xxmaj yet , since love 's argument was first on foot , 
▁ xxmaj let not the cloud of sorrow justle it 
▁ xxmaj from what it purpos'd ; since to wail friends lost 
▁ xxmaj is not by much so wholesome - profitable 
▁ xxmaj as to rejoice at friends but newly found . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . i understand you not ; my griefs are double . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief ; 
▁ xxmaj and by these badges understand the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj for your fair sakes have we neglected time , 
▁ xxmaj play'd foul play with our oaths ; your beauty , ladies , 
▁ xxmaj hath much deformed us , fashioning our humours 
▁ xxmaj even to the opposed end of our intents ; 
▁ xxmaj and what in us hath seem'd ridiculous , 
▁ xxmaj as love is full of unbefitting strains , 
▁ xxmaj all wanton as a child , skipping and vain ; 
▁ xxmaj form'd by the eye and therefore , like the eye , 
▁ xxmaj full of strange shapes , of habits , and of forms , 
▁ xxmaj varying in subjects as the eye doth roll 
▁ xxmaj to every varied object in his glance ; 
▁ xxmaj which parti - coated presence of loose love 
▁ xxmaj put on by us , if in your heavenly eyes 
▁ xxmaj have misbecom'd our oaths and gravities , 
▁ xxmaj those heavenly eyes that look into these faults 
▁ xxmaj suggested us to make . xxmaj therefore , ladies , 
▁ xxmaj our love being yours , the error that love makes 
▁ xxmaj is likewise yours . xxmaj we to ourselves prove false , 
▁ xxmaj by being once false for ever to be true 
▁ xxmaj to those that make us both- fair ladies , you ; 
▁ xxmaj and even that falsehood , in itself a sin , 
▁ xxmaj thus purifies itself and turns to grace . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj we have receiv'd your letters , full of love ; 
▁ xxmaj your favours , the ambassadors of love ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in our maiden council , rated them 
▁ xxmaj at courtship , pleasant jest , and courtesy , 
▁ xxmaj as bombast and as lining to the time ; 
▁ xxmaj but more devout than this in our respects 
▁ xxmaj have we not been ; and therefore met your loves 
▁ xxmaj in their own fashion , like a merriment . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj our letters , madam , show'd much more than jest . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj so did our looks . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj we did not quote them so . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj now , at the latest minute of the hour , 
▁ xxmaj grant us your loves . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . a time , methinks , too short 
▁ xxmaj to make a world - without - end bargain in . 
▁ xxmaj no , no , my lord , your xxmaj grace is perjur'd much , 
▁ xxmaj full of dear guiltiness ; and therefore this , 
▁ xxmaj if for my love , as there is no such cause , 
▁ xxmaj you will do aught- this shall you do for me : 
▁ xxmaj your oath i will not trust ; but go with speed 
▁ xxmaj to some forlorn and naked hermitage , 
▁ xxmaj remote from all the pleasures of the world ; 
▁ xxmaj there stay until the twelve celestial signs 
▁ xxmaj have brought about the annual reckoning . 
▁ xxmaj if this austere insociable life 
▁ xxmaj change not your offer made in heat of blood , 
▁ xxmaj if frosts and fasts , hard lodging and thin weeds , 
▁ xxmaj nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love , 
▁ xxmaj but that it bear this trial , and last love , 
▁ xxmaj then , at the expiration of the year , 
▁ xxmaj come , challenge me , challenge me by these deserts ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by this virgin palm now kissing thine , 
▁ i will be thine ; and , till that instant , shut 
▁ xxmaj my woeful self up in a mournful house , 
▁ xxmaj raining the tears of lamentation 
▁ xxmaj for the remembrance of my father 's death . 
▁ xxmaj if this thou do deny , let our hands part , 
▁ xxmaj neither intitled in the other 's heart . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj if this , or more than this , i would deny , 
▁ xxmaj to flatter up these powers of mine with rest , 
▁ xxmaj the sudden hand of death close up mine eye ! 
▁ xxmaj hence hermit then , my heart is in thy breast . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj and what to me , my love ? and what to me ? 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj you must he purged too , your sins are rack'd ; 
▁ xxmaj you are attaint with faults and perjury ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , if you my favour mean to get , 
▁ a twelvemonth shall you spend , and never rest , 
▁ xxmaj but seek the weary beds of people sick . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj but what to me , my love ? but what to me ? 
▁ a wife ? 
▁ xxup katharine . a beard , fair health , and honesty ; 
▁ xxmaj with threefold love i wish you all these three . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxup o , shall i say i thank you , gentle wife ? 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj no so , my lord ; a twelvemonth and a day 
▁ xxmaj i 'll mark no words that smooth - fac'd wooers say . 
▁ xxmaj come when the xxmaj king doth to my lady come ; 
▁ xxmaj then , if i have much love , xxmaj i 'll give you some . 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj i 'll serve thee true and faithfully till then . 
▁ xxup katharine . xxmaj yet swear not , lest ye be forsworn again . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj what says xxmaj maria ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj at the twelvemonth 's end 
▁ xxmaj i 'll change my black gown for a faithful friend . 
▁ xxup longaville . xxmaj i 'll stay with patience ; but the time is long . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj the liker you ; few taller are so young . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj studies my lady ? xxmaj mistress , look on me ; 
▁ xxmaj behold the window of my heart , mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj what humble suit attends thy answer there . 
▁ xxmaj impose some service on me for thy love . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj oft have i heard of you , my xxmaj lord xxmaj berowne , 
▁ xxmaj before i saw you ; and the world 's large tongue 
▁ xxmaj proclaims you for a man replete with mocks , 
▁ xxmaj full of comparisons and wounding flouts , 
▁ xxmaj which you on all estates will execute 
▁ xxmaj that lie within the mercy of your wit . 
▁ xxmaj to weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain , 
▁ xxmaj and therewithal to win me , if you please , 
▁ xxmaj without the which i am not to be won , 
▁ xxmaj you shall this twelvemonth term from day to day 
▁ xxmaj visit the speechless sick , and still converse 
▁ xxmaj with groaning wretches ; and your task shall be , 
▁ xxmaj with all the fierce endeavour of your wit , 
▁ xxmaj to enforce the pained impotent to smile . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj to move wild laughter in the throat of death ? 
▁ xxmaj it can not be ; it is impossible ; 
▁ xxmaj mirth can not move a soul in agony . 
▁ xxup rosaline . xxmaj why , that 's the way to choke a gibing spirit , 
▁ xxmaj whose influence is begot of that loose grace 
▁ xxmaj which shallow laughing hearers give to fools . 
▁ a jest 's prosperity lies in the ear 
▁ xxmaj of him that hears it , never in the tongue 
▁ xxmaj of him that makes it ; then , if sickly ears , 
▁ xxmaj deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans , 
▁ xxmaj will hear your idle scorns , continue then , 
▁ xxmaj and i will have you and that fault withal . 
▁ xxmaj but if they will not , throw away that spirit , 
▁ xxmaj and i shall find you empty of that fault , 
▁ xxmaj right joyful of your reformation . 
▁ xxup berowne . a twelvemonth ? xxmaj well , befall what will befall , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital . 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . [ xxmaj to the xxmaj king ] xxmaj ay , sweet my lord , and so i take 
▁ my leave . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj no , madam ; we will bring you on your way . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj our wooing doth not end like an old play : 
▁ xxmaj jack hath not xxmaj jill . xxmaj these ladies ' courtesy 
▁ xxmaj might well have made our sport a comedy . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj come , sir , it wants a twelvemonth an ' a day , 
▁ xxmaj and then ' twill end . 
▁ xxup berowne . xxmaj that 's too long for a play . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup armado 

▁ xxup armado . xxmaj sweet xxmaj majesty , vouchsafe me- 
▁ xxup princess xxup of xxup france . xxmaj was not that not xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxup dumain . xxmaj the worthy knight of xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxup armado . i will kiss thy royal finger , and take leave . i am a 
▁ votary : i have vow'd to xxmaj jaquenetta to hold the plough for her 
▁ sweet love three year . xxmaj but , most esteemed greatness , will you 
▁ hear the dialogue that the two learned men have compiled in 
▁ praise of the xxmaj owl and the xxmaj cuckoo ? xxmaj it should have followed in the 
▁ end of our show . 
▁ xxup king . xxmaj call them forth quickly ; we will do so . 
▁ xxup armado . xxmaj holla ! approach . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj all 

▁ xxmaj this side is xxmaj hiems , xxmaj winter ; this xxmaj ver , the xxmaj spring- the one 
▁ maintained by the xxmaj owl , th ' other by the xxmaj cuckoo . xxmaj ver , begin . 

▁ xxup spring 
▁ xxmaj when daisies pied and violets blue 
▁ xxmaj and lady - smocks all silver - white 
▁ xxmaj and cuckoo - buds of yellow hue 
▁ xxmaj do paint the meadows with delight , 
▁ xxmaj the cuckoo then on every tree 
▁ xxmaj mocks married men , for thus sings he : 
▁ ' cuckoo ; 
▁ xxmaj cuckoo , cuckoo'- o word of fear , 
▁ xxmaj unpleasing to a married ear ! 

▁ xxmaj when shepherds pipe on oaten straws , 
▁ xxmaj and merry larks are ploughmen 's clocks ; 
▁ xxmaj when turtles tread , and rooks and daws , 
▁ xxmaj and maidens bleach their summer smocks ; 
▁ xxmaj the cuckoo then on every tree 
▁ xxmaj mocks married men , for thus sings he : 
▁ ' cuckoo ; 
▁ xxmaj cuckoo , cuckoo'- o word of fear , 
▁ xxmaj unpleasing to a married ear ! 


▁ xxup winter 

▁ xxmaj when icicles hang by the wall , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj dick the shepherd blows his nail , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj tom bears logs into the hall , 
▁ xxmaj and milk comes frozen home in pail , 
▁ xxmaj when blood is nipp'd , and ways be foul , 
▁ xxmaj then nightly sings the staring owl : 
▁ ' tu - who ; 
▁ xxmaj tu - whit , xxmaj tu - who'- a merry note , 
▁ xxmaj while greasy xxmaj joan doth keel the pot . 

▁ xxmaj when all aloud the wind doth blow , 
▁ xxmaj and coughing drowns the parson 's saw , 
▁ xxmaj and birds sit brooding in the snow , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj marian 's nose looks red and raw , 
▁ xxmaj when roasted crabs hiss in the bowl , 
▁ xxmaj then nightly sings the staring owl : 
▁ ' tu - who ; 
▁ xxmaj tu - whit , xxmaj to - who'- a merry note , 
▁ xxmaj while greasy xxmaj joan doth keel the pot . 

▁ xxup armado . xxmaj the words of xxmaj mercury are harsh after the songs of xxmaj apollo . 
▁ xxmaj you that way : we this way . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 






 1606 

 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup macbeth 


 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup duncan , xxmaj king of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup macbeth , xxmaj thane of xxmaj glamis and xxmaj cawdor , a general in the xxmaj king 's army 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth , his wife 
▁ xxup macduff , xxmaj thane of xxmaj fife , a nobleman of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff , his wife 
▁ xxup malcolm , elder son of xxmaj duncan 
▁ xxup donalbain , younger son of xxmaj duncan 
▁ xxup banquo , xxmaj thane of xxmaj lochaber , a general in the xxmaj king 's army 
▁ xxup fleance , his son 
▁ xxup lennox , nobleman of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup ross , nobleman of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup menteith nobleman of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup angus , nobleman of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup caithness , nobleman of xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxup siward , xxmaj earl of xxmaj northumberland , general of the xxmaj english forces 
▁ xxup young xxup siward , his son 
▁ xxup seyton , attendant to xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxup hecate , xxmaj queen of the xxmaj witches 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj three xxmaj witches 
▁ xxmaj boy , xxmaj son of xxmaj macduff 
▁ xxmaj gentlewoman attending on xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj english xxmaj doctor 
▁ a xxmaj scottish xxmaj doctor 
▁ a xxmaj sergeant 
▁ a xxmaj porter 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj old xxmaj man 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj ghost of xxmaj banquo and other xxmaj apparitions 
▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj gentlemen , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj murtherers , xxmaj attendants , 
▁ and xxmaj messengers 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : xxmaj scotland and xxmaj england 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 a desert place . xxmaj thunder and lightning . 

 xxmaj enter three xxmaj witches . 

▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj when shall we three meet again ? 
▁ xxmaj in thunder , lightning , or in rain ? 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj when the hurlyburly 's done , 
▁ xxmaj when the battle 's lost and won . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj that will be ere the set of sun . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj where the place ? 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj upon the heath . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj there to meet with xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . i come , xxmaj graymalkin . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj paddock calls . xxmaj anon ! 
▁ xxmaj fair is foul , and foul is fair . 
▁ xxmaj hover through the fog and filthy air . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a camp near xxmaj forres . xxmaj alarum within . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj duncan , xxmaj malcolm , xxmaj donalbain , xxmaj lennox , with xxmaj attendants , 
 meeting a bleeding xxmaj sergeant . 

▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj what bloody man is that ? xxmaj he can report , 
▁ xxmaj as seemeth by his plight , of the revolt 
▁ xxmaj the newest state . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj this is the sergeant 
▁ xxmaj who like a good and hardy soldier fought 
▁ ' gainst my captivity . xxmaj hail , brave friend ! 
▁ xxmaj say to the xxmaj king the knowledge of the broil 
▁ xxmaj as thou didst leave it . 
▁ xxup sergeant . xxmaj doubtful it stood , 
▁ xxmaj as two spent swimmers that do cling together 
▁ xxmaj and choke their art . xxmaj the merciless xxmaj macdonwald- 
▁ xxmaj worthy to be a rebel , for to that 
▁ xxmaj the multiplying villainies of nature 
▁ xxmaj do swarm upon him -from the xxmaj western xxmaj isles 
▁ xxmaj of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj fortune , on his damned quarrel smiling , 
▁ xxmaj show'd like a rebel 's whore . xxmaj but all 's too weak ; 
▁ xxmaj for brave xxmaj macbeth -well he deserves that name- 
▁ xxmaj disdaining xxmaj fortune , with his brandish'd steel , 
▁ xxmaj which smoked with bloody execution , 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj valor 's minion carved out his passage 
▁ xxmaj till he faced the slave , 
▁ xxmaj which ne'er shook hands , nor bade farewell to him , 
▁ xxmaj till he unseam'd him from the nave to the chaps , 
▁ xxmaj and fix'd his head upon our battlements . 
▁ xxup duncan . o valiant cousin ! xxmaj worthy gentleman ! 
▁ xxup sergeant . xxmaj as whence the sun ' gins his reflection 
▁ xxmaj shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break , 
▁ xxmaj so from that spring whence comfort seem'd to come 
▁ xxmaj discomfort swells . xxmaj mark , xxmaj king of xxmaj scotland , mark . 
▁ xxmaj no sooner justice had , with valor arm'd , 
▁ xxmaj compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels , 
▁ xxmaj but the xxmaj norweyan lord , surveying vantage , 
▁ xxmaj with furbish'd arms and new supplies of men , 
▁ xxmaj began a fresh assault . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj dismay'd not this 
▁ xxmaj our captains , xxmaj macbeth and xxmaj banquo . ? 
▁ xxup sergeant . xxmaj yes , 
▁ xxmaj as sparrows eagles , or the hare the lion . 
▁ xxmaj if i say sooth , i must report they were 
▁ xxmaj as cannons overcharged with double cracks , 
▁ xxmaj so they 
▁ xxmaj doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe . 
▁ xxmaj except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds , 
▁ xxmaj or memorize another xxmaj golgotha , 
▁ i can not tell- 
▁ xxmaj but i am faint ; my gashes cry for help . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj so well thy words become thee as thy wounds ; 
▁ xxmaj they smack of honor both . xxmaj go get him surgeons . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj sergeant , attended . 
▁ xxmaj who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ross . 

▁ xxup malcolm xxmaj the worthy xxmaj thane of xxmaj ross . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj what a haste looks through his eyes ! xxmaj so should he look 
▁ xxmaj that seems to speak things strange . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj whence camest thou , worthy xxmaj thane ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj from xxmaj fife , great xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj where the xxmaj norweyan banners flout the sky 
▁ xxmaj and fan our people cold . 
▁ xxmaj norway himself , with terrible numbers , 
▁ xxmaj assisted by that most disloyal traitor 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor , began a dismal conflict , 
▁ xxmaj till that xxmaj bellona 's bridegroom , lapp'd in proof , 
▁ xxmaj confronted him with self - comparisons , 
▁ xxmaj point against point rebellious , arm ' gainst arm , 
▁ xxmaj curbing his lavish spirit ; and , to conclude , 
▁ xxmaj the victory fell on us . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj great happiness ! 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj that now 
▁ xxmaj sweno , the xxmaj norways ' king , craves composition ; 
▁ xxmaj nor would we deign him burial of his men 
▁ xxmaj till he disbursed , at xxmaj saint xxmaj colme 's xxmaj inch , 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand dollars to our general use . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj no more that xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor shall deceive 
▁ xxmaj our bosom interest . xxmaj go pronounce his present death , 
▁ xxmaj and with his former title greet xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj i 'll see it done . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj what he hath lost , noble xxmaj macbeth hath won . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a heath . xxmaj thunder . 

 xxmaj enter the three xxmaj witches . 

▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj where hast thou been , sister ? 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj killing swine . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj sister , where thou ? 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . a sailor 's wife had chestnuts in her lap , 
▁ xxmaj and mounch'd , and mounch'd , and mounch'd . " give me , " quoth xxup i. 
▁ " aroint thee , witch ! " the rump - fed ronyon cries . 
▁ xxmaj her husband 's to xxmaj aleppo gone , master the xxmaj tiger ; 
▁ xxmaj but in a sieve xxmaj i 'll thither sail , 
▁ xxmaj and , like a rat without a tail , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll do , xxmaj i 'll do , and xxmaj i 'll do . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj i 'll give thee a wind . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj thou'rt kind . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj and i another . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . i myself have all the other , 
▁ xxmaj and the very ports they blow , 
▁ xxmaj all the quarters that they know 
▁ xxup i ' the shipman 's card . 
▁ i will drain him dry as hay : 
▁ xxmaj sleep shall neither night nor day 
▁ xxmaj hang upon his penthouse lid ; 
▁ xxmaj he shall live a man forbid . 
▁ xxmaj weary se'nnights nine times nine 
▁ xxmaj shall he dwindle , peak , and pine ; 
▁ xxmaj though his bark can not be lost , 
▁ xxmaj yet it shall be tempest - toss'd . 
▁ xxmaj look what i have . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj show me , show me . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj here i have a pilot 's thumb , 
▁ xxmaj wreck'd as homeward he did come . xxmaj drum within . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . a drum , a drum ! 
▁ xxmaj macbeth doth come . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj the weird sisters , hand in hand , 
▁ xxmaj posters of the sea and land , 
▁ xxmaj thus do go about , about , 
▁ xxmaj thrice to thine , and thrice to mine , 
▁ xxmaj and thrice again , to make up nine . 
▁ xxmaj peace ! xxmaj the charm 's wound up . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth and xxmaj banquo . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj so foul and fair a day i have not seen . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj how far is't call'd to xxmaj forres ? xxmaj what are these 
▁ xxmaj so wither'd and so wild in their attire , 
▁ xxmaj that look not like the inhabitants o ' the earth , 
▁ xxmaj and yet are on't ? xxmaj live you ? or are you aught 
▁ xxmaj that man may question ? xxmaj you seem to understand me , 
▁ xxmaj by each at once her choppy finger laying 
▁ xxmaj upon her skinny lips . xxmaj you should be women , 
▁ xxmaj and yet your beards forbid me to interpret 
▁ xxmaj that you are so . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj speak , if you can . xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj all hail , xxmaj macbeth , hail to thee , xxmaj thane of xxmaj glamis ! 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj all hail , xxmaj macbeth , hail to thee , xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor ! 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj all hail , xxmaj macbeth , that shalt be xxmaj king hereafter ! 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj good sir , why do you start , and seem to fear 
▁ xxmaj things that do sound so fair ? xxup i ' the name of truth , 
▁ xxmaj are ye fantastical or that indeed 
▁ xxmaj which outwardly ye show ? xxmaj my noble partner 
▁ xxmaj you greet with present grace and great prediction 
▁ xxmaj of noble having and of royal hope , 
▁ xxmaj that he seems rapt withal . xxmaj to me you speak not . 
▁ xxmaj if you can look into the seeds of time , 
▁ xxmaj and say which grain will grow and which will not , 
▁ xxmaj speak then to me , who neither beg nor fear 
▁ xxmaj your favors nor your hate . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj hail ! 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj hail ! 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj hail ! 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj lesser than xxmaj macbeth , and greater . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj not so happy , yet much happier . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj thou shalt get kings , though thou be none . 
▁ xxmaj so all hail , xxmaj macbeth and xxmaj banquo ! 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj banquo and xxmaj macbeth , all hail ! 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj stay , you imperfect speakers , tell me more . 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj sinel 's death i know i am xxmaj thane of xxmaj glamis ; 
▁ xxmaj but how of xxmaj cawdor ? xxmaj the xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor lives , 
▁ a prosperous gentleman ; and to be xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj stands not within the prospect of belief , 
▁ xxmaj no more than to be xxmaj cawdor . xxmaj say from whence 
▁ xxmaj you owe this strange intelligence , or why 
▁ xxmaj upon this blasted heath you stop our way 
▁ xxmaj with such prophetic greeting ? xxmaj speak , i charge you . 
▁ xxmaj witches vanish . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj the earth hath bubbles as the water has , 
▁ xxmaj and these are of them . xxmaj whither are they vanish'd ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj into the air , and what seem'd corporal melted 
▁ xxmaj as breath into the wind . xxmaj would they had stay'd ! 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj were such things here as we do speak about ? 
▁ xxmaj or have we eaten on the insane root 
▁ xxmaj that takes the reason prisoner ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj your children shall be kings . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj you shall be xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj and xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor too . xxmaj went it not so ? 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj to the selfsame tune and words . xxmaj who 's here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ross and xxmaj angus . 
▁
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath happily received , xxmaj macbeth , 
▁ xxmaj the news of thy success ; and when he reads 
▁ xxmaj thy personal venture in the rebels ' fight , 
▁ xxmaj his wonders and his praises do contend 
▁ xxmaj which should be thine or his . xxmaj silenced with that , 
▁ xxmaj in viewing o'er the rest o ' the selfsame day , 
▁ xxmaj he finds thee in the stout xxmaj norweyan ranks , 
▁ xxmaj nothing afeard of what thyself didst make , 
▁ xxmaj strange images of death . xxmaj as thick as hail 
▁ xxmaj came post with post , and every one did bear 
▁ xxmaj thy praises in his kingdom 's great defense , 
▁ xxmaj and pour'd them down before him . 
▁ xxup angus . xxmaj we are sent 
▁ xxmaj to give thee , from our royal master , thanks ; 
▁ xxmaj only to herald thee into his sight , 
▁ xxmaj not pay thee . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj and for an earnest of a greater honor , 
▁ xxmaj he bade me , from him , call thee xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor . 
▁ xxmaj in which addition , hail , most worthy xxmaj thane , 
▁ xxmaj for it is thine . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj what , can the devil speak true ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj the xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor lives . xxmaj why do you dress me 
▁ xxmaj in borrow'd robes ? 
▁ xxup angus . xxmaj who was the xxmaj thane lives yet , 
▁ xxmaj but under heavy judgement bears that life 
▁ xxmaj which he deserves to lose . xxmaj whether he was combined 
▁ xxmaj with those of xxmaj norway , or did line the rebel 
▁ xxmaj with hidden help and vantage , or that with both 
▁ xxmaj he labor'd in his country 's wreck , i know not ; 
▁ xxmaj but treasons capital , confess'd and proved , 
▁ xxmaj have overthrown him . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj glamis , and xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor ! 
▁ xxmaj the greatest is behind . [ to xxmaj ross and xxmaj angus ] xxmaj thanks for your 
▁ pains . 
▁ [ aside to xxmaj banquo ] xxmaj do you not hope your children shall be kings , 
▁ xxmaj when those that gave the xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor to me 
▁ xxmaj promised no less to them ? 
▁ xxup banquo . [ aside to xxmaj macbeth . ] xxmaj that , trusted home , 
▁ xxmaj might yet enkindle you unto the crown , 
▁ xxmaj besides the xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor . xxmaj but ' tis strange ; 
▁ xxmaj and oftentimes , to win us to our harm , 
▁ xxmaj the instruments of darkness tell us truths , 
▁ xxmaj win us with honest trifles , to betray 's 
▁ xxmaj in deepest consequence- 
▁ xxmaj cousins , a word , i pray you . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj two truths are told , 
▁ xxmaj as happy prologues to the swelling act 
▁ xxmaj of the imperial theme - i thank you , gentlemen . 
▁ [ aside . ] xxmaj this supernatural soliciting 
▁ xxmaj can not be ill , can not be good . xxmaj if ill , 
▁ xxmaj why hath it given me earnest of success , 
▁ xxmaj commencing in a truth ? i am xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor . 
▁ xxmaj if good , why do i yield to that suggestion 
▁ xxmaj whose horrid image doth unfix my hair 
▁ xxmaj and make my seated heart knock at my ribs , 
▁ xxmaj against the use of nature ? xxmaj present fears 
▁ xxmaj are less than horrible imaginings : 
▁ xxmaj my thought , whose murther yet is but fantastical , 
▁ xxmaj shakes so my single state of man that function 
▁ xxmaj is smother'd in surmise , and nothing is 
▁ xxmaj but what is not . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj look , how our partner 's rapt . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj if chance will have me xxmaj king , why , chance may 
▁ crown me 
▁ xxmaj without my stir . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj new honors come upon him , 
▁ xxmaj like our strange garments , cleave not to their mould 
▁ xxmaj but with the aid of use . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj come what come may , 
▁ xxmaj time and the hour runs through the roughest day . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj worthy xxmaj macbeth , we stay upon your leisure . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj give me your favor ; my dull brain was wrought 
▁ xxmaj with things forgotten . xxmaj kind gentlemen , your pains 
▁ xxmaj are register'd where every day i turn 
▁ xxmaj the leaf to read them . xxmaj let us toward the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj think upon what hath chanced , and at more time , 
▁ xxmaj the interim having weigh'd it , let us speak 
▁ xxmaj our free hearts each to other . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj very gladly . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj till then , enough . xxmaj come , friends . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj forres . xxmaj the palace . 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxmaj duncan , xxmaj malcolm , xxmaj donalbain , xxmaj lennox , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj is execution done on xxmaj cawdor ? xxmaj are not 
▁ xxmaj those in commission yet return'd ? 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj my liege , 
▁ xxmaj they are not yet come back . xxmaj but i have spoke 
▁ xxmaj with one that saw him die , who did report