xxbos xxmaj that very frankly he confess'd his treasons , 
▁ xxmaj implored your xxmaj highness ' pardon , and set forth 
▁ a deep repentance . xxmaj nothing in his life 
▁ xxmaj became him like the leaving it ; he died 
▁ xxmaj as one that had been studied in his death , 
▁ xxmaj to throw away the dearest thing he owed 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere a careless trifle . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj there 's no art 
▁ xxmaj to find the mind 's construction in the face : 
▁ xxmaj he was a gentleman on whom i built 
▁ xxmaj an absolute trust . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth , xxmaj banquo , xxmaj ross , and xxmaj angus . 

▁ o worthiest cousin ! 
▁ xxmaj the sin of my ingratitude even now 
▁ xxmaj was heavy on me . xxmaj thou art so far before , 
▁ xxmaj that swiftest wing of recompense is slow 
▁ xxmaj to overtake thee . xxmaj would thou hadst less deserved , 
▁ xxmaj that the proportion both of thanks and payment 
▁ xxmaj might have been mine ! xxmaj only i have left to say , 
▁ xxmaj more is thy due than more than all can pay . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj the service and the loyalty lowe , 
▁ xxmaj in doing it , pays itself . xxmaj your xxmaj highness ' part 
▁ xxmaj is to receive our duties , and our duties 
▁ xxmaj are to your throne and state , children and servants , 
▁ xxmaj which do but what they should , by doing everything 
▁ xxmaj safe toward your love and honor . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj welcome hither . 
▁ i have begun to plant thee , and will labor 
▁ xxmaj to make thee full of growing . xxmaj noble xxmaj banquo , 
▁ xxmaj that hast no less deserved , nor must be known 
▁ xxmaj no less to have done so ; let me infold thee 
▁ xxmaj and hold thee to my heart . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj there if i grow , 
▁ xxmaj the harvest is your own . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj my plenteous joys , 
▁ xxmaj wanton in fullness , seek to hide themselves 
▁ xxmaj in drops of sorrow . xxmaj sons , kinsmen , thanes , 
▁ xxmaj and you whose places are the nearest , know 
▁ xxmaj we will establish our estate upon 
▁ xxmaj our eldest , xxmaj malcolm , whom we name hereafter 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj cumberland ; which honor must 
▁ xxmaj not unaccompanied invest him only , 
▁ xxmaj but signs of nobleness , like stars , shall shine 
▁ xxmaj on all deservers . xxmaj from hence to xxmaj inverness , 
▁ xxmaj and bind us further to you . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj the rest is labor , which is not used for you . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be myself the harbinger , and make joyful 
▁ xxmaj the hearing of my wife with your approach ; 
▁ xxmaj so humbly take my leave . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj my worthy xxmaj cawdor ! 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj cumberland ! xxmaj that is a step 
▁ xxmaj on which i must fall down , or else o'erleap , 
▁ xxmaj for in my way it lies . xxmaj stars , hide your fires ; 
▁ xxmaj let not light see my black and deep desires . 
▁ xxmaj the eye wink at the hand ; yet let that be 
▁ xxmaj which the eye fears , when it is done , to see . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj true , worthy xxmaj banquo ! xxmaj he is full so valiant , 
▁ xxmaj and in his commendations i am fed ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a banquet to me . xxmaj let 's after him , 
▁ xxmaj whose care is gone before to bid us welcome . 
▁ xxmaj it is a peerless kinsman . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj inverness . xxmaj macbeth 's castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth , reading a letter . 

▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . " they met me in the day of success , and i have 
▁ learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than 
▁ mortal knowledge . xxmaj when i burned in desire to question them 
▁ further , they made themselves air , into which they vanished . 
▁ xxmaj whiles i stood rapt in the wonder of it , came missives from the 
▁ xxmaj king , who all - hailed me ' thane of xxmaj cawdor ' ; by which title , 
▁ before , these weird sisters saluted me and referred me to the 
▁ coming on of time with ' hail , xxmaj king that shalt be ! ' xxmaj this have i 
▁ thought good to deliver thee , my dearest partner of greatness , 
▁ that thou mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing , by being 
▁ ignorant of what greatness is promised thee . xxmaj lay it to thy heart , 
▁ and farewell . " 

▁ xxmaj glamis thou art , and xxmaj cawdor , and shalt be 
▁ xxmaj what thou art promised . xxmaj yet do i fear thy nature . 
▁ xxmaj it is too full o ' the milk of human kindness 
▁ xxmaj to catch the nearest way . xxmaj thou wouldst be great ; 
▁ xxmaj art not without ambition , but without 
▁ xxmaj the illness should attend it . xxmaj what thou wouldst highly , 
▁ xxmaj that wouldst thou holily ; wouldst not play false , 
▁ xxmaj and yet wouldst wrongly win . xxmaj thou'ldst have , great xxmaj glamis , 
▁ xxmaj that which cries , " thus thou must do , if thou have it ; 
▁ xxmaj and that which rather thou dost fear to do 
▁ xxmaj than wishest should be undone . " xxmaj hie thee hither , 
▁ xxmaj that i may pour my spirits in thine ear , 
▁ xxmaj and chastise with the valor of my tongue 
▁ xxmaj all that impedes thee from the golden round , 
▁ xxmaj which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem 
▁ xxmaj to have thee crown'd withal . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj what is your tidings ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj king comes here tonight . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou'rt mad to say it ! 
▁ xxmaj is not thy master with him ? who , were't so , 
▁ xxmaj would have inform'd for preparation . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj so please you , it is true ; our xxmaj thane is coming . 
▁ xxmaj one of my fellows had the speed of him , 
▁ xxmaj who , almost dead for breath , had scarcely more 
▁ xxmaj than would make up his message . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj give him tending ; 
▁ xxmaj he brings great news . xxmaj exit xxmaj messenger . 
▁ xxmaj the raven himself is hoarse 
▁ xxmaj that croaks the fatal entrance of xxmaj duncan 
▁ xxmaj under my battlements . xxmaj come , you spirits 
▁ xxmaj that tend on mortal thoughts , unsex me here 
▁ xxmaj and fill me from the crown to the toe top - full 
▁ xxmaj of direst cruelty ! xxmaj make thick my blood , 
▁ xxmaj stop up the access and passage to remorse , 
▁ xxmaj that no compunctious visitings of nature 
▁ xxmaj shake my fell purpose nor keep peace between 
▁ xxmaj the effect and it ! xxmaj come to my woman 's breasts , 
▁ xxmaj and take my milk for gall , your murthering ministers , 
▁ xxmaj wherever in your sightless substances 
▁ xxmaj you wait on nature 's mischief ! xxmaj come , thick night , 
▁ xxmaj and pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell 
▁ xxmaj that my keen knife see not the wound it makes 
▁ xxmaj nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark 
▁ xxmaj to cry , " hold , hold ! " 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxmaj great xxmaj glamis ! xxmaj worthy xxmaj cawdor ! 
▁ xxmaj greater than both , by the all - hail hereafter ! 
▁ xxmaj thy letters have transported me beyond 
▁ xxmaj this ignorant present , and i feel now 
▁ xxmaj the future in the instant . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj my dearest love , 
▁ xxmaj duncan comes here tonight . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj and when goes hence ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj tomorrow , as he purposes . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxup o , never 
▁ xxmaj shall sun that morrow see ! 
▁ xxmaj your face , my xxmaj thane , is as a book where men 
▁ xxmaj may read strange matters . xxmaj to beguile the time , 
▁ xxmaj look like the time ; bear welcome in your eye , 
▁ xxmaj your hand , your tongue ; look like the innocent flower , 
▁ xxmaj but be the serpent under it . xxmaj he that 's coming 
▁ xxmaj must be provided for ; and you shall put 
▁ xxmaj this night 's great business into my dispatch , 
▁ xxmaj which shall to all our nights and days to come 
▁ xxmaj give solely sovereign sway and masterdom . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj we will speak further . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj only look up clear ; 
▁ xxmaj to alter favor ever is to fear . 
▁ xxmaj leave all the rest to me . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj before xxmaj macbeth 's castle . xxmaj hautboys and torches . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj duncan , xxmaj malcolm , xxmaj donalbain , xxmaj banquo , xxmaj lennox , xxmaj macduff , xxmaj ross , xxmaj angus , 
 and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj this castle hath a pleasant seat ; the air 
▁ xxmaj nimbly and sweetly recommends itself 
▁ xxmaj unto our gentle senses . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj this guest of summer , 
▁ xxmaj the temple - haunting martlet , does approve 
▁ xxmaj by his loved mansionry that the heaven 's breath 
▁ xxmaj smells wooingly here . xxmaj no jutty , frieze , 
▁ xxmaj buttress , nor coign of vantage , but this bird 
▁ xxmaj hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle ; 
▁ xxmaj where they most breed and haunt , i have observed 
▁ xxmaj the air is delicate . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj see , see , our honor'd hostess ! 
▁ xxmaj the love that follows us sometime is our trouble , 
▁ xxmaj which still we thank as love . xxmaj herein i teach you 
▁ xxmaj how you shall bid xxmaj god ' ield us for your pains , 
▁ xxmaj and thank us for your trouble . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj all our service 
▁ xxmaj in every point twice done , and then done double , 
▁ xxmaj were poor and single business to contend 
▁ xxmaj against those honors deep and broad wherewith 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj majesty loads our house . xxmaj for those of old , 
▁ xxmaj and the late dignities heap'd up to them , 
▁ xxmaj we rest your hermits . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj where 's the xxmaj thane of xxmaj cawdor ? 
▁ xxmaj we coursed him at the heels and had a purpose 
▁ xxmaj to be his purveyor ; but he rides well , 
▁ xxmaj and his great love , sharp as his spur , hath holp him 
▁ xxmaj to his home before us . xxmaj fair and noble hostess , 
▁ xxmaj we are your guest tonight . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj your servants ever 
▁ xxmaj have theirs , themselves , and what is theirs , in compt , 
▁ xxmaj to make their audit at your xxmaj highness ' pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj still to return your own . 
▁ xxup duncan . xxmaj give me your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj conduct me to mine host . xxmaj we love him highly , 
▁ xxmaj and shall continue our graces towards him . 
▁ xxmaj by your leave , hostess . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup vii 
 xxmaj macbeth 's castle . xxmaj hautboys and torches . 

 xxmaj enter a xxmaj sewer and divers xxmaj servants with dishes and service , who pass over 
 the stage . xxmaj then enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj if it were done when ' tis done , then ' twere well 
▁ xxmaj it were done quickly . xxmaj if the assassination 
▁ xxmaj could trammel up the consequence , and catch , 
▁ xxmaj with his surcease , success ; that but this blow 
▁ xxmaj might be the be - all and the end - all -here , 
▁ xxmaj but here , upon this bank and shoal of time , 
▁ xxmaj we'ld jump the life to come . xxmaj but in these cases 
▁ xxmaj we still have judgement here , that we but teach 
▁ xxmaj bloody instructions , which being taught return 
▁ xxmaj to plague the inventor . xxmaj this even - handed justice 
▁ xxmaj commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice 
▁ xxmaj to our own lips . xxmaj he 's here in double trust : 
▁ xxmaj first , as i am his kinsman and his subject , 
▁ xxmaj strong both against the deed ; then , as his host , 
▁ xxmaj who should against his murtherer shut the door , 
▁ xxmaj not bear the knife myself . xxmaj besides , this xxmaj duncan 
▁ xxmaj hath borne his faculties so meek , hath been 
▁ xxmaj so clear in his great office , that his virtues 
▁ xxmaj will plead like angels trumpet - tongued against 
▁ xxmaj the deep damnation of his taking - off , 
▁ xxmaj and pity , like a naked new - born babe 
▁ xxmaj striding the blast , or heaven 's cherubin horsed 
▁ xxmaj upon the sightless couriers of the air , 
▁ xxmaj shall blow the horrid deed in every eye , 
▁ xxmaj that tears shall drown the wind . i have no spur 
▁ xxmaj to prick the sides of my intent , but only 
▁ xxmaj vaulting ambition , which o'erleaps itself 
▁ xxmaj and falls on the other . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxmaj how now , what news ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj he has almost supp'd . xxmaj why have you left the chamber ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj hath he ask'd for me ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj know you not he has ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj we will proceed no further in this business : 
▁ xxmaj he hath honor'd me of late , and i have bought 
▁ xxmaj golden opinions from all sorts of people , 
▁ xxmaj which would be worn now in their newest gloss , 
▁ xxmaj not cast aside so soon . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj was the hope drunk 
▁ xxmaj wherein you dress'd yourself ? xxmaj hath it slept since ? 
▁ xxmaj and wakes it now , to look so green and pale 
▁ xxmaj at what it did so freely ? xxmaj from this time 
▁ xxmaj such i account thy love . xxmaj art thou afeard 
▁ xxmaj to be the same in thine own act and valor 
▁ xxmaj as thou art in desire ? xxmaj wouldst thou have that 
▁ xxmaj which thou esteem'st the ornament of life 
▁ xxmaj and live a coward in thine own esteem , 
▁ xxmaj letting " i dare not " wait upon " i would " 
▁ xxmaj like the poor cat i ' the adage ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj prithee , peace ! 
▁ i dare do all that may become a man ; 
▁ xxmaj who dares do more is none . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj what beast wast then 
▁ xxmaj that made you break this enterprise to me ? 
▁ xxmaj when you durst do it , then you were a man , 
▁ xxmaj and , to be more than what you were , you would 
▁ xxmaj be so much more the man . xxmaj nor time nor place 
▁ xxmaj did then adhere , and yet you would make both . 
▁ xxmaj they have made themselves , and that their fitness now 
▁ xxmaj does unmake you . i have given suck and know 
▁ xxmaj how tender ' tis to love the babe that milks me- 
▁ i would , while it was smiling in my face , 
▁ xxmaj have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums 
▁ xxmaj and dash'd the brains out had i so sworn as you 
▁ xxmaj have done to this . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj if we should fail ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj we fail ? 
▁ xxmaj but screw your courage to the sticking - place 
▁ xxmaj and we 'll not fail . xxmaj when xxmaj duncan is asleep- 
▁ xxmaj whereto the rather shall his day 's hard journey 
▁ xxmaj soundly invite him- his two chamberlains 
▁ xxmaj will i with wine and wassail so convince 
▁ xxmaj that memory , the warder of the brain , 
▁ xxmaj shall be a fume and the receipt of reason 
▁ a limbeck only . xxmaj when in swinish sleep 
▁ xxmaj their drenched natures lie as in a death , 
▁ xxmaj what can not you and i perform upon 
▁ xxmaj the unguarded xxmaj duncan ? xxmaj what not put upon 
▁ xxmaj his spongy officers , who shall bear the guilt 
▁ xxmaj of our great quell ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj bring forth men - children only , 
▁ xxmaj for thy undaunted mettle should compose 
▁ xxmaj nothing but males . xxmaj will it not be received , 
▁ xxmaj when we have mark'd with blood those sleepy two 
▁ xxmaj of his own chamber and used their very daggers , 
▁ xxmaj that they have done't ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj who dares receive it other , 
▁ xxmaj as we shall make our griefs and clamor roar 
▁ xxmaj upon his death ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . i am settled and bend up 
▁ xxmaj each corporal agent to this terrible feat . 
▁ xxmaj away , and mock the time with fairest show : 
▁ xxmaj false face must hide what the false heart doth know . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj inverness . xxmaj court of xxmaj macbeth 's castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj banquo and xxmaj fleance , bearing a torch before him . 

▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj how goes the night , boy ? 
▁ xxup fleance . xxmaj the moon is down ; i have not heard the clock . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj and she goes down at twelve . 
▁ xxup fleance . i take't ' tis later , sir . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj hold , take my sword . xxmaj there 's husbandry in heaven , 
▁ xxmaj their candles are all out . xxmaj take thee that too . 
▁ a heavy summons lies like lead upon me , 
▁ xxmaj and yet i would not sleep . xxmaj merciful powers , 
▁ xxmaj restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature 
▁ xxmaj gives way to in repose ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth and a xxmaj servant with a torch . 

▁ xxmaj give me my sword . 
▁ xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . a friend . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj what , sir , not yet at rest ? xxmaj the xxmaj king 's abed . 
▁ xxmaj he hath been in unusual pleasure and 
▁ xxmaj sent forth great largess to your offices . 
▁ xxmaj this diamond he greets your wife withal , 
▁ xxmaj by the name of most kind hostess , and shut up 
▁ xxmaj in measureless content . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj being unprepared , 
▁ xxmaj our will became the servant to defect , 
▁ xxmaj which else should free have wrought . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj all 's well . 
▁ i dreamt last night of the three weird sisters : 
▁ xxmaj to you they have show'd some truth . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i think not of them ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , when we can entreat an hour to serve , 
▁ xxmaj we would spend it in some words upon that business , 
▁ xxmaj if you would grant the time . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj at your kind'st leisure . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj if you shall cleave to my consent , when ' tis , 
▁ xxmaj it shall make honor for you . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj so i lose none 
▁ xxmaj in seeking to augment it , but still keep 
▁ xxmaj my bosom franchised and allegiance clear , 
▁ i shall be counsel'd . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj good repose the while . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj thanks , sir , the like to you . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj banquo . and xxmaj fleance . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj go bid thy mistress , when my drink is ready , 
▁ xxmaj she strike upon the bell . xxmaj get thee to bed . xxmaj exit xxmaj servant . 
▁ xxmaj is this a dagger which i see before me , 
▁ xxmaj the handle toward my hand ? xxmaj come , let me clutch thee . 
▁ i have thee not , and yet i see thee still . 
▁ xxmaj art thou not , fatal vision , sensible 
▁ xxmaj to feeling as to sight ? xxmaj or art thou but 
▁ a dagger of the mind , a false creation , 
▁ xxmaj proceeding from the heat - oppressed brain ? 
▁ i see thee yet , in form as palpable 
▁ xxmaj as this which now i draw . 
▁ xxmaj thou marshal'st me the way that i was going , 
▁ xxmaj and such an instrument i was to use . 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes are made the fools o ' the other senses , 
▁ xxmaj or else worth all the rest . i see thee still , 
▁ xxmaj and on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood , 
▁ xxmaj which was not so before . xxmaj there 's no such thing : 
▁ xxmaj it is the bloody business which informs 
▁ xxmaj thus to mine eyes . xxmaj now o'er the one half - world 
▁ xxmaj nature seems dead , and wicked dreams abuse 
▁ xxmaj the curtain'd sleep ; witchcraft celebrates 
▁ xxmaj pale xxmaj hecate 's offerings ; and wither'd xxmaj murther , 
▁ xxmaj alarum'd by his sentinel , the wolf , 
▁ xxmaj whose howl 's his watch , thus with his stealthy pace , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj tarquin 's ravishing strides , towards his design 
▁ xxmaj moves like a ghost . xxmaj thou sure and firm - set earth , 
▁ xxmaj hear not my steps , which way they walk , for fear 
▁ xxmaj thy very stones prate of my whereabout , 
▁ xxmaj and take the present horror from the time , 
▁ xxmaj which now suits with it . xxmaj whiles i threat , he lives ; 
▁ xxmaj words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives . 
▁ a bell rings . 
▁ i go , and it is done ; the bell invites me . 
▁ xxmaj hear it not , xxmaj duncan , for it is a knell 
▁ xxmaj that summons thee to heaven , or to hell . xxmaj exit . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the same . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj that which hath made them drunk hath made me bold ; 
▁ xxmaj what hath quench'd them hath given me fire . xxmaj hark ! xxmaj peace ! 
▁ xxmaj it was the owl that shriek'd , the fatal bellman , 
▁ xxmaj which gives the stern'st good night . xxmaj he is about it : 
▁ xxmaj the doors are open , and the surfeited grooms 
▁ xxmaj do mock their charge with snores . i have drugg'd their possets 
▁ xxmaj that death and nature do contend about them , 
▁ xxmaj whether they live or die . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ within . ] xxmaj who 's there ' what , ho ! 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj alack , i am afraid they have awaked 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis not done . xxmaj the attempt and not the deed 
▁ xxmaj confounds us . xxmaj hark ! i laid their daggers ready ; 
▁ xxmaj he could not miss 'em . xxmaj had he not resembled 
▁ xxmaj my father as he slept , i had done't . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth , 
▁
▁ xxmaj my husband ! 
▁ xxup macbeth . i have done the deed . xxmaj didst thou not hear a noise ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . i heard the owl scream and the crickets cry . 
▁ xxmaj did not you speak ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj when ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj now . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj as i descended ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj hark ! 
▁ xxmaj who lies i ' the second chamber ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj donalbain . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj this is a sorry sight . [ looks on his hands . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . a foolish thought , to say a sorry sight . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj there 's one did laugh in 's sleep , and one cried , 
▁ " murther ! " 
▁ xxmaj that they did wake each other . i stood and heard them , 
▁ xxmaj but they did say their prayers and address'd them 
▁ xxmaj again to sleep . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj there are two lodged together . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj one cried , " god bless us ! " and " amen " the other , 
▁ xxmaj as they had seen me with these hangman 's hands . 
▁ xxmaj listening their fear , i could not say " amen , " 
▁ xxmaj when they did say , " god bless us ! " 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj consider it not so deeply . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj but wherefore could not i pronounce " amen " ? 
▁ i had most need of blessing , and " amen " 
▁ xxmaj stuck in my throat . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj these deeds must not be thought 
▁ xxmaj after these ways ; so , it will make us mad . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i heard a voice cry , " sleep no more ! 
▁ xxmaj macbeth does murther sleep " -the innocent sleep , 
▁ xxmaj sleep that knits up the ravel'd sleave of care , 
▁ xxmaj the death of each day 's life , sore labor 's bath , 
▁ xxmaj balm of hurt minds , great nature 's second course , 
▁ xxmaj chief nourisher in life 's feast- 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj what do you mean ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj still it cried , " sleep no more ! " to all the house ; 
▁ " glamis hath murther'd sleep , and therefore xxmaj cawdor 
▁ xxmaj shall sleep no more . xxmaj macbeth shall sleep no more . " 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj who was it that thus cried ? xxmaj why , worthy xxmaj thane , 
▁ xxmaj you do unbend your noble strength , to think 
▁ xxmaj so brainsickly of things . xxmaj go , get some water 
▁ xxmaj and wash this filthy witness from your hand . 
▁ xxmaj why did you bring these daggers from the place ? 
▁ xxmaj they must lie there . xxmaj go carry them , and smear 
▁ xxmaj the sleepy grooms with blood . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj i 'll go no more . 
▁ i am afraid to think what i have done ; 
▁ xxmaj look on't again i dare not . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj infirm of purpose ! 
▁ xxmaj give me the daggers . xxmaj the sleeping and the dead 
▁ xxmaj are but as pictures ; ' tis the eye of childhood 
▁ xxmaj that fears a painted devil . xxmaj if he do bleed , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll gild the faces of the grooms withal , 
▁ xxmaj for it must seem their guilt . xxmaj exit . xxmaj knocking within . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj whence is that knocking ? 
▁ xxmaj how is't with me , when every noise appals me ? 
▁ xxmaj what hands are here ? xxmaj ha , they pluck out mine eyes ! 
▁ xxmaj will all great xxmaj neptune 's ocean wash this blood 
▁ xxmaj clean from my hand ? xxmaj no , this my hand will rather 
▁ xxmaj the multitudinous seas incarnadine , 
▁ xxmaj making the green one red . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj my hands are of your color , but i shame 
▁ xxmaj to wear a heart so white . [ knocking within . ] i hear knocking 
▁ xxmaj at the south entry . xxmaj retire we to our chamber . 
▁ a little water clears us of this deed . 
▁ xxmaj how easy is it then ! xxmaj your constancy 
▁ xxmaj hath left you unattended . [ knocking within . ] xxmaj hark , more knocking . 
▁ xxmaj get on your nightgown , lest occasion call us 
▁ xxmaj and show us to be watchers . xxmaj be not lost 
▁ xxmaj so poorly in your thoughts . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj to know my deed , ' twere best not know myself . 
▁ xxmaj knocking within . 
▁ xxmaj wake xxmaj duncan with thy knocking ! i would thou couldst ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the same . 

 xxmaj enter a xxmaj porter . xxmaj knocking within . 

▁ xxup porter . xxmaj here 's a knocking indeed ! xxmaj if a man were porter of xxmaj hell 
▁ xxmaj gate , he should have old turning the key . [ knocking within . ] 
▁ xxmaj knock , knock , knock ! xxmaj who 's there , i ' the name of xxmaj belzebub ? xxmaj here 's 
▁ a farmer that hanged himself on th ' expectation of plenty . xxmaj come 
▁ in time ! xxmaj have napkins enow about you ; here you 'll sweat fort . 
▁ [ knocking within . ] xxmaj knock , knock ! xxmaj who 's there , in th ' other 
▁ devil 's name ? xxmaj faith , here 's an equivocator that could swear in 
▁ both the scales against either scale , who committed treason 
▁ enough for xxmaj god 's sake , yet could not equivocate to heaven . xxup o , 
▁ come in , equivocator . [ knocking within . ] xxmaj knock , knock , knock ! 
▁ xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj faith , here 's an xxmaj english tailor come hither , for 
▁ stealing out of a xxmaj french hose . xxmaj come in , tailor ; here you may 
▁ roast your goose . [ knocking within . ] xxmaj knock , knock ! xxmaj never at 
▁ quiet ! xxmaj what are you ? xxmaj but this place is too cold for hell . xxmaj i 'll 
▁ devil - porter it no further . i had thought to have let in some of 
▁ all professions , that go the primrose way to the everlasting 
▁ bonfire . [ knocking within . ] xxmaj anon , anon ! i pray you , remember the 
▁ porter . 
▁ xxmaj opens the gate . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macduff and xxmaj lennox . 

▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj was it so late , friend , ere you went to bed , 
▁ xxmaj that you do lie so late ? 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj faith , sir , we were carousing till the second cock ; and 
▁ drink , sir , is a great provoker of three things . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj what three things does drink especially provoke ? 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj marry , sir , nose - painting , sleep , and urine . xxmaj lechery , sir , 
▁ it provokes and unprovokes : it provokes the desire , but it takes 
▁ away the performance . xxmaj therefore much drink may be said to be an 
▁ equivocator with lechery : it makes him , and it mars him ; it sets 
▁ him on , and it takes him off ; it persuades him and disheartens 
▁ him ; makes him stand to and not stand to ; in conclusion , 
▁ equivocates him in a sleep , and giving him the lie , leaves him . 
▁ xxup macduff . i believe drink gave thee the lie last night . 
▁ xxup porter . xxmaj that it did , sir , i ' the very throat on me ; but requited 
▁ him for his lie , and , i think , being too strong for him , though 
▁ he took up my legs sometime , yet i made shift to cast him . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj is thy master stirring ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxmaj our knocking has awaked him ; here he comes . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj good morrow , noble sir . 
▁ xxup macbeth . morrow , both . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj is the xxmaj king stirring , worthy xxmaj thane ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj not yet . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj he did command me to call timely on him ; 
▁ i have almost slipp'd the hour . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj i 'll bring you to him . 
▁ xxup macduff . i know this is a joyful trouble to you , 
▁ xxmaj but yet ' tis one . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj the labor we delight in physics pain . 
▁ xxmaj this is the door . 
▁ xxup macduff xxmaj i 'll make so bold to call , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis my limited service . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj goes the xxmaj king hence today ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj he does ; he did appoint so . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj the night has been unruly . xxmaj where we lay , 
▁ xxmaj our chimneys were blown down , and , as they say , 
▁ xxmaj lamentings heard i ' the air , strange screams of death , 
▁ xxmaj and prophesying with accents terrible 
▁ xxmaj of dire combustion and confused events 
▁ xxmaj new hatch'd to the woeful time . xxmaj the obscure bird 
▁ xxmaj clamor'd the livelong night . xxmaj some say the earth 
▁ xxmaj was feverous and did shake . 
▁ xxup macbeth . ' twas a rough fight . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj my young remembrance can not parallel 
▁ a fellow to it . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj macduff . 

▁ xxup macduff . o horror , horror , horror ! xxmaj tongue nor heart 
▁ xxmaj can not conceive nor name thee . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxup lennox . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj confusion now hath made his masterpiece . 
▁ xxmaj most sacrilegious murther hath broke ope 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lord 's anointed temple and stole thence 
▁ xxmaj the life o ' the building . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj what is't you say ? the life ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj mean you his xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj approach the chamber , and destroy your sight 
▁ xxmaj with a new xxmaj gorgon . xxmaj do not bid me speak ; 
▁ xxmaj see , and then speak yourselves . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj macbeth and xxmaj lennox . 
▁ xxmaj awake , awake ! 
▁ xxmaj ring the alarum bell . xxmaj murther and treason ! 
▁ xxmaj banquo and xxmaj donalbain ! xxmaj malcolm , awake ! 
▁ xxmaj shake off this downy sleep , death 's counterfeit , 
▁ xxmaj and look on death itself ! xxmaj up , up , and see 
▁ xxmaj the great doom 's image ! xxmaj malcolm ! xxmaj banquo ! 
▁ xxmaj as from your graves rise up , and walk like sprites 
▁ xxmaj to countenance this horror ! xxmaj ring the bell . xxmaj bell rings . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj what 's the business , 
▁ xxmaj that such a hideous trumpet calls to parley 
▁ xxmaj the sleepers of the house ? xxmaj speak , speak ! 
▁ xxup macduff . o gentle lady , 
▁ ' tis not for you to hear what i can speak : 
▁ xxmaj the repetition in a woman 's ear 
▁ xxmaj would murther as it fell . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj banquo . 

▁ o xxmaj banquo , xxmaj banquo ! 
▁ xxmaj our royal master 's murther'd . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj woe , alas ! 
▁ xxmaj what , in our house ? 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj too cruel anywhere . 
▁ xxmaj dear xxmaj duff , i prithee , contradict thyself , 
▁ xxmaj and say it is not so . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj macbeth and xxmaj lennox , with xxmaj ross . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj had i but died an hour before this chance , 
▁ i had lived a blessed time , for from this instant 
▁ xxmaj there 's nothing serious in mortality . 
▁ xxmaj all is but toys ; renown and grace is dead , 
▁ xxmaj the wine of life is drawn , and the mere lees 
▁ xxmaj is left this vault to brag of . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj malcolm and xxmaj donalbain . 

▁ xxup donalbain . xxmaj what is amiss ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj you are , and do not know't . 
▁ xxmaj the spring , the head , the fountain of your blood 
▁ xxmaj is stopped , the very source of it is stopp'd . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj your royal father 's murther'd . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxup o , by whom ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj those of his chamber , as it seem'd , had done't . 
▁ xxmaj their hands and faces were all badged with blood ; 
▁ xxmaj so were their daggers , which unwiped we found 
▁ xxmaj upon their pillows . 
▁ xxmaj they stared , and were distracted ; no man 's life 
▁ xxmaj was to be trusted with them . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxup o , yet i do repent me of my fury , 
▁ xxmaj that i did kill them . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj wherefore did you so ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj who can be wise , amazed , temperate and furious , 
▁ xxmaj loyal and neutral , in a moment ? xxmaj no man . 
▁ xxmaj the expedition of my violent love 
▁ xxmaj outrun the pauser reason . xxmaj here lay xxmaj duncan , 
▁ xxmaj his silver skin laced with his golden blood , 
▁ xxmaj and his gash'd stabs look'd like a breach in nature 
▁ xxmaj for ruin 's wasteful entrance ; there , the murtherers , 
▁ xxmaj steep'd in the colors of their trade , their daggers 
▁ xxmaj unmannerly breech'd with gore . xxmaj who could refrain , 
▁ xxmaj that had a heart to love , and in that heart 
▁ xxmaj courage to make 's love known ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj help me hence , ho ! 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj look to the lady . 
▁ xxup malcolm . [ aside to xxmaj donalbain . ] xxmaj why do we hold our tongues , 
▁ xxmaj that most may claim this argument for ours ? 
▁ xxup donalbain . [ aside to xxmaj malcolm . ] xxmaj what should be spoken here , where 
▁ our fate , 
▁ xxmaj hid in an auger hole , may rush and seize us ? 
▁ xxmaj let 's away , 
▁ xxmaj our tears are not yet brew'd . 
▁ xxup malcolm . [ aside to xxmaj donalbain . ] xxmaj nor our strong sorrow 
▁ xxmaj upon the foot of motion . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj look to the lady . 
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth is carried out . 
▁ xxmaj and when we have our naked frailties hid , 
▁ xxmaj that suffer in exposure , let us meet 
▁ xxmaj and question this most bloody piece of work 
▁ xxmaj to know it further . xxmaj fears and scruples shake us . 
▁ xxmaj in the great hand of xxmaj god i stand , and thence 
▁ xxmaj against the undivulged pretense i fight 
▁ xxmaj of treasonous malice . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj and so do xxup i. 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj so all . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj let 's briefly put on manly readiness 
▁ xxmaj and meet i ' the hall together . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj well contented . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj malcolm and xxmaj donalbain . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj what will you do ? xxmaj let 's not consort with them . 
▁ xxmaj to show an unfelt sorrow is an office 
▁ xxmaj which the false man does easy . xxmaj i 'll to xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup donalbain . xxmaj to xxmaj ireland , xxup i ; our separated fortune 
▁ xxmaj shall keep us both the safer . xxmaj where we are 
▁ xxmaj there 's daggers in men 's smiles ; the near in blood , 
▁ xxmaj the nearer bloody . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj this murtherous shaft that 's shot 
▁ xxmaj hath not yet lighted , and our safest way 
▁ xxmaj is to avoid the aim . xxmaj therefore to horse ; 
▁ xxmaj and let us not be dainty of leave - taking , 
▁ xxmaj but shift away . xxmaj there 's warrant in that theft 
▁ xxmaj which steals itself when there 's no mercy left . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj outside xxmaj macbeth 's castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj ross with an xxmaj old xxmaj man . 

▁ xxup old xxup man . xxmaj threescore and ten i can remember well , 
▁ xxmaj within the volume of which time i have seen 
▁ xxmaj hours dreadful and things strange , but this sore night 
▁ xxmaj hath trifled former knowings . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj ah , good father , 
▁ xxmaj thou seest the heavens , as troubled with man 's act , 
▁ xxmaj threaten his bloody stage . xxmaj by the clock ' tis day , 
▁ xxmaj and yet dark night strangles the traveling lamp . 
▁ xxmaj is't night 's predominance , or the day 's shame , 
▁ xxmaj that darkness does the face of earth entomb , 
▁ xxmaj when living light should kiss it ? 
▁ xxup old xxup man . ' tis unnatural , 
▁ xxmaj even like the deed that 's done . xxmaj on xxmaj tuesday last 
▁ a falcon towering in her pride of place 
▁ xxmaj was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj and xxmaj duncan 's horses - a thing most strange and certain- 
▁ xxmaj beauteous and swift , the minions of their race , 
▁ xxmaj turn'd wild in nature , broke their stalls , flung out , 
▁ xxmaj contending ' gainst obedience , as they would make 
▁ xxmaj war with mankind . 
▁ xxup old xxup man . ' tis said they eat each other . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj they did so , to the amazement of mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj that look'd upon't . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macduff . 

▁ xxmaj here comes the good xxmaj macduff . 
▁ xxmaj how goes the world , sir , now ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj why , see you not ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj is't known who did this more than bloody deed ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj those that xxmaj macbeth hath slain . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj alas , the day ! 
▁ xxmaj what good could they pretend ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj they were suborn'd : 
▁ xxmaj malcolm and xxmaj donalbain , the xxmaj king 's two sons , 
▁ xxmaj are stol'n away and fled , which puts upon them 
▁ xxmaj suspicion of the deed . 
▁ xxup ross . ' gainst nature still ! 
▁ xxmaj thriftless ambition , that wilt ravin up 
▁ xxmaj thine own life 's means ! xxmaj then ' tis most like 
▁ xxmaj the sovereignty will fall upon xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj he is already named , and gone to xxmaj scone 
▁ xxmaj to be invested . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj where is xxmaj duncan 's body ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj carried to xxmaj colmekill , 
▁ xxmaj the sacred storehouse of his predecessors 
▁ xxmaj and guardian of their bones . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj will you to xxmaj scone ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj no , cousin , xxmaj i 'll to xxmaj fife . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj well , i will thither . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj well , may you see things well done there . 
▁ xxmaj adieu , 
▁ xxmaj lest our old robes sit easier than our new ! 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj farewell , father . 
▁ xxup old xxup man . xxmaj god 's benison go with you and with those 
▁ xxmaj that would make good of bad and friends of foes ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj forres . xxmaj the palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj banquo . 

▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj thou hast it now : xxmaj king , xxmaj cawdor , xxmaj glamis , all , 
▁ xxmaj as the weird women promised , and i fear 
▁ xxmaj thou play'dst most foully for't ; yet it was said 
▁ xxmaj it should not stand in thy posterity , 
▁ xxmaj but that myself should be the root and father 
▁ xxmaj of many kings . xxmaj if there come truth from them 
▁ ( as upon thee , xxmaj macbeth , their speeches shine ) 
▁ xxmaj why , by the verities on thee made good , 
▁ xxmaj may they not be my oracles as well 
▁ xxmaj and set me up in hope ? xxmaj but hush , no more . 

▁ xxmaj sennet sounds . xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth as xxmaj king , xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth 
▁ as xxmaj queen , xxmaj lennox , xxmaj ross , xxmaj lords , xxmaj ladies , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj here 's our chief guest . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj if he had been forgotten , 
▁ xxmaj it had been as a gap in our great feast 
▁ xxmaj and all thing unbecoming . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj tonight we hold a solemn supper , sir , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll request your presence . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj let your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj command upon me , to the which my duties 
▁ xxmaj are with a most indissoluble tie 
▁ xxmaj forever knit . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj ride you this afternoon ? 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj we should have else desired your good advice , 
▁ xxmaj which still hath been both grave and prosperous 
▁ xxmaj in this day 's council ; but we 'll take tomorrow . 
▁ xxmaj is't far you ride ' ! 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj as far , my lord , as will fill up the time 
▁ ' twixt this and supper . xxmaj go not my horse the better , 
▁ i must become a borrower of the night 
▁ xxmaj for a dark hour or twain . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj fail not our feast . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj my lord , i will not . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj we hear our bloody cousins are bestow'd 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj england and in xxmaj ireland , not confessing 
▁ xxmaj their cruel parricide , filling their hearers 
▁ xxmaj with strange invention . xxmaj but of that tomorrow , 
▁ xxmaj when therewithal we shall have cause of state 
▁ xxmaj craving us jointly . xxmaj hie you to horse ; adieu , 
▁ xxmaj till you return at night . xxmaj goes xxmaj fleance with you ? 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj ay , my good lord . xxmaj our time does call upon ' s. 
▁ xxup macbeth . i wish your horses swift and sure of foot , 
▁ xxmaj and so i do commend you to their backs . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exit xxmaj banquo . 
▁ xxmaj let every man be master of his time 
▁ xxmaj till seven at night ; to make society 
▁ xxmaj the sweeter welcome , we will keep ourself 
▁ xxmaj till supper time alone . xxmaj while then , xxmaj god be with you ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj macbeth and an xxmaj attendant . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , a word with you . xxmaj attend those men 
▁ xxmaj our pleasure ? 
▁ xxup attendant . xxmaj they are , my lord , without the palace gate . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj bring them before us . xxmaj exit xxmaj attendant . 
▁ xxmaj to be thus is nothing , 
▁ xxmaj but to be safely thus . xxmaj our fears in xxmaj banquo . 
▁ xxmaj stick deep , and in his royalty of nature 
▁ xxmaj reigns that which would be fear'd . ' tis much he dares , 
▁ xxmaj and , to that dauntless temper of his mind , 
▁ xxmaj he hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor 
▁ xxmaj to act in safety . xxmaj there is none but he 
▁ xxmaj whose being i do fear ; and under him 
▁ xxmaj my genius is rebuked , as it is said 
▁ xxmaj mark xxmaj antony 's was by xxmaj caesar . xxmaj he chid the sisters 
▁ xxmaj when first they put the name of xxmaj king upon me 
▁ xxmaj and bade them speak to him ; then prophet - like 
▁ xxmaj they hail'd him father to a line of kings . 
▁ xxmaj upon my head they placed a fruitless crown 
▁ xxmaj and put a barren sceptre in my gripe , 
▁ xxmaj thence to be wrench'd with an unlineal hand , 
▁ xxmaj no son of mine succeeding . xxmaj if't be so , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj banquo 's issue have i filed my mind , 
▁ xxmaj for them the gracious xxmaj duncan have i murther'd , 
▁ xxmaj put rancors in the vessel of my peace 
▁ xxmaj only for them , and mine eternal jewel 
▁ xxmaj given to the common enemy of man , 
▁ xxmaj to make them kings -the seed of xxmaj banquo kings ! 
▁ xxmaj rather than so , come , xxmaj fate , into the list , 
▁ xxmaj and champion me to the utterance ! xxmaj who 's there ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj attendant , with two xxmaj murtherers . 

▁ xxmaj now go to the door , and stay there till we call . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj attendant . 
▁ xxmaj was it not yesterday we spoke together ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj it was , so please your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj well then , now 
▁ xxmaj have you consider'd of my speeches ? xxmaj know 
▁ xxmaj that it was he in the times past which held you 
▁ xxmaj so under fortune , which you thought had been 
▁ xxmaj our innocent self ? xxmaj this i made good to you 
▁ xxmaj in our last conference , pass'd in probation with you : 
▁ xxmaj how you were borne in hand , how cross'd , the instruments , 
▁ xxmaj who wrought with them , and all things else that might 
▁ xxmaj to half a soul and to a notion crazed 
▁ xxmaj say , " thus did xxmaj banquo . " 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj you made it known to us . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i did so , and went further , which is now 
▁ xxmaj our point of second meeting . xxmaj do you find 
▁ xxmaj your patience so predominant in your nature , 
▁ xxmaj that you can let this go ? xxmaj are you so gospel'd , 
▁ xxmaj to pray for this good man and for his issue , 
▁ xxmaj whose heavy hand hath bow'd you to the grave 
▁ xxmaj and beggar'd yours forever ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj we are men , my liege . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj ay , in the catalogue ye go for men , 
▁ xxmaj as hounds and greyhounds , mongrels , spaniels , curs , 
▁ xxmaj shoughs , waterrugs , and demi - wolves are clept 
▁ xxmaj all by the name of dogs . xxmaj the valued file 
▁ xxmaj distinguishes the swift , the slow , the subtle , 
▁ xxmaj the housekeeper , the hunter , every one 
▁ xxmaj according to the gift which bounteous nature 
▁ xxmaj hath in him closed , whereby he does receive 
▁ xxmaj particular addition , from the bill 
▁ xxmaj that writes them all alike ; and so of men . 
▁ xxmaj now if you have a station in the file , 
▁ xxmaj not i ' the worst rank of manhood , say it , 
▁ xxmaj and i will put that business in your bosoms 
▁ xxmaj whose execution takes your enemy off , 
▁ xxmaj grapples you to the heart and love of us , 
▁ xxmaj who wear our health but sickly in his life , 
▁ xxmaj which in his death were perfect . 
▁ xxup second xxup murtherer . i am one , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj whom the vile blows and buffets of the world 
▁ xxmaj have so incensed that i am reckless what 
▁ i do to spite the world . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj and i another 
▁ xxmaj so weary with disasters , tugg'd with fortune , 
▁ xxmaj that i would set my life on any chance , 
▁ xxmaj to mend it or be rid on't . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj both of you 
▁ xxmaj know xxmaj banquo was your enemy . 
▁ xxup both xxup murtherers . xxmaj true , my lord . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj so is he mine , and in such bloody distance 
▁ xxmaj that every minute of his being thrusts 
▁ xxmaj against my near'st of life ; and though i could 
▁ xxmaj with barefaced power sweep him from my sight 
▁ xxmaj and bid my will avouch it , yet i must not , 
▁ xxmaj for certain friends that are both his and mine , 
▁ xxmaj whose loves i may not drop , but wail his fall 
▁ xxmaj who i myself struck down . xxmaj and thence it is 
▁ xxmaj that i to your assistance do make love , 
▁ xxmaj masking the business from the common eye 
▁ xxmaj for sundry weighty reasons . 
▁ xxup second xxup murtherer . xxmaj we shall , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj perform what you command us . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj though our lives- 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj your spirits shine through you . xxmaj within this hour at most 
▁ i will advise you where to plant yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj acquaint you with the perfect spy o ' the time , 
▁ xxmaj the moment on't ; fort must be done tonight 
▁ xxmaj and something from the palace ( always thought 
▁ xxmaj that i require a clearness ) ; and with him- 
▁ xxmaj to leave no rubs nor botches in the work- 
▁ xxmaj fleance his son , that keeps him company , 
▁ xxmaj whose absence is no less material to me 
▁ xxmaj than is his father 's , must embrace the fate 
▁ xxmaj of that dark hour . xxmaj resolve yourselves apart ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll come to you anon . 
▁ xxup both xxup murtherers . xxmaj we are resolved , my lord . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj i 'll call upon you straight . xxmaj abide within . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj murtherers . 
▁ xxmaj it is concluded : xxmaj banquo , thy soul 's flight , 
▁ xxmaj if it find heaven , must find it out tonight . xxmaj exit . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth and a xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj is xxmaj banquo gone from court ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj ay , madam , but returns again tonight . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj say to the xxmaj king i would attend his leisure 
▁ xxmaj for a few words . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj madam , i will . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj nought 's had , all 's spent , 
▁ xxmaj where our desire is got without content . 
▁ ' tis safer to be that which we destroy 
▁ xxmaj than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxmaj how now , my lord ? xxmaj why do you keep alone , 
▁ xxmaj of sorriest fancies your companions making , 
▁ xxmaj using those thoughts which should indeed have died 
▁ xxmaj with them they think on ? xxmaj things without all remedy 
▁ xxmaj should be without regard . xxmaj what 's done is done . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj we have scotch'd the snake , not kill'd it . 
▁ xxmaj she 'll close and be herself , whilst our poor malice 
▁ xxmaj remains in danger of her former tooth . 
▁ xxmaj but let the frame of things disjoint , both the worlds suffer , 
▁ xxmaj ere we will eat our meal in fear and sleep 
▁ xxmaj in the affliction of these terrible dreams