xxbos xxmaj that shake us nightly . xxmaj better be with the dead , 
▁ xxmaj whom we , to gain our peace , have sent to peace , 
▁ xxmaj than on the torture of the mind to lie 
▁ xxmaj in restless ecstasy . xxmaj duncan is in his grave ; 
▁ xxmaj after life 's fitful fever he sleeps well . 
▁ xxmaj treason has done his worst ; nor steel , nor poison , 
▁ xxmaj malice domestic , foreign levy , nothing , 
▁ xxmaj can touch him further . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj come on , 
▁ xxmaj gentle my lord , sleek o'er your rugged looks ; 
▁ xxmaj be bright and jovial among your guests tonight . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj so shall xxup i , love , and so , i pray , be you . 
▁ xxmaj let your remembrance apply to xxmaj banquo ; 
▁ xxmaj present him eminence , both with eye and tongue : 
▁ xxmaj unsafe the while , that we 
▁ xxmaj must lave our honors in these flattering streams , 
▁ xxmaj and make our faces vizards to our hearts , 
▁ xxmaj disguising what they are . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj you must leave this . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxup o , full of scorpions is my mind , dear wife ! 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st that xxmaj banquo and his xxmaj fleance lives . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj but in them nature 's copy 's not eterne . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj there 's comfort yet ; they are assailable . 
▁ xxmaj then be thou jocund . xxmaj ere the bat hath flown 
▁ xxmaj his cloister'd flight , ere to black xxmaj hecate 's summons 
▁ xxmaj the shard - borne beetle with his drowsy hums 
▁ xxmaj hath rung night 's yawning peal , there shall be done 
▁ a deed of dreadful note . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj what 's to be done ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj be innocent of the knowledge , dearest chuck , 
▁ xxmaj till thou applaud the deed . xxmaj come , seeling night , 
▁ xxmaj scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day , 
▁ xxmaj and with thy bloody and invisible hand 
▁ xxmaj cancel and tear to pieces that great bond 
▁ xxmaj which keeps me pale ! xxmaj light thickens , and the crow 
▁ xxmaj makes wing to the rooky wood ; 
▁ xxmaj good things of day begin to droop and drowse , 
▁ xxmaj whiles night 's black agents to their preys do rouse . 
▁ xxmaj thou marvel'st at my words , but hold thee still : 
▁ xxmaj things bad begun make strong themselves by ill . 
▁ xxmaj so , prithee , go with me . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a park near the palace . 

 xxmaj enter three xxmaj murtherers . 

▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj but who did bid thee join with us ? 
▁ xxup third xxup murtherer . xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup second xxup murtherer . xxmaj he needs not our mistrust , since he delivers 
▁ xxmaj our offices and what we have to do 
▁ xxmaj to the direction just . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj then stand with us . 
▁ xxmaj the west yet glimmers with some streaks of day ; 
▁ xxmaj now spurs the lated traveler apace 
▁ xxmaj to gain the timely inn , and near approaches 
▁ xxmaj the subject of our watch . 
▁ xxup third xxup murtherer . xxmaj hark ! i hear horses . 
▁ xxup banquo . [ within . ] xxmaj give us a light there , ho ! 
▁ xxup second xxup murtherer . xxmaj then ' tis he ; the rest 
▁ xxmaj that are within the note of expectation 
▁ xxmaj already are i ' the court . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj his horses go about . 
▁ xxup third xxup murtherer . xxmaj almost a mile , but he does usually- 
▁ xxmaj so all men do -from hence to the palace gate 
▁ xxmaj make it their walk . 
▁ xxup second xxup murtherer . a light , a light ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj banquo , and xxmaj fleance with a torch . 

▁ xxup third xxup murtherer . ' tis he . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj stand to't . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxmaj it will be rain tonight . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj let it come down . 
▁ xxmaj they set upon xxmaj banquo . 
▁ xxup banquo . xxup o , treachery ! xxmaj fly , good xxmaj fleance , fly , fly , fly ! 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst revenge . o slave ! xxmaj dies . xxmaj fleance escapes . 
▁ xxup third xxup murtherer . xxmaj who did strike out the light ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj wast not the way ? 
▁ xxup third xxup murtherer . xxmaj there 's but one down ; the son is fled . 
▁ xxup second xxup murtherer . xxmaj we have lost 
▁ xxmaj best half of our affair . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj well , let 's away and say how much is done . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 a xxmaj hall in the palace . a banquet prepared . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth , xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth , xxmaj ross , xxmaj lennox , xxmaj lords , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj you know your own degrees ; sit down . xxmaj at first 
▁ xxmaj and last the hearty welcome . 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj thanks to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj ourself will mingle with society 
▁ xxmaj and play the humble host . 
▁ xxmaj our hostess keeps her state , but in best time 
▁ xxmaj we will require her welcome . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj pronounce it for me , sir , to all our friends , 
▁ xxmaj for my heart speaks they are welcome . 

▁ xxmaj enter first xxmaj murtherer to the door . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj see , they encounter thee with their hearts ' thanks . 
▁ xxmaj both sides are even ; here xxmaj i 'll sit i ' the midst . 
▁ xxmaj be large in mirth ; anon we 'll drink a measure 
▁ xxmaj the table round . [ approaches the door . ] xxmaj there 's blood upon thy 
▁ face . 
▁ xxup murtherer . ' tis xxmaj banquo 's then . 
▁ xxup macbeth . ' tis better thee without than he within . 
▁ xxmaj is he dispatch'd ? 
▁ xxup murtherer . xxmaj my lord , his throat is cut ; that i did for him . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou art the best o ' the cut - throats ! xxmaj yet he 's good 
▁ xxmaj that did the like for xxmaj fleance . xxmaj if thou didst it , 
▁ xxmaj thou art the nonpareil . 
▁ xxup murtherer . xxmaj most royal sir , 
▁ xxmaj fleance is ' scaped . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj then comes my fit again . i had else been perfect , 
▁ xxmaj whole as the marble , founded as the rock , 
▁ xxmaj as broad and general as the casing air ; 
▁ xxmaj but now i am cabin'd , cribb'd , confin'd , bound in 
▁ xxmaj to saucy doubts and fears -but xxmaj banquo 's safe ? 
▁ xxup murtherer . xxmaj ay , my good lord . xxmaj safe in a ditch he bides , 
▁ xxmaj with twenty trenched gashes on his head , 
▁ xxmaj the least a death to nature . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thanks for that . 
▁ xxmaj there the grown serpent lies ; the worm that 's fled 
▁ xxmaj hath nature that in time will venom breed , 
▁ xxmaj no teeth for the present . xxmaj get thee gone . xxmaj tomorrow 
▁ xxmaj we 'll hear ourselves again . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj murtherer . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj my royal lord , 
▁ xxmaj you do not give the cheer . xxmaj the feast is sold 
▁ xxmaj that is not often vouch'd , while ' tis amaking , 
▁ ' tis given with welcome . xxmaj to feed were best at home ; 
▁ xxmaj from thence the sauce to meat is ceremony ; 
▁ xxmaj meeting were bare without it . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj sweet remembrancer ! 
▁ xxmaj now good digestion wait on appetite , 
▁ xxmaj and health on both ! 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj may't please your xxmaj highness sit . 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj ghost of xxmaj banquo enters and sits in xxmaj macbeth 's place . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj here had we now our country 's honor roof'd , 
▁ xxmaj were the graced person of our xxmaj banquo present , 
▁ xxmaj who may i rather challenge for unkindness 
▁ xxmaj than pity for mischance ! 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj his absence , sir , 
▁ xxmaj lays blame upon his promise . xxmaj please't your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj to grace us with your royal company ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj the table 's full . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj here is a place reserved , sir . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj here , my good lord . xxmaj what is't that moves your xxmaj highness ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj which of you have done this ? 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj what , my good lord ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou canst not say i did it ; never shake 
▁ xxmaj thy gory locks at me . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj gentlemen , rise ; his xxmaj highness is well . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj sit , worthy friends ; my lord is often thus , 
▁ xxmaj and hath been from his youth . xxmaj pray you , keep seat . 
▁ xxmaj the fit is momentary ; upon a thought 
▁ xxmaj he will again be well . xxmaj if much you note him , 
▁ xxmaj you shall offend him and extend his passion . 
▁ xxmaj feed , and regard him not - are you a man ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj ay , and a bold one , that dare look on that 
▁ xxmaj which might appal the devil . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . o proper stuff ! 
▁ xxmaj this is the very painting of your fear ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the air - drawn dagger which you said 
▁ xxmaj led you to xxmaj duncan . xxup o , these flaws and starts , 
▁ xxmaj impostors to true fear , would well become 
▁ a woman 's story at a winter 's fire , 
▁ xxmaj authorized by her grandam . xxmaj shame itself ! 
▁ xxmaj why do you make such faces ? xxmaj when all 's done , 
▁ xxmaj you look but on a stool . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj prithee , see there ! xxmaj behold ! xxmaj look ! xxmaj lo ! xxmaj how say you ? 
▁ xxmaj why , what care xxup i ? xxmaj if thou canst nod , speak too . 
▁ xxmaj if charnel houses and our graves must send 
▁ xxmaj those that we bury back , our monuments 
▁ xxmaj shall be the maws of kites . xxmaj exit xxmaj ghost . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj what , quite unmann'd in folly ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj if i stand here , i saw him . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj fie , for shame ! 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj blood hath been shed ere now , i ' the olden time , 
▁ xxmaj ere humane statute purged the gentle weal ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , and since too , murthers have been perform'd 
▁ xxmaj too terrible for the ear . xxmaj the time has been , 
▁ xxmaj that , when the brains were out , the man would die , 
▁ xxmaj and there an end ; but now they rise again , 
▁ xxmaj with twenty mortal murthers on their crowns , 
▁ xxmaj and push us from our stools . xxmaj this is more strange 
▁ xxmaj than such a murther is . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj my worthy lord , 
▁ xxmaj your noble friends do lack you . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i do forget . 
▁ xxmaj do not muse at me , my most worthy friends . 
▁ i have a strange infirmity , which is nothing 
▁ xxmaj to those that know me . xxmaj come , love and health to all ; 
▁ xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll sit down . xxmaj give me some wine , fill full . 
▁ i drink to the general joy o ' the whole table , 
▁ xxmaj and to our dear friend xxmaj banquo , whom we miss . 
▁ xxmaj would he were here ! xxmaj to all and him we thirst , 
▁ xxmaj and all to all . 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj our duties and the pledge . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj ghost . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj avaunt , and quit my sight ! xxmaj let the earth hide thee ! 
▁ xxmaj thy bones are marrowless , thy blood is cold ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast no speculation in those eyes 
▁ xxmaj which thou dost glare with . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj think of this , good peers , 
▁ xxmaj but as a thing of custom . ' tis no other , 
▁ xxmaj only it spoils the pleasure of the time . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj what man dare , i dare . 
▁ xxmaj approach thou like the rugged xxmaj russian bear , 
▁ xxmaj the arm'd rhinoceros , or the xxmaj hyrcan tiger ; 
▁ xxmaj take any shape but that , and my firm nerves 
▁ xxmaj shall never tremble . xxmaj or be alive again , 
▁ xxmaj and dare me to the desert with thy sword . 
▁ xxmaj if trembling i inhabit then , protest me 
▁ xxmaj the baby of a girl . xxmaj hence , horrible shadow ! 
▁ xxmaj unreal mockery , hence ! xxmaj exit xxmaj ghost . 
▁ xxmaj why , so , being gone , 
▁ i am a man again . xxmaj pray you sit still . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj you have displaced the mirth , broke the good meeting , 
▁ xxmaj with most admired disorder . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj can such things be , 
▁ xxmaj and overcome us like a summer 's cloud , 
▁ xxmaj without our special wonder ? xxmaj you make me strange 
▁ xxmaj even to the disposition that i owe 
▁ xxmaj when now i think you can behold such sights 
▁ xxmaj and keep the natural ruby of your cheeks 
▁ xxmaj when mine is blanch'd with fear . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj what sights , my lord ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . i pray you , speak not ; he grows worse and worse ; 
▁ xxmaj question enrages him . xxmaj at once , good night . 
▁ xxmaj stand not upon the order of your going , 
▁ xxmaj but go at once . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj good night , and better health 
▁ xxmaj attend his xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . a kind good night to all ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj macbeth and xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup macbeth . will have blood ; they say blood will have blood . 
▁ xxmaj stones have been known to move and trees to speak ; 
▁ xxmaj augures and understood relations have 
▁ xxmaj by maggot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth 
▁ xxmaj the secret'st man of blood . xxmaj what is the night ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj almost at odds with morning , which is which . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj how say'st thou , that xxmaj macduff denies his person 
▁ xxmaj at our great bidding ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj did you send to him , sir ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . i hear it by the way , but i will send . 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a one of them but in his house 
▁ i keep a servant feed . i will tomorrow , 
▁ xxmaj and betimes i will , to the weird sisters . 
▁ xxmaj more shall they speak ; for now i am bent to know , 
▁ xxmaj by the worst means , the worst . xxmaj for mine own good 
▁ xxmaj all causes shall give way . i am in blood 
▁ xxmaj stepp'd in so far that , should i wade no more , 
▁ xxmaj returning were as tedious as go o'er . 
▁ xxmaj strange things i have in head that will to hand , 
▁ xxmaj which must be acted ere they may be scann'd . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj you lack the season of all natures , sleep . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj come , we 'll to sleep . xxmaj my strange and self - abuse 
▁ xxmaj is the initiate fear that wants hard use . 
▁ xxmaj we are yet but young in deed . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 a heath . xxmaj thunder . 

 xxmaj enter the three xxmaj witches , meeting xxmaj hecate . 

▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj hecate ? xxmaj you look angerly . 
▁ xxup hecate . xxmaj have i not reason , beldams as you are , 
▁ xxmaj saucy and overbold ? xxmaj how did you dare 
▁ xxmaj to trade and traffic with xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj in riddles and affairs of death , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , the mistress of your charms , 
▁ xxmaj the close contriver of all harms , 
▁ xxmaj was never call'd to bear my part , 
▁ xxmaj or show the glory of our art ? 
▁ xxmaj and , which is worse , all you have done 
▁ xxmaj hath been but for a wayward son , 
▁ xxmaj spiteful and wrathful , who , as others do , 
▁ xxmaj loves for his own ends , not for you . 
▁ xxmaj but make amends now . xxmaj get you gone , 
▁ xxmaj and at the pit of xxmaj acheron 
▁ xxmaj meet me i ' the morning . xxmaj thither he 
▁ xxmaj will come to know his destiny . 
▁ xxmaj your vessels and your spells provide , 
▁ xxmaj your charms and everything beside . 
▁ i am for the air ; this night xxmaj i 'll spend 
▁ xxmaj unto a dismal and a fatal end . 
▁ xxmaj great business must be wrought ere noon : 
▁ xxmaj upon the corner of the moon 
▁ xxmaj there hangs a vaporous drop profound ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll catch it ere it come to ground . 
▁ xxmaj and that distill'd by magic sleights 
▁ xxmaj shall raise such artificial sprites 
▁ xxmaj as by the strength of their illusion 
▁ xxmaj shall draw him on to his confusion . 
▁ xxmaj he shall spurn fate , scorn death , and bear 
▁ xxmaj his hopes ' bove wisdom , grace , and fear . 
▁ xxmaj and you all know security 
▁ xxmaj is mortals ' chiefest enemy . 
▁ xxmaj music and a song within , 
▁ " come away , come away . " 
▁ xxmaj hark ! i am call'd ; my little spirit , see , 
▁ xxmaj sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj come , let 's make haste ; she 'll soon be back again . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj forres . xxmaj the palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lennox and another xxmaj lord . 

▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj my former speeches have but hit your thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj which can interpret farther ; only i say 
▁ xxmaj thing 's have been strangely borne . xxmaj the gracious xxmaj duncan 
▁ xxmaj was pitied of xxmaj macbeth ; marry , he was dead . 
▁ xxmaj and the right valiant xxmaj banquo walk'd too late , 
▁ xxmaj whom , you may say , if't please you , xxmaj fleance kill'd , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj fleance fled . xxmaj men must not walk too late . 
▁ xxmaj who can not want the thought , how monstrous 
▁ xxmaj it was for xxmaj malcolm and for xxmaj donalbain 
▁ xxmaj to kill their gracious father ? xxmaj damned fact ! 
▁ xxmaj how it did grieve xxmaj macbeth ! xxmaj did he not straight , 
▁ xxmaj in pious rage , the two delinquents tear 
▁ xxmaj that were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep ? 
▁ xxmaj was not that nobly done ? xxmaj ay , and wisely too , 
▁ xxmaj for ' twould have anger'd any heart alive 
▁ xxmaj to hear the men deny't . xxmaj so that , i say , 
▁ xxmaj he has borne all things well ; and i do think 
▁ xxmaj that , had he xxmaj duncan 's sons under his key- 
▁ xxmaj as , an't please heaven , he shall not -they should find 
▁ xxmaj what ' twere to kill a father ; so should xxmaj fleance . 
▁ xxmaj but , peace ! xxmaj for from broad words , and 'cause he fail'd 
▁ xxmaj his presence at the tyrant 's feast , i hear , 
▁ xxmaj macduff lives in disgrace . xxmaj sir , can you tell 
▁ xxmaj where he bestows himself ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj the son of xxmaj duncan , 
▁ xxmaj from whom this tyrant holds the due of birth , 
▁ xxmaj lives in the xxmaj english court and is received 
▁ xxmaj of the most pious xxmaj edward with such grace 
▁ xxmaj that the malevolence of fortune nothing 
▁ xxmaj takes from his high respect . xxmaj thither xxmaj macduff 
▁ xxmaj is gone to pray the holy xxmaj king , upon his aid 
▁ xxmaj to wake xxmaj northumberland and warlike xxmaj siward ; 
▁ xxmaj that by the help of these , with xxmaj him above 
▁ xxmaj to ratify the work , we may again 
▁ xxmaj give to our tables meat , sleep to our nights , 
▁ xxmaj free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives , 
▁ xxmaj do faithful homage , and receive free honors- 
▁ xxmaj all which we pine for now . xxmaj and this report 
▁ xxmaj hath so exasperate the xxmaj king that he 
▁ xxmaj prepares for some attempt of war . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj sent he to xxmaj macduff ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj he did , and with an absolute " sir , not xxup i , " 
▁ xxmaj the cloudy messenger turns me his back , 
▁ xxmaj and hums , as who should say , " you 'll rue the time 
▁ xxmaj that clogs me with this answer . " 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj and that well might 
▁ xxmaj advise him to a caution , to hold what distance 
▁ xxmaj his wisdom can provide . xxmaj some holy angel 
▁ xxmaj fly to the court of xxmaj england and unfold 
▁ xxmaj his message ere he come , that a swift blessing 
▁ xxmaj may soon return to this our suffering country 
▁ xxmaj under a hand accursed ! 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj i 'll send my prayers with him . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a cavern . xxmaj in the middle , a boiling cauldron . xxmaj thunder . 

 xxmaj enter the three xxmaj witches . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj thrice and once the hedge - pig whined . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj harpier cries , " ' tis time , ' tis time . " 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj round about the cauldron go ; 
▁ xxmaj in the poison'd entrails throw . 
▁ xxmaj toad , that under cold stone 
▁ xxmaj days and nights has thirty - one 
▁ xxmaj swelter'd venom sleeping got , 
▁ xxmaj boil thou first i ' the charmed pot . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj double , double , toil and trouble ; 
▁ xxmaj fire burn and cauldron bubble . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj fillet of a fenny snake , 
▁ xxmaj in the cauldron boil and bake ; 
▁ xxmaj eye of newt and toe of frog , 
▁ xxmaj wool of bat and tongue of dog , 
▁ xxmaj adder 's fork and blind - worm 's sting , 
▁ xxmaj lizard 's leg and howlet 's wing , 
▁ xxmaj for a charm of powerful trouble , 
▁ xxmaj like a hell - broth boil and bubble . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj double , double , toil and trouble ; 
▁ xxmaj fire burn and cauldron bubble . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj scale of dragon , tooth of wolf , 
▁ xxmaj witch 's mummy , maw and gulf 
▁ xxmaj of the ravin'd salt - sea shark , 
▁ xxmaj root of hemlock digg'd i ' the dark , 
▁ xxmaj liver of blaspheming xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj gall of goat and slips of yew 
▁ xxmaj sliver'd in the moon 's eclipse , 
▁ xxmaj nose of xxmaj turk and xxmaj tartar 's lips , 
▁ xxmaj finger of birth - strangled babe 
▁ xxmaj ditch - deliver'd by a drab , 
▁ xxmaj make the gruel thick and slab . 
▁ xxmaj add thereto a tiger 's chawdron , 
▁ xxmaj for the ingredients of our cawdron . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj double , double , toil and trouble ; 
▁ xxmaj fire burn and cauldron bubble . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj cool it with a baboon 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj then the charm is firm and good . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj hecate to the other three xxmaj witches . 

▁ xxup hecate . xxup o , well done ! i commend your pains , 
▁ xxmaj and everyone shall share i ' the gains . 
▁ xxmaj and now about the cauldron sing , 
▁ xxmaj like elves and fairies in a ring , 
▁ xxmaj enchanting all that you put in . 
▁ xxmaj music and a song , " black spirits . " 
▁ xxmaj hecate retires . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj by the pricking of my thumbs , 
▁ xxmaj something wicked this way comes . 
▁ xxmaj open , locks , 
▁ xxmaj whoever knocks ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj how now , you secret , black , and midnight hags ? 
▁ xxmaj what is't you do ? 
▁ xxup all . a deed without a name . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i conjure you , by that which you profess 
▁ ( howeer you come to know it ) answer me : 
▁ xxmaj though you untie the winds and let them fight 
▁ xxmaj against the churches , though the yesty waves 
▁ xxmaj confound and swallow navigation up , 
▁ xxmaj though bladed corn be lodged and trees blown down , 
▁ xxmaj though castles topple on their warders ' heads , 
▁ xxmaj though palaces and pyramids do slope 
▁ xxmaj their heads to their foundations , though the treasure 
▁ xxmaj of nature 's germaines tumble all together 
▁ xxmaj even till destruction sicken , answer me 
▁ xxmaj to what i ask you . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj demand . 
▁ xxup third xxup witch . xxmaj we 'll answer . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj say , if thou'dst rather hear it from our mouths , 
▁ xxmaj or from our masters ' ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj call 'em , let me see 'em . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj pour in sow 's blood that hath eaten 
▁ xxmaj her nine farrow ; grease that 's sweaten 
▁ xxmaj from the murtherer 's gibbet throw 
▁ xxmaj into the flame . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj come , high or low ; 
▁ xxmaj thyself and office deftly show ! 

▁ xxmaj thunder . xxmaj first xxmaj apparition : an armed xxmaj head . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj tell me , thou unknown power- 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj he knows thy thought : 
▁ xxmaj hear his speech , but say thou nought . 
▁ xxup first xxup apparition . xxmaj macbeth ! xxmaj macbeth ! xxmaj macbeth ! xxmaj beware xxmaj macduff , 
▁ xxmaj beware the xxmaj thane of xxmaj fife . xxmaj dismiss me . xxmaj enough . 
▁ xxmaj descends . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj whate'er thou art , for thy good caution , thanks ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast harp'd my fear aright . xxmaj but one word more- 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj he will not be commanded . xxmaj here 's another , 
▁ xxmaj more potent than the first . 

▁ xxmaj thunder . xxmaj second xxmaj apparition : a bloody xxmaj child . 
▁
▁ xxup second xxup apparition . xxmaj macbeth ! xxmaj macbeth ! xxmaj macbeth ! 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj had i three ears , xxmaj i 'd hear thee . 
▁ xxup second xxup apparition . xxmaj be bloody , bold , and resolute : laugh to scorn 
▁ xxmaj the power of man , for none of woman born 
▁ xxmaj shall harm xxmaj macbeth . xxmaj descends . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj then live , xxmaj macduff . xxmaj what need i fear of thee ? 
▁ xxmaj but yet xxmaj i 'll make assurance double sure , 
▁ xxmaj and take a bond of fate : thou shalt not live , 
▁ xxmaj that i may tell pale - hearted fear it lies , 
▁ xxmaj and sleep in spite of thunder . 

▁ xxmaj thunder . xxmaj third xxmaj apparition : a xxmaj child crowned , 
▁ with a tree in his hand . 

▁ xxmaj what is this , 
▁ xxmaj that rises like the issue of a king , 
▁ xxmaj and wears upon his baby brow the round 
▁ xxmaj and top of sovereignty ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj listen , but speak not to't . 
▁ xxup third xxup apparition . xxmaj be lion - mettled , proud , and take no care 
▁ xxmaj who chafes , who frets , or where conspirers are . 
▁ xxmaj macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj birnam xxmaj wood to high xxmaj dunsinane xxmaj hill 
▁ xxmaj shall come against him . xxmaj descends . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj that will never be . 
▁ xxmaj who can impress the forest , bid the tree 
▁ xxmaj unfix his earth - bound root ? xxmaj sweet bodements , good ! 
▁ xxmaj rebellion 's head , rise never till the xxmaj wood 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj birnam rise , and our high - placed xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj shall live the lease of nature , pay his breath 
▁ xxmaj to time and mortal custom . xxmaj yet my heart 
▁ xxmaj throbs to know one thing : tell me , if your art 
▁ xxmaj can tell so much , shall xxmaj banquo 's issue ever 
▁ xxmaj reign in this kingdom ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj seek to know no more . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i will be satisfied ! xxmaj deny me this , 
▁ xxmaj and an eternal curse fall on you ! xxmaj let me know . 
▁ xxmaj why sinks that cauldron , and what noise is this ? 
▁ xxmaj hautboys . 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj show ! 
▁ xxup second xxup witch . xxmaj show ! 
▁ xxup third . xxup witch . xxmaj show ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj show his eyes , and grieve his heart ; 
▁ xxmaj come like shadows , so depart ! 

▁ a show of eight xxmaj kings , the last with a glass in his hand ; 
▁ xxmaj banquo 's xxmaj ghost following . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou are too like the spirit of xxmaj banquo xxmaj down ! 
▁ xxmaj thy crown does sear mine eyeballs . xxmaj and thy hair , 
▁ xxmaj thou other gold - bound brow , is like the first . 
▁ a third is like the former . xxmaj filthy hags ! 
▁ xxmaj why do you show me this ? a fourth ! xxmaj start , eyes ! 
▁ xxmaj what , will the line stretch out to the crack of doom ? 
▁ xxmaj another yet ! a seventh ! xxmaj i 'll see no more ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet the eighth appears , who bears a glass 
▁ xxmaj which shows me many more ; and some i see 
▁ xxmaj that twofold balls and treble sceptres carry . 
▁ xxmaj horrible sight ! xxmaj now i see ' tis true ; 
▁ xxmaj for the blood - bolter'd xxmaj banquo smiles upon me , 
▁ xxmaj and points at them for his . xxmaj what , is this so ? 
▁ xxup first xxup witch . xxmaj ay , sir , all this is so . xxmaj but why 
▁ xxmaj stands xxmaj macbeth thus amazedly ? 
▁ xxmaj come , sisters , cheer we up his sprites , 
▁ xxmaj and show the best of our delights . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll charm the air to give a sound , 
▁ xxmaj while you perform your antic round , 
▁ xxmaj that this great xxmaj king may kindly say 
▁ xxmaj our duties did his welcome pay . 
▁ xxmaj music . xxmaj the xxmaj witches dance and 
▁ then vanish with xxmaj hecate . 
▁ xxup macbeth . are they ? xxmaj gone ? xxmaj let this pernicious hour 
▁ xxmaj stand ay accursed in the calendar ! 
▁ xxmaj come in , without there ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lennox . 

▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj what 's your xxmaj grace 's will ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj saw you the weird sisters ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj came they not by you ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj no indeed , my lord . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj infected be the ' air whereon they ride , 
▁ xxmaj and damn'd all those that trust them ! i did hear 
▁ xxmaj the galloping of horse . xxmaj who wast came by ? 
▁ xxup lennox . ' tis two or three , my lord , that bring you word 
▁ xxmaj macduff is fled to xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj fled to xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup macbeth . [ aside . ] xxmaj time , thou anticipatest my dread exploits . 
▁ xxmaj the flighty purpose never is o'ertook 
▁ xxmaj unless the deed go with it . xxmaj from this moment 
▁ xxmaj the very firstlings of my heart shall be 
▁ xxmaj the firstlings of my hand . xxmaj and even now , 
▁ xxmaj to crown my thoughts with acts , be it thought and done : 
▁ xxmaj the castle of xxmaj macduff i will surprise , 
▁ xxmaj seize upon xxmaj fife , give to the edge o ' the sword 
▁ xxmaj his wife , his babes , and all unfortunate souls 
▁ xxmaj that trace him in his line . xxmaj no boasting like a fool ; 
▁ xxmaj this deed xxmaj i 'll do before this purpose cool . 
▁ xxmaj but no more sights ! -where are these gentlemen ? 
▁ xxmaj come , bring me where they are . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj fife . xxmaj macduff 's castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macduff , her xxmaj son , and xxmaj ross . 

▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj what had he done , to make him fly the land ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj you must have patience , madam . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj he had none ; 
▁ xxmaj his flight was madness . xxmaj when our actions do not , 
▁ xxmaj our fears do make us traitors . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj you know not 
▁ xxmaj whether it was his wisdom or his fear . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj wisdom ? xxmaj to leave his wife , to leave his babes , 
▁ xxmaj his mansion , and his titles , in a place 
▁ xxmaj from whence himself does fly ? xxmaj he loves us not ; 
▁ xxmaj he wants the natural touch ; for the poor wren , 
▁ xxmaj the most diminutive of birds , will fight , 
▁ xxmaj her young ones in her nest , against the owl . 
▁ xxmaj all is the fear and nothing is the love ; 
▁ xxmaj as little is the wisdom , where the flight 
▁ xxmaj so runs against all reason . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj my dearest coz , 
▁ i pray you , school yourself . xxmaj but for your husband , 
▁ xxmaj he is noble , wise , xxmaj judicious , and best knows 
▁ xxmaj the fits o ' the season . i dare not speak much further ; 
▁ xxmaj but cruel are the times when we are traitors 
▁ xxmaj and do not know ourselves ; when we hold rumor 
▁ xxmaj from what we fear , yet know not what we fear , 
▁ xxmaj but float upon a wild and violent sea 
▁ xxmaj each way and move . i take my leave of you ; 
▁ xxmaj shall not be long but xxmaj i 'll be here again . 
▁ xxmaj things at the worst will cease or else climb upward 
▁ xxmaj to what they were before . xxmaj my pretty cousin , 
▁ xxmaj blessing upon you ! 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj father'd he is , and yet he 's fatherless . 
▁ xxup ross . i am so much a fool , should i stay longer , 
▁ xxmaj it would be my disgrace and your discomfort . 
▁ i take my leave at once . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj sirrah , your father 's dead . 
▁ xxmaj and what will you do now ? xxmaj how will you live ? 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj as birds do , xxmaj mother . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj what , with worms and flies ? 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj with what i get , i mean ; and so do they . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj poor bird ! xxmaj thou'ldst never fear the net nor lime , 
▁ xxmaj the pitfall nor the gin . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj why should xxup i , xxmaj mother ? xxmaj poor birds they are not set for . 
▁ xxmaj my father is not dead , for all your saying . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj yes , he is dead . xxmaj how wilt thou do for father ? 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj nay , how will you do for a husband ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj why , i can buy me twenty at any market . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj then you 'll buy 'em to sell again . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj thou speak'st with all thy wit , and yet , i ' faith , 
▁ xxmaj with wit enough for thee . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj was my father a traitor , xxmaj mother ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj ay , that he was . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj what is a traitor ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj why one that swears and lies . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj and be all traitors that do so ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj everyone that does so is a traitor and must be 
▁ hanged . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj and must they all be hanged that swear and lie ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj everyone . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj who must hang them ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj why , the honest men . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj then the liars and swearers are fools , for there are liars and 
▁ swearers enow to beat the honest men and hang up them . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj now , xxmaj god help thee , poor monkey ! xxmaj but how wilt thou do 
▁ for a father ? 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj if he were dead , you'ld weep for him ; if you would not , it 
▁ were a good sign that i should quickly have a new father . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj poor prattler , how thou talk'st ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj bless you , fair dame ! i am not to you known , 
▁ xxmaj though in your state of honor i am perfect . 
▁ i doubt some danger does approach you nearly . 
▁ xxmaj if you will take a homely man 's advice , 
▁ xxmaj be not found here ; hence , with your little ones . 
▁ xxmaj to fright you thus , methinks i am too savage ; 
▁ xxmaj to do worse to you were fell cruelty , 
▁ xxmaj which is too nigh your person . xxmaj heaven preserve you ! 
▁ i dare abide no longer . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . xxmaj whither should i fly ? 
▁ i have done no harm . xxmaj but i remember now 
▁ i am in this earthly world , where to do harm 
▁ xxmaj is often laudable , to do good sometime 
▁ xxmaj accounted dangerous folly . xxmaj why then , alas , 
▁ xxmaj do i put up that womanly defense , 
▁ xxmaj to say i have done no harm -what are these faces ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj murtherers . 

▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj where is your husband ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macduff . i hope , in no place so unsanctified 
▁ xxmaj where such as thou mayst find him . 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj he 's a traitor . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj thou liest , thou shag - ear'd villain ! 
▁ xxup first xxup murtherer . xxmaj what , you egg ! 
▁ xxmaj stabs him . 
▁ xxmaj young fry of treachery ! 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj he has kill'd me , xxmaj mother . 
▁ xxmaj run away , i pray you ! xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj lady xxmaj macduff , crying " murther ! " 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj murtherers , following her . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj england . xxmaj before the xxmaj king 's palace . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj malcolm and xxmaj macduff . 

▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj let us seek out some desolate shade and there 
▁ xxmaj weep our sad bosoms empty . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj let us rather 
▁ xxmaj hold fast the mortal sword , and like good men 
▁ xxmaj bestride our downfall'n birthdom . xxmaj each new morn 
▁ xxmaj new widows howl , new orphans cry , new sorrows 
▁ xxmaj strike heaven on the face , that it resounds 
▁ xxmaj as if it felt with xxmaj scotland and yell'd out 
▁ xxmaj like syllable of dolor . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj what i believe , xxmaj i 'll wall ; 
▁ xxmaj what know , believe ; and what i can redress , 
▁ xxmaj as i shall find the time to friend , i will . 
▁ xxmaj what you have spoke , it may be so perchance . 
▁ xxmaj this tyrant , whose sole name blisters our tongues , 
▁ xxmaj was once thought honest . xxmaj you have loved him well ; 
▁ xxmaj he hath not touch'd you yet . i am young , but something 
▁ xxmaj you may deserve of him through me , and wisdom 
▁ xxmaj to offer up a weak , poor , innocent lamb 
▁ xxmaj to appease an angry god . 
▁ xxup macduff . i am not treacherous . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj but xxmaj macbeth is . 
▁ a good and virtuous nature may recoil 
▁ xxmaj in an imperial charge . xxmaj but i shall crave your pardon ; 
▁ xxmaj that which you are , my thoughts can not transpose . 
▁ xxmaj angels are bright still , though the brightest fell . 
▁ xxmaj though all things foul would wear the brows of grace , 
▁ xxmaj yet grace must still look so . 
▁ xxup macduff . i have lost my hopes . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj perchance even there where i did find my doubts . 
▁ xxmaj why in that rawness left you wife and child , 
▁ xxmaj those precious motives , those strong knots of love , 
▁ xxmaj without leave - taking ? i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj let not my jealousies be your dishonors , 
▁ xxmaj but mine own safeties . xxmaj you may be rightly just , 
▁ xxmaj whatever i shall think . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj bleed , bleed , poor country ! 
▁ xxmaj great tyranny , lay thou thy basis sure , 
▁ xxmaj for goodness dare not check thee . xxmaj wear thou thy wrongs ; 
▁ xxmaj the title is affeer'd . xxmaj fare thee well , lord . 
▁ i would not be the villain that thou think'st 
▁ xxmaj for the whole space that 's in the tyrant 's grasp 
▁ xxmaj and the rich xxmaj east to boot . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj be not offended ; 
▁ i speak not as in absolute fear of you . 
▁ i think our country sinks beneath the yoke ; 
▁ xxmaj it weeps , it bleeds , and each new day a gash 
▁ xxmaj is added to her wounds . i think withal 
▁ xxmaj there would be hands uplifted in my right ; 
▁ xxmaj and here from gracious xxmaj england have i offer 
▁ xxmaj of goodly thousands . xxmaj but for all this , 
▁ xxmaj when i shall tread upon the tyrant 's head , 
▁ xxmaj or wear it on my sword , yet my poor country 
▁ xxmaj shall have more vices than it had before , 
▁ xxmaj more suffer and more sundry ways than ever , 
▁ xxmaj by him that shall succeed . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj what should he be ? 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj it is myself i mean , in whom i know 
▁ xxmaj all the particulars of vice so grafted 
▁ xxmaj that , when they shall be open'd , black xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj will seem as pure as snow , and the poor state 
▁ xxmaj esteem him as a lamb , being compared 
▁ xxmaj with my confineless harms . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj not in the legions 
▁ xxmaj of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd 
▁ xxmaj in evils to top xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup malcolm . i grant him bloody , 
▁ xxmaj luxurious , avaricious , false , deceitful , 
▁ xxmaj sudden , malicious , smacking of every sin 
▁ xxmaj that has a name . xxmaj but there 's no bottom , none , 
▁ xxmaj in my voluptuousness . xxmaj your wives , your daughters , 
▁ xxmaj your matrons , and your maids could not fill up 
▁ xxmaj the cestern of my lust , and my desire 
▁ xxmaj all continent impediments would o'erbear 
▁ xxmaj that did oppose my will . xxmaj better xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj than such an one to reign . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj boundless intemperance 
▁ xxmaj in nature is a tyranny ; it hath been 
▁ xxmaj the untimely emptying of the happy throne , 
▁ xxmaj and fall of many kings . xxmaj but fear not yet 
▁ xxmaj to take upon you what is yours . xxmaj you may 
▁ xxmaj convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty 
▁ xxmaj and yet seem cold , the time you may so hoodwink . 
▁ xxmaj we have willing dames enough ; there can not be 
▁ xxmaj that vulture in you to devour so many 
▁ xxmaj as will to greatness dedicate themselves , 
▁ xxmaj finding it so inclined . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj with this there grows 
▁ xxmaj in my most ill - composed affection such 
▁ a stanchless avarice that , were i xxmaj king , 
▁ i should cut off the nobles for their lands , 
▁ xxmaj desire his jewels and this other 's house , 
▁ xxmaj and my more - having would be as a sauce 
▁ xxmaj to make me hunger more , that i should forge 
▁ xxmaj quarrels unjust against the good and loyal , 
▁ xxmaj destroying them for wealth . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj this avarice 
▁ xxmaj sticks deeper , grows with more pernicious root 
▁ xxmaj than summer - seeming lust , and it hath been 
▁ xxmaj the sword of our slain kings . xxmaj yet do not fear ; 
▁ xxmaj scotland hath foisons to fill up your will 
▁ xxmaj of your mere own . xxmaj all these are portable , 
▁ xxmaj with other graces weigh'd . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj but i have none . xxmaj the king - becoming graces , 
▁ xxmaj as justice , verity , temperance , stableness , 
▁ xxmaj bounty , perseverance , mercy , lowliness , 
▁ xxmaj devotion , patience , courage , fortitude , 
▁ i have no relish of them , but abound 
▁ xxmaj in the division of each several crime , 
▁ xxmaj acting it many ways . xxmaj nay , had i power , i should 
▁ xxmaj pour the sweet milk of concord into hell , 
▁ xxmaj uproar the universal peace , confound 
▁ xxmaj all unity on earth . 
▁ xxup macduff . o xxmaj scotland , xxmaj scotland ! 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj if such a one be fit to govern , speak . 
▁ i am as i have spoken . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj fit to govern ? 
▁ xxmaj no , not to live . o nation miserable ! 
▁ xxmaj with an untitled tyrant bloody - scepter'd , 
▁ xxmaj when shalt thou see thy wholesome days again , 
▁ xxmaj since that the truest issue of thy throne 
▁ xxmaj by his own interdiction stands accursed 
▁ xxmaj and does blaspheme his breed ? xxmaj thy royal father 
▁ xxmaj was a most sainted king ; the queen that bore thee , 
▁ xxmaj oftener upon her knees than on her feet , 
▁ xxmaj died every day she lived . xxmaj fare thee well ! 
▁ xxmaj these evils thou repeat'st upon thyself 
▁ xxmaj have banish'd me from xxmaj scotland . o my breast , 
▁ xxmaj thy hope ends here ! 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj macduff , this noble passion , 
▁ xxmaj child of integrity , hath from my soul 
▁ xxmaj wiped the black scruples , reconciled my thoughts 
▁ xxmaj to thy good truth and honor . xxmaj devilish xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj by many of these trains hath sought to win me 
▁ xxmaj into his power , and modest wisdom plucks me 
▁ xxmaj from over - credulous haste . xxmaj but xxmaj god above 
▁ xxmaj deal between thee and me ! xxmaj for even now 
▁ i put myself to thy direction and 
▁ xxmaj unspeak mine own detraction ; here abjure 
▁ xxmaj the taints and blames i laid upon myself , 
▁ xxmaj for strangers to my nature . i am yet 
▁ xxmaj unknown to woman , never was forsworn , 
▁ xxmaj scarcely have coveted what was mine own , 
▁ xxmaj at no time broke my faith , would not betray 
▁ xxmaj the devil to his fellow , and delight 
▁ xxmaj no less in truth than life . xxmaj my first false speaking 
▁ xxmaj was this upon myself . xxmaj what i am truly 
▁ xxmaj is thine and my poor country 's to command . 
▁ xxmaj whither indeed , before thy here - approach , 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj siward , with ten thousand warlike men 
▁ xxmaj already at a point , was setting forth . 
▁ xxmaj now we 'll together , and the chance of goodness 
▁ xxmaj be like our warranted quarrel ! xxmaj why are you silent ? 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj such welcome and unwelcome things at once 
▁ ' tis hard to reconcile . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj doctor . 
▁
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj well , more anon . xxmaj comes the xxmaj king forth , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj ay , sir , there are a crew of wretched souls 
▁ xxmaj that stay his cure . xxmaj their malady convinces 
▁ xxmaj the great assay of art , but at his touch , 
▁ xxmaj such sanctity hath heaven given his hand , 
▁ xxmaj they presently amend . 
▁ xxup malcolm . i thank you , xxmaj doctor . xxmaj exit xxmaj doctor . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj what 's the disease he means ? 
▁ xxup malcolm . ' tis call'd the evil : 
▁ a most miraculous work in this good xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj which often , since my here - remain in xxmaj england , 
▁ i have seen him do . xxmaj how he solicits heaven , 
▁ xxmaj himself best knows ; but strangely - visited people , 
▁ xxmaj all swol'n and ulcerous , pitiful to the eye , 
▁ xxmaj the mere despair of surgery , he cures , 
▁ xxmaj hanging a golden stamp about their necks 
▁ xxmaj put on with holy prayers ; and ' tis spoken , 
▁ xxmaj to the succeeding royalty he leaves 
▁ xxmaj the healing benediction . xxmaj with this strange virtue 
▁ xxmaj he hath a heavenly gift of prophecy , 
▁ xxmaj and sundry blessings hang about his throne 
▁ xxmaj that speak him full of grace . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ross . 

▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj see , who comes here ? 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj my countryman , but yet i know him not . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj my ever gentle cousin , welcome hither . 
▁ xxup malcolm . i know him now . xxmaj good xxmaj god , betimes remove 
▁ xxmaj the means that makes us strangers ! 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj sir , amen . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj stands xxmaj scotland where it did ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj alas , poor country , 
▁ xxmaj almost afraid to know itself ! xxmaj it can not 
▁ xxmaj be call'd our mother , but our grave . xxmaj where nothing , 
▁ xxmaj but who knows nothing , is once seen to smile ; 
▁ xxmaj where sighs and groans and shrieks that rend the air , 
▁ xxmaj are made , not mark'd ; where violent sorrow seems 
▁ a modern ecstasy . xxmaj the dead man 's knell 
▁ xxmaj is there scarce ask'd for who , and good men 's lives 
▁ xxmaj expire before the flowers in their caps , 
▁ xxmaj dying or ere they sicken . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxup o , relation 
▁ xxmaj too nice , and yet too true ! 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj what 's the newest grief ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj that of an hour 's age doth hiss the speaker ; 
▁ xxmaj each minute teems a new one . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj how does my wife ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj why , well . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj and all my children ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj well too . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj the tyrant has not batter'd at their peace ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj no , they were well at peace when i did leave 'em . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj be not a niggard of your speech . xxmaj how goest ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj when i came hither to transport the tidings , 
▁ xxmaj which i have heavily borne , there ran a rumor 
▁ xxmaj of many worthy fellows that were out , 
▁ xxmaj which was to my belief witness'd the rather , 
▁ xxmaj for that i saw the tyrant 's power afoot . 
▁ xxmaj now is the time of help ; your eye in xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxmaj would create soldiers , make our women fight , 
▁ xxmaj to doff their dire distresses . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj be't their comfort 
▁ xxmaj we are coming thither . xxmaj gracious xxmaj england hath 
▁ xxmaj lent us good xxmaj siward and ten thousand men ; 
▁ xxmaj an older and a better soldier none 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj christendom gives out . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj would i could answer 
▁ xxmaj this comfort with the like ! xxmaj but i have words 
▁ xxmaj that would be howl'd out in the desert air , 
▁ xxmaj where hearing should not latch them . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj what concern they ? 
▁ xxmaj the general cause ? xxmaj or is it a fee - grief 
▁ xxmaj due to some single breast ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj no mind that 's honest 
▁ xxmaj but in it shares some woe , though the main part 
▁ xxmaj pertains to you alone . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj if it be mine , 
▁ xxmaj keep it not from me , quickly let me have it . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj let not your ears despise my tongue forever , 
▁ xxmaj which shall possess them with the heaviest sound 
▁ xxmaj that ever yet they heard . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj humh ! i guess at it . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj your castle is surprised ; your wife and babes 
▁ xxmaj savagely slaughter'd . xxmaj to relate the manner 
▁ xxmaj were , on the quarry of these murther'd deer , 
▁ xxmaj to add the death of you . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj merciful heaven ! 
▁ xxmaj what , man ! xxmaj neer pull your hat upon your brows ; 
▁ xxmaj give sorrow words . xxmaj the grief that does not speak 
▁ xxmaj whispers the o'erfraught heart , and bids it break . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj my children too ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj wife , children , servants , all 
▁ xxmaj that could be found . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj and i must be from thence ! 
▁ xxmaj my wife kill'd too ? 
▁ xxup ross . i have said . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj be comforted . 
▁ xxmaj let 's make us medicines of our great revenge , 
▁ xxmaj to cure this deadly grief . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj he has no children . xxmaj all my pretty ones ? 
▁ xxmaj did you say all ? o hell - kite ! xxmaj all ? 
▁ xxmaj what , all my pretty chickens and their dam 
▁ xxmaj at one fell swoop ? 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj dispute it like a man . 
▁ xxup macduff . i shall do so , 
▁ xxmaj but i must also feel it as a man . 
▁ i can not but remember such things were 
▁ xxmaj that were most precious to me . xxmaj did heaven look on , 
▁ xxmaj and would not take their part ? xxmaj sinful xxmaj macduff , 
▁ xxmaj they were all struck for thee ! xxmaj naught that i am , 
▁ xxmaj not for their own demerits , but for mine , 
▁ xxmaj fell slaughter on their souls . xxmaj heaven rest them now ! 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj be this the whetstone of your sword . xxmaj let grief 
▁ xxmaj convert to anger ; blunt not the heart , enrage it . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxup o , i could play the woman with mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj and braggart with my tongue ! xxmaj but , gentle heavens , 
▁ xxmaj cut short all intermission ; front to front 
▁ xxmaj bring thou this fiend of xxmaj scotland and myself ; 
▁ xxmaj within my sword 's length set him ; if he ' scape , 
▁ xxmaj heaven forgive him too !