xxbos xxup malcolm . xxmaj this tune goes manly . 
▁ xxmaj come , go we to the xxmaj king ; our power is ready , 
▁ xxmaj our lack is nothing but our leave . xxmaj macbeth 
▁ xxmaj is ripe for shaking , and the powers above 
▁ xxmaj put on their instruments . xxmaj receive what cheer you may , 
▁ xxmaj the night is long that never finds the day . xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj dunsinane . xxmaj anteroom in the castle . 

 xxmaj enter a xxmaj doctor of xxmaj physic and a xxmaj waiting xxmaj gentlewoman . 

▁ xxup doctor . i have two nights watched with you , but can perceive no 
▁ truth in your report . xxmaj when was it she last walked ? 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj since his xxmaj majesty went into the field , have seen her 
▁ rise from her bed , throw her nightgown upon her , unlock her 
▁ closet , take forth paper , fold it , write upon't , read it , 
▁ afterwards seal it , and again return to bed ; yet all this while 
▁ in a most fast sleep . 
▁ xxup doctor . a great perturbation in nature , to receive at once the 
▁ benefit of sleep and do the effects of watching ! xxmaj in this slumbery 
▁ agitation , besides her walking and other actual performances , 
▁ what , at any time , have you heard her say ? 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj that , sir , which i will not report after her . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj you may to me , and ' tis most meet you should . 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj neither to you nor anyone , having no witness to 
▁ confirm my speech . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lady xxmaj macbeth with a taper . 

▁ xxmaj lo you , here she comes ! xxmaj this is her very guise , and , upon my 
▁ life , fast asleep . xxmaj observe her ; stand close . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj how came she by that light ? 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj why , it stood by her . xxmaj she has light by her 
▁ continually ; ' tis her command . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj you see , her eyes are open . 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj ay , but their sense is shut . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj what is it she does now ? xxmaj look how she rubs her hands . 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj it is an accustomed action with her , to seem thus 
▁ washing her hands . i have known her continue in this a quarter of 
▁ an hour . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj yet here 's a spot . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj hark , she speaks ! i will set down what comes from her , to 
▁ satisfy my remembrance the more strongly . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj out , damned spot ! xxmaj out , i say ! xxmaj one- two -why then ' tis 
▁ time to do't . xxmaj hell is murky . xxmaj fie , my lord , fie ! a soldier , and 
▁ afeard ? xxmaj what need we fear who knows it , when none can call our 
▁ power to account ? xxmaj yet who would have thought the old man to have 
▁ had so much blood in him ? 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj do you mark that ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj the xxmaj thane of xxmaj fife had a wife ; where is she now ? xxmaj what , 
▁ will these hands neer be clean ? xxmaj no more o ' that , my lord , no more 
▁ o ' that . xxmaj you mar all with this starting . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj go to , go to ; you have known what you should not . 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj she has spoke what she should not , i am sure of that . 
▁ xxmaj heaven knows what she has known . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj here 's the smell of the blood still . xxmaj all the perfumes 
▁ of xxmaj arabia will not sweeten this little hand . xxmaj oh , oh , oh ! 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj what a sigh is there ! xxmaj the heart is sorely charged . 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . i would not have such a heart in my bosom for the 
▁ dignity of the whole body . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj well , well , well- 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj pray xxmaj god it be , sir . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj this disease is beyond my practice . xxmaj yet i have known those 
▁ which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their 
▁ beds . 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj wash your hands , put on your nightgown , look not so 
▁ pale . i tell you yet again , xxmaj banquo 's buried ; he can not come out 
▁ on 's grave . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj even so ? 
▁ xxup lady xxup macbeth . xxmaj to bed , to bed ; there 's knocking at the gate . xxmaj come , 
▁ come , come , come , give me your hand.what 's done can not be undone . 
▁ xxmaj to bed , to bed , to bed . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj will she go now to bed ? 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj directly . 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj foul whisperings are abroad . xxmaj unnatural deeds 
▁ xxmaj do breed unnatural troubles ; infected minds 
▁ xxmaj to their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets . 
▁ xxmaj more needs she the divine than the physician . 
▁ xxmaj god , xxmaj god , forgive us all ! xxmaj look after her ; 
▁ xxmaj remove from her the means of all annoyance , 
▁ xxmaj and still keep eyes upon her . xxmaj so good night . 
▁ xxmaj my mind she has mated and amazed my sight . 
▁ i think , but dare not speak . 
▁ xxup gentlewoman . xxmaj good night , good doctor . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the country near xxmaj dunsinane . xxmaj drum and colors . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj menteith , xxmaj caithness , xxmaj angus , xxmaj lennox , and xxmaj soldiers . 

▁ xxup menteith . xxmaj the xxmaj english power is near , led on by xxmaj malcolm , 
▁ xxmaj his uncle xxmaj siward , and the good xxmaj macduff . 
▁ xxmaj revenges burn in them , for their dear causes 
▁ xxmaj would to the bleeding and the grim alarm 
▁ xxmaj excite the mortified man . 
▁ xxup angus . xxmaj near xxmaj birnam xxmaj wood 
▁ xxmaj shall we well meet them ; that way are they coming . 
▁ xxup caithness . xxmaj who knows if xxmaj donalbain be with his brother ? 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj for certain , sir , he is not ; i have a file 
▁ xxmaj of all the gentry . xxmaj there is xxmaj seward 's son 
▁ xxmaj and many unrough youths that even now 
▁ xxmaj protest their first of manhood . 
▁ xxup menteith . xxmaj what does the tyrant ? 
▁ xxup caithness . xxmaj great xxmaj dunsinane he strongly fortifies . 
▁ xxmaj some say he 's mad ; others , that lesser hate him , 
▁ xxmaj do call it valiant fury ; but , for certain , 
▁ xxmaj he can not buckle his distemper'd cause 
▁ xxmaj within the belt of rule . 
▁ xxup angus . xxmaj now does he feel 
▁ xxmaj his secret murthers sticking on his hands , 
▁ xxmaj now minutely revolts upbraid his faith - breach ; 
▁ xxmaj those he commands move only in command , 
▁ xxmaj nothing in love . xxmaj now does he feel his title 
▁ xxmaj hang loose about him , like a giant 's robe 
▁ xxmaj upon a dwarfish thief . 
▁ xxup menteith . xxmaj who then shall blame 
▁ xxmaj his pester'd senses to recoil and start , 
▁ xxmaj when all that is within him does condemn 
▁ xxmaj itself for being there ? 
▁ xxup caithness . xxmaj well , march we on 
▁ xxmaj to give obedience where ' tis truly owed . 
▁ xxmaj meet we the medicine of the sickly weal , 
▁ xxmaj and with him pour we , in our country 's purge , 
▁ xxmaj each drop of us . 
▁ xxup lennox . xxmaj or so much as it needs 
▁ xxmaj to dew the sovereign flower and drown the weeds . 
▁ xxmaj make we our march towards xxmaj birnam . xxmaj exeunt marching . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj dunsinane . a room in the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth , xxmaj doctor , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj bring me no more reports ; let them fly all ! 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj birnam xxmaj wood remove to xxmaj dunsinane 
▁ i can not taint with fear . xxmaj what 's the boy xxmaj malcolm ? 
▁ xxmaj was he not born of woman ? xxmaj the spirits that know 
▁ xxmaj all mortal consequences have pronounced me thus : 
▁ " fear not , xxmaj macbeth ; no man that 's born of woman 
▁ xxmaj shall e'er have power upon thee . " xxmaj then fly , false xxmaj thanes , 
▁ xxmaj and mingle with the xxmaj english epicures ! 
▁ xxmaj the mind i sway by and the heart i bear 
▁ xxmaj shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj servant . 

▁ xxmaj the devil damn thee black , thou cream - faced loon ! 
▁ xxmaj where got'st thou that goose look ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj there is ten thousand- 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj geese , villain ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj soldiers , sir . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj go prick thy face and over - red thy fear , 
▁ xxmaj thou lily - liver'd boy . xxmaj what soldiers , patch ? 
▁ xxmaj death of thy soul ! xxmaj those linen cheeks of thine 
▁ xxmaj are counselors to fear . xxmaj what soldiers , whey - face ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj the xxmaj english force , so please you . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj take thy face hence . xxmaj exit xxmaj servant . 
▁ seyton - i am sick at heart , 
▁ xxmaj when i behold- xxmaj seyton , i say!- xxmaj this push 
▁ xxmaj will cheer me ever or disseat me now . 
▁ i have lived long enough . xxmaj my way of life 
▁ xxmaj is fall'n into the sear , the yellow leaf , 
▁ xxmaj and that which should accompany old age , 
▁ xxmaj as honor , love , obedience , troops of friends , 
▁ i must not look to have ; but in their stead , 
▁ xxmaj curses , not loud but deep , mouth - honor , breath , 
▁ xxmaj which the poor heart would fain deny and dare not . 
▁ xxmaj seyton ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj seyton . 

▁ xxup seyton . xxmaj what 's your gracious pleasure ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj what news more ? 
▁ xxup seyton . xxmaj all is confirm'd , my lord , which was reported . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj i 'll fight , ' til from my bones my flesh be hack'd . 
▁ xxmaj give me my armor . 
▁ xxup seyton . ' tis not needed yet . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj i 'll put it on . 
▁ xxmaj send out more horses , skirr the country round , 
▁ xxmaj hang those that talk of fear . xxmaj give me mine armor . 
▁ xxmaj how does your patient , doctor ? 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj not so sick , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj as she is troubled with thick - coming fancies , 
▁ xxmaj that keep her from her rest . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj cure her of that . 
▁ xxmaj canst thou not minister to a mind diseased , 
▁ xxmaj pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj raze out the written troubles of the brain , 
▁ xxmaj and with some sweet oblivious antidote 
▁ xxmaj cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff 
▁ xxmaj which weighs upon the heart ? 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj therein the patient 
▁ xxmaj must minister to himself . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj throw physic to the dogs , xxmaj i 'll none of it . 
▁ xxmaj come , put mine armor on ; give me my staff . 
▁ xxmaj seyton , send out . xxmaj doctor , the xxmaj thanes fly from me . 
▁ xxmaj come , sir , dispatch . xxmaj if thou couldst , doctor , cast 
▁ xxmaj the water of my land , find her disease 
▁ xxmaj and purge it to a sound and pristine health , 
▁ i would applaud thee to the very echo , 
▁ xxmaj that should applaud again . xxmaj pull't off , i say . 
▁ xxmaj what rhubarb , cyme , or what purgative drug 
▁ xxmaj would scour these xxmaj english hence ? xxmaj hearst thou of them ? 
▁ xxup doctor . xxmaj ay , my good lord , your royal preparation 
▁ xxmaj makes us hear something . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj bring it after me . 
▁ i will not be afraid of death and bane 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj birnam xxmaj forest come to xxmaj dunsinane . 
▁ xxup doctor . [ aside . ] xxmaj were i from xxmaj dunsinane away and clear , 
▁ xxmaj profit again should hardly draw me here . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj country near xxmaj birnam xxmaj wood . xxmaj drum and colors . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj malcolm , old xxmaj seward and his xxmaj son , xxmaj macduff , xxmaj menteith , xxmaj caithness , 
 xxmaj angus , xxmaj lennox , xxmaj ross , and xxmaj soldiers , marching . 

▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj cousins , i hope the days are near at hand 
▁ xxmaj that chambers will be safe . 
▁ xxup menteith . xxmaj we doubt it nothing . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj what wood is this before us ? 
▁ xxup menteith . xxmaj the xxmaj wood of xxmaj birnam . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj let every soldier hew him down a bough , 
▁ xxmaj and bear't before him ; thereby shall we shadow 
▁ xxmaj the numbers of our host , and make discovery 
▁ xxmaj err in report of us . 
▁ xxup soldiers . xxmaj it shall be done . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj we learn no other but the confident tyrant 
▁ xxmaj keeps still in xxmaj dunsinane and will endure 
▁ xxmaj our setting down before't . 
▁ xxup malcolm . ' tis his main hope ; 
▁ xxmaj for where there is advantage to be given , 
▁ xxmaj both more and less have given him the revolt , 
▁ xxmaj and none serve with him but constrained things 
▁ xxmaj whose hearts are absent too . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj let our just censures 
▁ xxmaj attend the true event , and put we on 
▁ xxmaj industrious soldiership . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj the time approaches 
▁ xxmaj that will with due decision make us know 
▁ xxmaj what we shall say we have and what we owe . 
▁ xxmaj thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate , 
▁ xxmaj but certain issue strokes must arbitrate . 
▁ xxmaj towards which advance the war . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj marching . 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj dunsinane . xxmaj within the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth , xxmaj seyton , and xxmaj soldiers , with drum and colors . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj hang out our banners on the outward walls ; 
▁ xxmaj the cry is still , " they come ! " xxmaj our castle 's strength 
▁ xxmaj will laugh a siege to scorn . xxmaj here let them lie 
▁ xxmaj till famine and the ague eat them up . 
▁ xxmaj were they not forced with those that should be ours , 
▁ xxmaj we might have met them dareful , beard to beard , 
▁ xxmaj and beat them backward home . 
▁ a cry of women within . 
▁ xxmaj what is that noise ? 
▁ xxup seyton . xxmaj it is the cry of women , my good lord . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup macbeth . i have almost forgot the taste of fears : 
▁ xxmaj the time has been , my senses would have cool'd 
▁ xxmaj to hear a night - shriek , and my fell of hair 
▁ xxmaj would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir 
▁ xxmaj as life were in't . i have supp'd full with horrors ; 
▁ xxmaj direness , familiar to my slaughterous thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj can not once start me . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj seyton . 
▁ xxmaj wherefore was that cry ? 
▁ xxup seyton . xxmaj the xxmaj queen , my lord , is dead . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj she should have died hereafter ; 
▁ xxmaj there would have been a time for such a word . 
▁ xxmaj tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow 
▁ xxmaj creeps in this petty pace from day to day 
▁ xxmaj to the last syllable of recorded time ; 
▁ xxmaj and all our yesterdays have lighted fools 
▁ xxmaj the way to dusty death . xxmaj out , out , brief candle ! 
▁ xxmaj life 's but a walking shadow , a poor player 
▁ xxmaj that struts and frets his hour upon the stage 
▁ xxmaj and then is heard no more . xxmaj it is a tale 
▁ xxmaj told by an idiot , full of sound and fury , 
▁ xxmaj signifying nothing . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj thou comest to use thy tongue ; thy story quickly . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj gracious my lord , 
▁ i should report that which i say i saw , 
▁ xxmaj but know not how to do it . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj well , say , sir . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj as i did stand my watch upon the hill , 
▁ i look'd toward xxmaj birnam , and anon , methought , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj wood began to move . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj liar and slave ! 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj let me endure your wrath , if't be not so . 
▁ xxmaj within this three mile may you see it coming ; 
▁ i say , a moving grove . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj if thou speak'st false , 
▁ xxmaj upon the next tree shalt thou hang alive , 
▁ xxmaj till famine cling thee ; if thy speech be sooth , 
▁ i care not if thou dost for me as much . 
▁ i pull in resolution and begin 
▁ xxmaj to doubt the equivocation of the fiend 
▁ xxmaj that lies like truth . " fear not , till xxmaj birnam xxmaj wood 
▁ xxmaj do come to xxmaj dunsinane , " and now a wood 
▁ xxmaj comes toward xxmaj dunsinane . xxmaj arm , arm , and out ! 
▁ xxmaj if this which he avouches does appear , 
▁ xxmaj there is nor flying hence nor tarrying here . 
▁ i ' gin to be aweary of the sun 
▁ xxmaj and wish the estate o ' the world were now undone . 
▁ xxmaj ring the alarum bell ! xxmaj blow , wind ! xxmaj come , wrack ! 
▁ xxmaj at least we 'll die with harness on our back . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj dunsinane . xxmaj before the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj malcolm , old xxmaj siward , xxmaj macduff , and their xxmaj army , with boughs . 
 xxmaj drum and colors . 

▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj now near enough ; your leavy screens throw down , 
▁ xxmaj and show like those you are . xxmaj you , worthy uncle , 
▁ xxmaj shall with my cousin , your right noble son , 
▁ xxmaj lead our first battle . xxmaj worthy xxmaj macduff and we 
▁ xxmaj shall take upon 's what else remains to do , 
▁ xxmaj according to our order . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj do we but find the tyrant 's power tonight , 
▁ xxmaj let us be beaten if we can not fight . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj make all our trumpets speak , give them all breath , 
▁ xxmaj those clamorous harbingers of blood and death . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj dunsinane . xxmaj before the castle . xxmaj alarums . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj they have tied me to a stake ; i can not fly , 
▁ xxmaj but bear - like i must fight the course . xxmaj what 's he 
▁ xxmaj that was not born of woman ? xxmaj such a one 
▁ xxmaj am i to fear , or none . 

▁ xxmaj enter young xxmaj siward . 

▁ xxup young xxup siward . xxmaj what is thy name ? 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou'lt be afraid to hear it . 
▁ xxup young xxup siward . xxmaj no , though thou call'st thyself a hotter name 
▁ xxmaj than any is in hell . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj my name 's xxmaj macbeth . 
▁ xxup young xxup siward . xxmaj the devil himself could not pronounce a title 
▁ xxmaj more hateful to mine ear . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj no , nor more fearful . 
▁ xxup young xxup siward o xxmaj thou liest , abhorred tyrant ; with my sword 
▁ xxmaj i 'll prove the lie thou speak'st . 
▁ xxmaj they fight , and young xxmaj seward is slain . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou wast born of woman . 
▁ xxmaj but swords i smile at , weapons laugh to scorn , 
▁ xxmaj brandish'd by man that 's of a woman born . xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj alarums . xxmaj enter xxmaj macduff . 

▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj that way the noise is . xxmaj tyrant , show thy face ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou best slain and with no stroke of mine , 
▁ xxmaj my wife and children 's ghosts will haunt me still . 
▁ i can not strike at wretched kerns , whose arms 
▁ xxmaj are hired to bear their staves . xxmaj either thou , xxmaj macbeth , 
▁ xxmaj or else my sword , with an unbatter'd edge , 
▁ i sheathe again undeeded . xxmaj there thou shouldst be ; 
▁ xxmaj by this great clatter , one of greatest note 
▁ xxmaj seems bruited . xxmaj let me find him , xxmaj fortune ! 
▁ xxmaj and more i beg not . xxmaj exit . xxmaj alarums . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj malcolm and old xxmaj siward . 
▁
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj this way , my lord ; the castle 's gently render'd . 
▁ xxmaj the tyrant 's people on both sides do fight , 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj thanes do bravely in the war , 
▁ xxmaj the day almost itself professes yours , 
▁ xxmaj and little is to do . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj we have met with foes 
▁ xxmaj that strike beside us . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj enter , sir , the castle . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj alarum . 




 xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another part of the field . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj macbeth . 

▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj why should i play the xxmaj roman fool and die 
▁ xxmaj on mine own sword ? xxmaj whiles i see lives , the gashes 
▁ xxmaj do better upon them . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj macduff . 

▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj turn , hell hound , turn ! 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj of all men else i have avoided thee . 
▁ xxmaj but get thee back , my soul is too much charged 
▁ xxmaj with blood of thine already . 
▁ xxup macduff . i have no words . 
▁ xxmaj my voice is in my sword , thou bloodier villain 
▁ xxmaj than terms can give thee out ! xxmaj they fight . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj thou losest labor . 
▁ xxmaj as easy mayst thou the intrenchant air 
▁ xxmaj with thy keen sword impress as make me bleed . 
▁ xxmaj let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests ; 
▁ i bear a charmed life , which must not yield 
▁ xxmaj to one of woman born . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj despair thy charm , 
▁ xxmaj and let the angel whom thou still hast served 
▁ xxmaj tell thee , xxmaj macduff was from his mother 's womb 
▁ xxmaj untimely ripp'd . 
▁ xxup macbeth . xxmaj accursed be that tongue that tells me so , 
▁ xxmaj for it hath cow'd my better part of man ! 
▁ xxmaj and be these juggling fiends no more believed 
▁ xxmaj that patter with us in a double sense , 
▁ xxmaj that keep the word of promise to our ear 
▁ xxmaj and break it to our hope . xxmaj i 'll not fight with thee . 
▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj then yield thee , coward , 
▁ xxmaj and live to be the show and gaze o ' the time . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll have thee , as our rarer monsters are , 
▁ xxmaj painted upon a pole , and underwrit , 
▁ " here may you see the tyrant . " 
▁ xxup macbeth . i will not yield , 
▁ xxmaj to kiss the ground before young xxmaj malcolm 's feet , 
▁ xxmaj and to be baited with the rabble 's curse . 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj birnam xxmaj wood be come to xxmaj dunsinane , 
▁ xxmaj and thou opposed , being of no woman born , 
▁ xxmaj yet i will try the last . xxmaj before my body 
▁ i throw my warlike shield ! xxmaj lay on , xxmaj macduff , 
▁ xxmaj and damn'd be him that first cries , " hold , enough ! " 
▁ xxmaj exeunt fighting . xxmaj alarums . 




 xxup scene xxup ix . 

 xxmaj retreat . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter , with drum and colors , xxmaj malcolm , old xxmaj siward , xxmaj ross , 
 the other xxmaj thanes , and xxmaj soldiers . 

▁ xxup malcolm . i would the friends we miss were safe arrived . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj some must go off , and yet , by these i see , 
▁ xxmaj so great a day as this is cheaply bought . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj macduff is missing , and your noble son . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj your son , my lord , has paid a soldier 's debt . 
▁ xxmaj he only lived but till he was a man , 
▁ xxmaj the which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd 
▁ xxmaj in the unshrinking station where he fought , 
▁ xxmaj but like a man he died . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj then he is dead ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj ay , and brought off the field . xxmaj your cause of sorrow 
▁ xxmaj must not be measured by his worth , for then 
▁ xxmaj it hath no end . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj had he his hurts before ? 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj ay , on the front . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj why then , xxmaj god 's soldier be he ! 
▁ xxmaj had i as many sons as i have hairs , 
▁ i would not wish them to a fairer death . 
▁ xxmaj and so his knell is knoll'd . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj he 's worth more sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj and that xxmaj i 'll spend for him . 
▁ xxup siward . xxmaj he 's worth no more : 
▁ xxmaj they say he parted well and paid his score , 
▁ xxmaj and so xxmaj god be with him ! xxmaj here comes newer comfort . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj macduff , with xxmaj macbeth 's head . 

▁ xxup macduff . xxmaj hail , xxmaj king , for so thou art . xxmaj behold where stands 
▁ xxmaj the usurper 's cursed head . xxmaj the time is free . 
▁ i see thee compass'd with thy kingdom 's pearl 
▁ xxmaj that speak my salutation in their minds , 
▁ xxmaj whose voices i desire aloud with mine- 
▁ xxmaj hail , xxmaj king of xxmaj scotland ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj hail , xxmaj king of xxmaj scotland ! xxmaj flourish . 
▁ xxup malcolm . xxmaj we shall not spend a large expense of time 
▁ xxmaj before we reckon with your several loves 
▁ xxmaj and make us even with you . xxmaj my xxmaj thanes and kinsmen , 
▁ xxmaj henceforth be xxmaj earls , the first that ever xxmaj scotland 
▁ xxmaj in such an honor named . xxmaj what 's more to do , 
▁ xxmaj which would be planted newly with the time , 
▁ xxmaj as calling home our exiled friends abroad 
▁ xxmaj that fled the snares of watchful tyranny , 
▁ xxmaj producing forth the cruel ministers 
▁ xxmaj of this dead butcher and his fiend - like queen , 
▁ xxmaj who , as ' tis thought , by self and violent hands 
▁ xxmaj took off her life ; this , and what needful else 
▁ xxmaj that calls upon us , by the grace of xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj we will perform in measure , time , and place . 
▁ xxmaj so thanks to all at once and to each one , 
▁ xxmaj whom we invite to see us crown'd at xxmaj scone . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt . 
▁ -the xxup end- 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1605 


 xxup measure xxup for xxup measure 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup vincentio , the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup angelo , the xxmaj deputy 
▁ xxup escalus , an ancient xxmaj lord 
▁ xxup claudio , a young gentleman 
▁ xxup lucio , a fantastic 
▁ xxmaj two other like xxmaj gentlemen 
▁ xxup varrius , a gentleman , servant to the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup provost 
▁ xxup thomas , friar 
▁ xxup peter , friar 
▁ a xxup justice 
▁ xxup elbow , a simple constable 
▁ xxup froth , a foolish gentleman 
▁ xxup pompey , a clown and servant to xxmaj mistress xxmaj overdone 
▁ xxup abhorson , an executioner 
▁ xxup barnardine , a dissolute prisoner 

▁ xxup isabella , sister to xxmaj claudio 
▁ xxup mariana , betrothed to xxmaj angelo 
▁ xxup juliet , beloved of xxmaj claudio 
▁ xxup francisca , a nun 
▁ xxup mistress xxup overdone , a bawd 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj officers , xxmaj citizens , xxmaj boy , and xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj vienna 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke , xxup escalus , xxup lords , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj escalus ! 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj of government the properties to unfold 
▁ xxmaj would seem in me t ' affect speech and discourse , 
▁ xxmaj since i am put to know that your own science 
▁ xxmaj exceeds , in that , the lists of all advice 
▁ xxmaj my strength can give you ; then no more remains 
▁ xxmaj but that to your sufficiency- as your worth is able- 
▁ xxmaj and let them work . xxmaj the nature of our people , 
▁ xxmaj our city 's institutions , and the terms 
▁ xxmaj for common justice , y'are as pregnant in 
▁ xxmaj as art and practice hath enriched any 
▁ xxmaj that we remember . xxmaj there is our commission , 
▁ xxmaj from which we would not have you warp . xxmaj call hither , 
▁ i say , bid come before us , xxmaj angelo . xxmaj exit an xxup attendant 
▁ xxmaj what figure of us think you he will bear ? 
▁ xxmaj for you must know we have with special soul 
▁ xxmaj elected him our absence to supply ; 
▁ xxmaj lent him our terror , dress'd him with our love , 
▁ xxmaj and given his deputation all the organs 
▁ xxmaj of our own power . xxmaj what think you of it ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj if any in xxmaj vienna be of worth 
▁ xxmaj to undergo such ample grace and honour , 
▁ xxmaj it is xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup angelo 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj look where he comes . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj always obedient to your xxmaj grace 's will , 
▁ i come to know your pleasure . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj there is a kind of character in thy life 
▁ xxmaj that to th ' observer doth thy history 
▁ xxmaj fully unfold . xxmaj thyself and thy belongings 
▁ xxmaj are not thine own so proper as to waste 
▁ xxmaj thyself upon thy virtues , they on thee . 
▁ xxmaj heaven doth with us as we with torches do , 
▁ xxmaj not light them for themselves ; for if our virtues 
▁ xxmaj did not go forth of us , ' twere all alike 
▁ xxmaj as if we had them not . xxmaj spirits are not finely touch'd 
▁ xxmaj but to fine issues ; nor xxmaj nature never lends 
▁ xxmaj the smallest scruple of her excellence 
▁ xxmaj but , like a thrifty goddess , she determines 
▁ xxmaj herself the glory of a creditor , 
▁ xxmaj both thanks and use . xxmaj but i do bend my speech 
▁ xxmaj to one that can my part in him advertise . 
▁ xxmaj hold , therefore , xxmaj angelo- 
▁ xxmaj in our remove be thou at full ourself ; 
▁ xxmaj mortality and mercy in xxmaj vienna 
▁ xxmaj live in thy tongue and heart . xxmaj old xxmaj escalus , 
▁ xxmaj though first in question , is thy secondary . 
▁ xxmaj take thy commission . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj now , good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj let there be some more test made of my metal , 
▁ xxmaj before so noble and so great a figure 
▁ xxmaj be stamp'd upon it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj no more evasion ! 
▁ xxmaj we have with a leaven'd and prepared choice 
▁ xxmaj proceeded to you ; therefore take your honours . 
▁ xxmaj our haste from hence is of so quick condition 
▁ xxmaj that it prefers itself , and leaves unquestion'd 
▁ xxmaj matters of needful value . xxmaj we shall write to you , 
▁ xxmaj as time and our concernings shall importune , 
▁ xxmaj how it goes with us , and do look to know 
▁ xxmaj what doth befall you here . xxmaj so , fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj to th ' hopeful execution do i leave you 
▁ xxmaj of your commissions . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj yet give leave , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj that we may bring you something on the way . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj my haste may not admit it ; 
▁ xxmaj nor need you , on mine honour , have to do 
▁ xxmaj with any scruple : your scope is as mine own , 
▁ xxmaj so to enforce or qualify the laws 
▁ xxmaj as to your soul seems good . xxmaj give me your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll privily away . i love the people , 
▁ xxmaj but do not like to stage me to their eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj though it do well , i do not relish well 
▁ xxmaj their loud applause and xxmaj aves vehement ; 
▁ xxmaj nor do i think the man of safe discretion 
▁ xxmaj that does affect it . xxmaj once more , fare you well . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj the heavens give safety to your purposes ! 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj lead forth and bring you back in happiness ! 
▁ xxup duke . i thank you . xxmaj fare you well . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup escalus . i shall desire you , sir , to give me leave 
▁ xxmaj to have free speech with you ; and it concerns me 
▁ xxmaj to look into the bottom of my place : 
▁ a pow'r i have , but of what strength and nature 
▁ i am not yet instructed . 
▁ xxup angelo . ' tis so with me . xxmaj let us withdraw together , 
▁ xxmaj and we may soon our satisfaction have 
▁ xxmaj touching that point . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj i 'll wait upon your honour . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a street 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lucio and two other xxup gentlemen 

▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj if the xxmaj duke , with the other dukes , come not to composition 
▁ with the xxmaj king of xxmaj hungary , why then all the dukes fall upon the 
▁ xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj heaven grant us its peace , but not the xxmaj king of 
▁ xxmaj hungary 's ! 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj thou conclud'st like the sanctimonious pirate that went to 
▁ sea with the xxmaj ten xxmaj commandments , but scrap'd one out of the table . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . ' thou shalt not steal ' ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj ay , that he raz'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj why , ' twas a commandment to command the captain 
▁ and all the rest from their functions : they put forth to steal . 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a soldier of us all that , in the thanksgiving before 
▁ meat , do relish the petition well that prays for peace . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i never heard any soldier dislike it . 
▁ xxup lucio . i believe thee ; for i think thou never wast where grace was 
▁ said . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj no ? a dozen times at least . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj what , in metre ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj in any proportion or in any language . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . i think , or in any religion . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj ay , why not ? xxmaj grace is grace , despite of all controversy ; as , 
▁ for example , thou thyself art a wicked villain , despite of all 
▁ grace . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj well , there went but a pair of shears between us . 
▁ xxup lucio . i grant ; as there may between the lists and the velvet . 
▁ xxmaj thou art the list . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj and thou the velvet ; thou art good velvet ; thou'rt 
▁ a three - pil'd piece , i warrant thee . i had as lief be a list of 
▁ an xxmaj english kersey as be pil'd , as thou art pil'd , for a xxmaj french 
▁ velvet . xxmaj do i speak feelingly now ? 
▁ xxup lucio . i think thou dost ; and , indeed , with most painful feeling of 
▁ thy speech . i will , out of thine own confession , learn to begin 
▁ thy health ; but , whilst i live , forget to drink after thee . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . i think i have done myself wrong , have i not ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj yes , that thou hast , whether thou art tainted or 
▁ free . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup overdone 

▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj behold , behold , where xxmaj madam xxmaj mitigation comes ! i have 
▁ purchas'd as many diseases under her roof as come to- 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj to what , i pray ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj judge . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj to three thousand dolours a year . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj ay , and more . 
▁ xxup lucio . a xxmaj french crown more . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj thou art always figuring diseases in me , but thou 
▁ art full of error ; i am sound . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj nay , not , as one would say , healthy ; but so sound as things 
▁ that are hollow : thy bones are hollow ; impiety has made a feast 
▁ of thee . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj how now ! which of your hips has the most profound 
▁ sciatica ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj well , well ! there 's one yonder arrested and carried 
▁ to prison was worth five thousand of you all . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj who 's that , i pray thee ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj marry , sir , that 's xxmaj claudio , xxmaj signior xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj claudio to prison ? ' tis not so . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj nay , but i know ' tis so : i saw him arrested ; saw him 
▁ carried away ; and , which is more , within these three days his 
▁ head to be chopp'd off . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj but , after all this fooling , i would not have it so . xxmaj art 
▁ thou sure of this ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . i am too sure of it ; and it is for getting xxmaj madam 
▁ xxmaj julietta with child . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj believe me , this may be ; he promis'd to meet me two hours 
▁ since , and he was ever precise in promise - keeping . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj besides , you know , it draws something near to the 
▁ speech we had to such a purpose . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj but most of all agreeing with the proclamation . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj away ; let 's go learn the truth of it . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj lucio and xxup gentlemen 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj thus , what with the war , what with the sweat , what 
▁ with the gallows , and what with poverty , i am custom - shrunk . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pompey 

▁ xxmaj how now ! what 's the news with you ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj yonder man is carried to prison . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj well , what has he done ? 
▁ xxup pompey . a woman . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj but what 's his offence ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj groping for trouts in a peculiar river . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj what ! is there a maid with child by him ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj no ; but there 's a woman with maid by him . xxmaj you have not 
▁ heard of the proclamation , have you ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj what proclamation , man ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj all houses in the suburbs of xxmaj vienna must be pluck'd down . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj and what shall become of those in the city ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj they shall stand for seed ; they had gone down too , but that 
▁ a wise burgher put in for them . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj but shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be 
▁ pull'd down ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj to the ground , mistress . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj why , here 's a change indeed in the commonwealth ! 
▁ xxmaj what shall become of me ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj come , fear not you : good counsellors lack no clients . 
▁ xxmaj though you change your place you need not change your trade ; xxmaj i 'll 
▁ be your tapster still . xxmaj courage , there will be pity taken on you ; 
▁ you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service , you will 
▁ be considered . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj what 's to do here , xxmaj thomas xxmaj tapster ? xxmaj let 's withdraw . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj here comes xxmaj signior xxmaj claudio , led by the provost to prison ; 
▁ and there 's xxmaj madam xxmaj juliet . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup provost , xxup claudio , xxup juliet , and xxup officers ; 
▁ xxup lucio following 

▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj fellow , why dost thou show me thus to th ' world ? 
▁ xxmaj bear me to prison , where i am committed . 
▁ xxup provost . i do it not in evil disposition , 
▁ xxmaj but from xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo by special charge . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj thus can the demigod xxmaj authority 
▁ xxmaj make us pay down for our offence by weight 
▁ xxmaj the words of heaven : on whom it will , it will ; 
▁ xxmaj on whom it will not , so ; yet still ' tis just . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj claudio , whence comes this restraint ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj from too much liberty , my xxmaj lucio , liberty ; 
▁ xxmaj as surfeit is the father of much fast , 
▁ xxmaj so every scope by the immoderate use 
▁ xxmaj turns to restraint . xxmaj our natures do pursue , 
▁ xxmaj like rats that ravin down their proper bane , 
▁ a thirsty evil ; and when we drink we die . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj if i could speak so wisely under an arrest , i would send for 
▁ certain of my creditors ; and yet , to say the truth , i had as lief 
▁ have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment . 
▁ xxmaj what 's thy offence , xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj what but to speak of would offend again . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj what , is't murder ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj lechery ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj call it so . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj away , sir ; you must go . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj one word , good friend . xxmaj lucio , a word with you . 
▁ xxup lucio . a hundred , if they 'll do you any good . xxmaj is lechery so look'd 
▁ after ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj thus stands it with me : upon a true contract 
▁ i got possession of xxmaj julietta 's bed . 
▁ xxmaj you know the lady ; she is fast my wife , 
▁ xxmaj save that we do the denunciation lack 
▁ xxmaj of outward order ; this we came not to , 
▁ xxmaj only for propagation of a dow'r 
▁ xxmaj remaining in the coffer of her friends . 
▁ xxmaj from whom we thought it meet to hide our love 
▁ xxmaj till time had made them for us . xxmaj but it chances 
▁ xxmaj the stealth of our most mutual entertainment , 
▁ xxmaj with character too gross , is writ on xxmaj juliet . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj with child , perhaps ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj unhappily , even so . 
▁ xxmaj and the new deputy now for the xxmaj duke- 
▁ xxmaj whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness , 
▁ xxmaj or whether that the body public be 
▁ a horse whereon the governor doth ride , 
▁ xxmaj who , newly in the seat , that it may know 
▁ xxmaj he can command , lets it straight feel the spur ; 
▁ xxmaj whether the tyranny be in his place , 
▁ xxmaj or in his eminence that fills it up , 
▁ i stagger in . xxmaj but this new governor 
▁ xxmaj awakes me all the enrolled penalties 
▁ xxmaj which have , like unscour'd armour , hung by th ' wall 
▁ xxmaj so long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round 
▁ xxmaj and none of them been worn ; and , for a name , 
▁ xxmaj now puts the drowsy and neglected act 
▁ xxmaj freshly on me . ' tis surely for a name . 
▁ xxup lucio . i warrant it is ; and thy head stands so tickle on thy 
▁ shoulders that a milkmaid , if she be in love , may sigh it off . 
▁ xxmaj send after the xxmaj duke , and appeal to him . 
▁ xxup claudio . i have done so , but he 's not to be found . 
▁ i prithee , xxmaj lucio , do me this kind service : 
▁ xxmaj this day my sister should the cloister enter , 
▁ xxmaj and there receive her approbation ; 
▁ xxmaj acquaint her with the danger of my state ; 
▁ xxmaj implore her , in my voice , that she make friends 
▁ xxmaj to the strict deputy ; bid herself assay him . 
▁ i have great hope in that ; for in her youth 
▁ xxmaj there is a prone and speechless dialect 
▁ xxmaj such as move men ; beside , she hath prosperous art 
▁ xxmaj when she will play with reason and discourse , 
▁ xxmaj and well she can persuade . 
▁ xxup lucio . i pray she may ; as well for the encouragement of the like , 
▁ which else would stand under grievous imposition , as for the 
▁ enjoying of thy life , who i would be sorry should be thus 
▁ foolishly lost at a game of tick - tack . xxmaj i 'll to her . 
▁ xxup claudio . i thank you , good friend xxmaj lucio . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj within two hours . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj come , officer , away . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a monastery 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke and xxup friar xxup thomas 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj no , holy father ; throw away that thought ; 
▁ xxmaj believe not that the dribbling dart of love 
▁ xxmaj can pierce a complete bosom . xxmaj why i desire thee 
▁ xxmaj to give me secret harbour hath a purpose 
▁ xxmaj more grave and wrinkled than the aims and ends 
▁ xxmaj of burning youth . 
▁ xxup friar . xxmaj may your xxmaj grace speak of it ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj my holy sir , none better knows than you 
▁ xxmaj how i have ever lov'd the life removed , 
▁ xxmaj and held in idle price to haunt assemblies 
▁ xxmaj where youth , and cost , a witless bravery keeps . 
▁ i have deliver'd to xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , 
▁ a man of stricture and firm abstinence , 
▁ xxmaj my absolute power and place here in xxmaj vienna , 
▁ xxmaj and he supposes me travell'd to xxmaj poland ; 
▁ xxmaj for so i have strew'd it in the common ear , 
▁ xxmaj and so it is received . xxmaj now , pious sir , 
▁ xxmaj you will demand of me why i do this . 
▁ xxup friar . xxmaj gladly , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj we have strict statutes and most biting laws , 
▁ xxmaj the needful bits and curbs to headstrong steeds , 
▁ xxmaj which for this fourteen years we have let slip ; 
▁ xxmaj even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave , 
▁ xxmaj that goes not out to prey . xxmaj now , as fond fathers , 
▁ xxmaj having bound up the threat'ning twigs of birch , 
▁ xxmaj only to stick it in their children 's sight 
▁ xxmaj for terror , not to use , in time the rod 
▁ xxmaj becomes more mock'd than fear'd ; so our decrees , 
▁ xxmaj dead to infliction , to themselves are dead ; 
▁ xxmaj and liberty plucks justice by the nose ; 
▁ xxmaj the baby beats the nurse , and quite athwart 
▁ xxmaj goes all decorum . 
▁ xxup friar . xxmaj it rested in your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj to unloose this tied - up justice when you pleas'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and it in you more dreadful would have seem'd 
▁ xxmaj than in xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup duke . i do fear , too dreadful . 
▁ xxmaj sith ' twas my fault to give the people scope , 
▁ ' twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them 
▁ xxmaj for what i bid them do ; for we bid this be done , 
▁ xxmaj when evil deeds have their permissive pass 
▁ xxmaj and not the punishment . xxmaj therefore , indeed , my father , 
▁ i have on xxmaj angelo impos'd the office ; 
▁ xxmaj who may , in th ' ambush of my name , strike home , 
▁ xxmaj and yet my nature never in the fight 
▁ xxmaj to do in slander . xxmaj and to behold his sway , 
▁ i will , as ' twere a brother of your order , 
▁ xxmaj visit both prince and people . xxmaj therefore , i prithee , 
▁ xxmaj supply me with the habit , and instruct me 
▁ xxmaj how i may formally in person bear me 
▁ xxmaj like a true friar . xxmaj moe reasons for this action 
▁ xxmaj at our more leisure shall i render you . 
▁ xxmaj only , this one : xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo is precise ; 
▁ xxmaj stands at a guard with envy ; scarce confesses 
▁ xxmaj that his blood flows , or that his appetite 
▁ xxmaj is more to bread than stone . xxmaj hence shall we see , 
▁ xxmaj if power change purpose , what our seemers be . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 a nunnery 

 xxmaj enter xxup isabella and xxup francisca 

▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj and have you nuns no farther privileges ? 
▁ xxup francisca . xxmaj are not these large enough ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj yes , truly ; i speak not as desiring more , 
▁ xxmaj but rather wishing a more strict restraint 
▁ xxmaj upon the sisterhood , the votarists of xxmaj saint xxmaj clare . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ xxmaj within ] xxmaj ho ! xxmaj peace be in this place ! 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj who 's that which calls ? 
▁ xxup francisca . xxmaj it is a man 's voice . xxmaj gentle xxmaj isabella , 
▁ xxmaj turn you the key , and know his business of him : 
▁ xxmaj you may , i may not ; you are yet unsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj when you have vow'd , you must not speak with men 
▁ xxmaj but in the presence of the prioress ; 
▁ xxmaj then , if you speak , you must not show your face , 
▁ xxmaj or , if you show your face , you must not speak . 
▁ xxmaj he calls again ; i pray you answer him . xxmaj exit xxup francisca 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj peace and prosperity ! xxmaj who is't that calls ? 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup lucio 

▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj hail , virgin , if you be , as those cheek - roses 
▁ xxmaj proclaim you are no less . xxmaj can you so stead me 
▁ xxmaj as bring me to the sight of xxmaj isabella , 
▁ a novice of this place , and the fair sister 
▁ xxmaj to her unhappy brother xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj why her ' unhappy brother ' ? xxmaj let me ask 
▁ xxmaj the rather , for i now must make you know 
▁ i am that xxmaj isabella , and his sister . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj gentle and fair , your brother kindly greets you . 
▁ xxmaj not to be weary with you , he 's in prison .