xxbos xxup isabella . xxmaj woe me ! xxmaj for what ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj for that which , if myself might be his judge , 
▁ xxmaj he should receive his punishment in thanks : 
▁ xxmaj he hath got his friend with child . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj sir , make me not your story . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj it is true . 
▁ i would not- though ' tis my familiar sin 
▁ xxmaj with maids to seem the lapwing , and to jest , 
▁ xxmaj tongue far from heart- play with all virgins so : 
▁ i hold you as a thing enskied and sainted , 
▁ xxmaj by your renouncement an immortal spirit , 
▁ xxmaj and to be talk'd with in sincerity , 
▁ xxmaj as with a saint . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj you do blaspheme the good in mocking me . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj do not believe it . xxmaj fewness and truth , ' tis thus : 
▁ xxmaj your brother and his lover have embrac'd . 
▁ xxmaj as those that feed grow full , as blossoming time 
▁ xxmaj that from the seedness the bare fallow brings 
▁ xxmaj to teeming foison , even so her plenteous womb 
▁ xxmaj expresseth his full tilth and husbandry . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj some one with child by him ? xxmaj my cousin xxmaj juliet ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj is she your cousin ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj adoptedly , as school - maids change their names 
▁ xxmaj by vain though apt affection . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj she it is . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , let him marry her ! 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj this is the point . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke is very strangely gone from hence ; 
▁ xxmaj bore many gentlemen , myself being one , 
▁ xxmaj in hand , and hope of action ; but we do learn , 
▁ xxmaj by those that know the very nerves of state , 
▁ xxmaj his givings - out were of an infinite distance 
▁ xxmaj from his true - meant design . xxmaj upon his place , 
▁ xxmaj and with full line of his authority , 
▁ xxmaj governs xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , a man whose blood 
▁ xxmaj is very snow - broth , one who never feels 
▁ xxmaj the wanton stings and motions of the sense , 
▁ xxmaj but doth rebate and blunt his natural edge 
▁ xxmaj with profits of the mind , study and fast . 
▁ xxmaj he- to give fear to use and liberty , 
▁ xxmaj which have for long run by the hideous law , 
▁ xxmaj as mice by lions- hath pick'd out an act 
▁ xxmaj under whose heavy sense your brother 's life 
▁ xxmaj falls into forfeit ; he arrests him on it , 
▁ xxmaj and follows close the rigour of the statute 
▁ xxmaj to make him an example . xxmaj all hope is gone , 
▁ xxmaj unless you have the grace by your fair prayer 
▁ xxmaj to soften xxmaj angelo . xxmaj and that 's my pith of business 
▁ ' twixt you and your poor brother . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj doth he so seek his life ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj has censur'd him 
▁ xxmaj already , and , as i hear , the xxmaj provost hath 
▁ a warrant for his execution . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj alas ! what poor ability 's in me 
▁ xxmaj to do him good ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj assay the pow'r you have . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj my power , alas , i doubt ! 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj our doubts are traitors , 
▁ xxmaj and make us lose the good we oft might win 
▁ xxmaj by fearing to attempt . xxmaj go to xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj and let him learn to know , when maidens sue , 
▁ xxmaj men give like gods ; but when they weep and kneel , 
▁ xxmaj all their petitions are as freely theirs 
▁ xxmaj as they themselves would owe them . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj i 'll see what i can do . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj but speedily . 
▁ xxup isabella . i will about it straight ; 
▁ xxmaj no longer staying but to give the xxmaj mother 
▁ xxmaj notice of my affair . i humbly thank you . 
▁ xxmaj commend me to my brother ; soon at night 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send him certain word of my success . 
▁ xxup lucio . i take my leave of you . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj good sir , adieu . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 a hall in xxup angelo 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup angelo , xxup escalus , a xxup justice , xxup provost , xxup officers , and other xxup attendants 

▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj we must not make a scarecrow of the law , 
▁ xxmaj setting it up to fear the birds of prey , 
▁ xxmaj and let it keep one shape till custom make it 
▁ xxmaj their perch , and not their terror . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj ay , but yet 
▁ xxmaj let us be keen , and rather cut a little 
▁ xxmaj than fall and bruise to death . xxmaj alas ! this gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj whom i would save , had a most noble father . 
▁ xxmaj let but your honour know , 
▁ xxmaj whom i believe to be most strait in virtue , 
▁ xxmaj that , in the working of your own affections , 
▁ xxmaj had time coher'd with place , or place with wishing , 
▁ xxmaj or that the resolute acting of our blood 
▁ xxmaj could have attain'd th ' effect of your own purpose 
▁ xxmaj whether you had not sometime in your life 
▁ xxmaj err'd in this point which now you censure him , 
▁ xxmaj and pull'd the law upon you . 
▁ xxup angelo . ' tis one thing to be tempted , xxmaj escalus , 
▁ xxmaj another thing to fall . i not deny 
▁ xxmaj the jury , passing on the prisoner 's life , 
▁ xxmaj may in the sworn twelve have a thief or two 
▁ xxmaj guiltier than him they try . xxmaj what 's open made to justice , 
▁ xxmaj that justice seizes . xxmaj what knows the laws 
▁ xxmaj that thieves do pass on thieves ? ' tis very pregnant , 
▁ xxmaj the jewel that we find , we stoop and take't , 
▁ xxmaj because we see it ; but what we do not see 
▁ xxmaj we tread upon , and never think of it . 
▁ xxmaj you may not so extenuate his offence 
▁ xxmaj for i have had such faults ; but rather tell me , 
▁ xxmaj when xxup i , that censure him , do so offend , 
▁ xxmaj let mine own judgment pattern out my death , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing come in partial . xxmaj sir , he must die . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj be it as your wisdom will . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj where is the xxmaj provost ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj here , if it like your honour . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj see that xxmaj claudio 
▁ xxmaj be executed by nine to - morrow morning ; 
▁ xxmaj bring him his confessor ; let him be prepar'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for that 's the utmost of his pilgrimage . xxmaj exit xxup provost 
▁ xxup escalus . [ aside ] xxmaj well , heaven forgive him ! and forgive us all ! 
▁ xxmaj some rise by sin , and some by virtue fall ; 
▁ xxmaj some run from breaks of ice , and answer none , 
▁ xxmaj and some condemned for a fault alone . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup elbow and xxup officers with xxup froth and xxup pompey 

▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj come , bring them away ; if these be good people in a 
▁ commonweal that do nothing but use their abuses in common houses , 
▁ i know no law ; bring them away . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj how now , sir ! xxmaj what 's your name , and what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj if it please your honour , i am the poor xxmaj duke 's constable , 
▁ and my name is xxmaj elbow ; i do lean upon justice , sir , and do bring 
▁ in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj benefactors ! xxmaj well- what benefactors are they ? xxmaj are they not 
▁ malefactors ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj if it please your honour , i know not well what they are ; but 
▁ precise villains they are , that i am sure of , and void of all 
▁ profanation in the world that good xxmaj christians ought to have . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj this comes off well ; here 's a wise officer . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj go to ; what quality are they of ? xxmaj elbow is your name ? xxmaj why 
▁ dost thou not speak , xxmaj elbow ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj he can not , sir ; he 's out at elbow . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj what are you , sir ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj he , sir ? a tapster , sir ; parcel - bawd ; one that serves a bad 
▁ woman ; whose house , sir , was , as they say , pluck'd down in the 
▁ suburbs ; and now she professes a hot - house , which , i think , is a 
▁ very ill house too . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj how know you that ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj my xxmaj wife , sir , whom i detest before heaven and your honour- 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj how ! thy wife ! 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj ay , sir ; whom i thank heaven , is an honest woman- 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj dost thou detest her therefore ? 
▁ xxup elbow . i say , sir , i will detest myself also , as well as she , that 
▁ this house , if it be not a bawd 's house , it is pity of her life , 
▁ for it is a naughty house . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj how dost thou know that , constable ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj marry , sir , by my wife ; who , if she had been a woman 
▁ cardinally given , might have been accus'd in fornication , 
▁ adultery , and all uncleanliness there . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj by the woman 's means ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj ay , sir , by xxmaj mistress xxmaj overdone 's means ; but as she spit in 
▁ his face , so she defied him . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , if it please your honour , this is not so . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj prove it before these varlets here , thou honourable man , 
▁ prove it . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj do you hear how he misplaces ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , she came in great with child ; and longing , saving your 
▁ honour 's reverence , for stew'd prunes . xxmaj sir , we had but two in the 
▁ house , which at that very distant time stood , as it were , in a 
▁ fruit dish , a dish of some three pence ; your honours have seen 
▁ such dishes ; they are not xxmaj china dishes , but very good dishes . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj go to , go to ; no matter for the dish , sir . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj no , indeed , sir , not of a pin ; you are therein in the 
▁ right ; but to the point . xxmaj as i say , this xxmaj mistress xxmaj elbow , being , as 
▁ i say , with child , and being great - bellied , and longing , as i 
▁ said , for prunes ; and having but two in the dish , as i said , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj froth here , this very man , having eaten the rest , as i 
▁ said , and , as i say , paying for them very honestly ; for , as you 
▁ know , xxmaj master xxmaj froth , i could not give you three pence again- 
▁ xxup froth . xxmaj no , indeed . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj very well ; you being then , if you be rememb'red , cracking 
▁ the stones of the foresaid prunes- 
▁ xxup froth . xxmaj ay , so i did indeed . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj why , very well ; i telling you then , if you be rememb'red , 
▁ that such a one and such a one were past cure of the thing you 
▁ wot of , unless they kept very good diet , as i told you- 
▁ xxup froth . xxmaj all this is true . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj why , very well then- 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj come , you are a tedious fool . xxmaj to the purpose : what was 
▁ done to xxmaj elbow 's wife that he hath cause to complain of ? xxmaj come me 
▁ to what was done to her . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , your honour can not come to that yet . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj no , sir , nor i mean it not . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , but you shall come to it , by your honour 's leave . xxmaj and , 
▁ i beseech you , look into xxmaj master xxmaj froth here , sir , a man of 
▁ fourscore pound a year ; whose father died at xxmaj hallowmas- was't not 
▁ at xxmaj hallowmas , xxmaj master xxmaj froth ? 
▁ xxup froth . xxmaj all - hallond eve . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj why , very well ; i hope here be truths . xxmaj he , sir , sitting , as 
▁ i say , in a lower chair , sir ; ' twas in the xxmaj bunch of xxmaj grapes , 
▁ where , indeed , you have a delight to sit , have you not ? 
▁ xxup froth . i have so ; because it is an open room , and good for winter . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj why , very well then ; i hope here be truths . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj this will last out a night in xxmaj russia , 
▁ xxmaj when nights are longest there ; xxmaj i 'll take my leave , 
▁ xxmaj and leave you to the hearing of the cause , 
▁ xxmaj hoping you 'll find good cause to whip them all . 
▁ xxup escalus . i think no less . xxmaj good morrow to your lordship . 
▁ [ exit xxup angelo ] xxmaj now , sir , come on ; what was done to xxmaj elbow 's wife , 
▁ once more ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj once?- sir . xxmaj there was nothing done to her once . 
▁ xxup elbow . i beseech you , sir , ask him what this man did to my wife . 
▁ xxup pompey . i beseech your honour , ask me . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj well , sir , what did this gentleman to her ? 
▁ xxup pompey . i beseech you , sir , look in this gentleman 's face . xxmaj good 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj froth , look upon his honour ; ' tis for a good purpose . xxmaj doth 
▁ your honour mark his face ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj ay , sir , very well . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj nay , i beseech you , mark it well . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj well , i do so . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj doth your honour see any harm in his face ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj why , no . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj i 'll be suppos'd upon a book his face is the worst thing 
▁ about him . xxmaj good then ; if his face be the worst thing about him , 
▁ how could xxmaj master xxmaj froth do the constable 's wife any harm ? i would 
▁ know that of your honour . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj he 's in the right , constable ; what say you to it ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj first , an it like you , the house is a respected house ; next , 
▁ this is a respected fellow ; and his mistress is a respected 
▁ woman . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj by this hand , sir , his wife is a more respected person than 
▁ any of us all . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj varlet , thou liest ; thou liest , wicket varlet ; the time is 
▁ yet to come that she was ever respected with man , woman , or 
▁ child . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , she was respected with him before he married with her . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj which is the wiser here , xxmaj justice or xxmaj iniquity ? xxmaj is this 
▁ true ? 
▁ xxup elbow . o thou caitiff ! o thou varlet ! o thou wicked xxmaj hannibal ! i 
▁ respected with her before i was married to her ! xxmaj if ever i was 
▁ respected with her , or she with me , let not your worship think me 
▁ the poor xxmaj duke 's officer . xxmaj prove this , thou wicked xxmaj hannibal , or 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have mine action of batt'ry on thee . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj if he took you a box o ' th ' ear , you might have your 
▁ action of slander too . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj marry , i thank your good worship for it . xxmaj what is't your 
▁ worship 's pleasure i shall do with this wicked caitiff ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj truly , officer , because he hath some offences in him that 
▁ thou wouldst discover if thou couldst , let him continue in his 
▁ courses till thou know'st what they are . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj marry , i thank your worship for it . xxmaj thou seest , thou wicked 
▁ varlet , now , what 's come upon thee : thou art to continue now , 
▁ thou varlet ; thou art to continue . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj where were you born , friend ? 
▁ xxup froth . xxmaj here in xxmaj vienna , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj are you of fourscore pounds a year ? 
▁ xxup froth . xxmaj yes , an't please you , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj so . xxmaj what trade are you of , sir ? 
▁ xxup pompey . a tapster , a poor widow 's tapster . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj your mistress ' name ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj mistress xxmaj overdone . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj hath she had any more than one husband ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj nine , sir ; xxmaj overdone by the last . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj nine ! xxmaj come hither to me , xxmaj master xxmaj froth . xxmaj master xxmaj froth , i 
▁ would not have you acquainted with tapsters : they will draw you , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj froth , and you will hang them . xxmaj get you gone , and let me 
▁ hear no more of you . 
▁ xxup froth . i thank your worship . xxmaj for mine own part , i never come into 
▁ any room in a taphouse but i am drawn in . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj well , no more of it , xxmaj master xxmaj froth ; farewell . [ exit xxup froth ] 
▁ xxmaj come you hither to me , xxmaj master xxmaj tapster ; what 's your name , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj tapster ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj what else ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj bum , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj troth , and your bum is the greatest thing about you ; so 
▁ that , in the beastliest sense , you are xxmaj pompey the xxmaj great . xxmaj pompey , 
▁ you are partly a bawd , xxmaj pompey , howsoever you colour it in being a 
▁ tapster . xxmaj are you not ? xxmaj come , tell me true ; it shall be the better 
▁ for you . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj truly , sir , i am a poor fellow that would live . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj how would you live , xxmaj pompey- by being a bawd ? xxmaj what do you 
▁ think of the trade , xxmaj pompey ? xxmaj is it a lawful trade ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj if the law would allow it , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj but the law will not allow it , xxmaj pompey ; nor it shall not be 
▁ allowed in xxmaj vienna . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of 
▁ the city ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj no , xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj truly , sir , in my poor opinion , they will to't then . xxmaj if 
▁ your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves , you 
▁ need not to fear the bawds . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj there is pretty orders beginning , i can tell you : but it 
▁ is but heading and hanging . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj if you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten 
▁ year together , you 'll be glad to give out a commission for more 
▁ heads ; if this law hold in xxmaj vienna ten year , xxmaj i 'll rent the fairest 
▁ house in it , after threepence a bay . xxmaj if you live to see this come 
▁ to pass , say xxmaj pompey told you so . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj thank you , good xxmaj pompey ; and , in requital of your prophecy , 
▁ hark you : i advise you , let me not find you before me again upon 
▁ any complaint whatsoever- no , not for dwelling where you do ; if i 
▁ do , xxmaj pompey , i shall beat you to your tent , and prove a shrewd 
▁ xxmaj caesar to you ; in plain dealing , xxmaj pompey , i shall have you whipt . 
▁ xxmaj so for this time , xxmaj pompey , fare you well . 
▁ xxup pompey . i thank your worship for your good counsel ; [ aside ] but i 
▁ shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall better determine . 
▁ xxmaj whip me ? xxmaj no , no ; let carman whip his jade ; 
▁ xxmaj the valiant heart 's not whipt out of his trade . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj come hither to me , xxmaj master xxmaj elbow ; come hither , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj constable . xxmaj how long have you been in this place of constable ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj seven year and a half , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . i thought , by the readiness in the office , you had 
▁ continued in it some time . xxmaj you say seven years together ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj and a half , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj alas , it hath been great pains to you ! xxmaj they do you wrong 
▁ to put you so oft upon't . xxmaj are there not men in your ward 
▁ sufficient to serve it ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj faith , sir , few of any wit in such matters ; as they are 
▁ chosen , they are glad to choose me for them ; i do it for some 
▁ piece of money , and go through with all . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj look you , bring me in the names of some six or seven , the 
▁ most sufficient of your parish . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj to your worship 's house , sir ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj to my house . xxmaj fare you well . [ exit xxup elbow ] 
▁ xxmaj what 's o'clock , think you ? 
▁ xxup justice . xxmaj eleven , sir . 
▁ xxup escalus . i pray you home to dinner with me . 
▁ xxup justice . i humbly thank you . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj it grieves me for the death of xxmaj claudio ; 
▁ xxmaj but there 's no remedy . 
▁ xxup justice . xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo is severe . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj it is but needful : 
▁ xxmaj mercy is not itself that oft looks so ; 
▁ xxmaj pardon is still the nurse of second woe . 
▁ xxmaj but yet , poor xxmaj claudio ! xxmaj there is no remedy . 
▁ xxmaj come , sir . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj another room in xxup angelo 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup provost and a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he 's hearing of a cause ; he will come straight . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell him of you . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj pray you do . [ exit xxup servant ] xxmaj i 'll know 
▁ xxmaj his pleasure ; may be he will relent . xxmaj alas , 
▁ xxmaj he hath but as offended in a dream ! 
▁ xxmaj all sects , all ages , smack of this vice ; and he 
▁ xxmaj to die for ' t ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup angelo 

▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj now , what 's the matter , xxmaj provost ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj is it your will xxmaj claudio shall die to - morrow ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj did not i tell thee yea ? xxmaj hadst thou not order ? 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou ask again ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj lest i might be too rash ; 
▁ xxmaj under your good correction , i have seen 
▁ xxmaj when , after execution , judgment hath 
▁ xxmaj repented o'er his doom . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj go to ; let that be mine . 
▁ xxmaj do you your office , or give up your place , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall well be spar'd . 
▁ xxup provost . i crave your honour 's pardon . 
▁ xxmaj what shall be done , sir , with the groaning xxmaj juliet ? 
▁ xxmaj she 's very near her hour . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj dispose of her 
▁ xxmaj to some more fitter place , and that with speed . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj here is the sister of the man condemn'd 
▁ xxmaj desires access to you . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj hath he a sister ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj ay , my good lord ; a very virtuous maid , 
▁ xxmaj and to be shortly of a sisterhood , 
▁ xxmaj if not already . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj well , let her be admitted . xxmaj exit xxup servant 
▁ xxmaj see you the fornicatress be remov'd ; 
▁ xxmaj let her have needful but not lavish means ; 
▁ xxmaj there shall be order for't . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lucio and xxup isabella 

▁ xxup provost . [ going ] xxmaj save your honour ! 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj stay a little while . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj y'are welcome ; what 's 
▁ your will ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i am a woeful suitor to your honour , 
▁ xxmaj please but your honour hear me . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj well ; what 's your suit ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj there is a vice that most i do abhor , 
▁ xxmaj and most desire should meet the blow of justice ; 
▁ xxmaj for which i would not plead , but that i must ; 
▁ xxmaj for which i must not plead , but that i am 
▁ xxmaj at war ' twixt will and will not . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj well ; the matter ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i have a brother is condemn'd to die ; 
▁ i do beseech you , let it be his fault , 
▁ xxmaj and not my brother . 
▁ xxup provost . [ aside ] xxmaj heaven give thee moving graces . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj condemn the fault and not the actor of it ! 
▁ xxmaj why , every fault 's condemn'd ere it be done ; 
▁ xxmaj mine were the very cipher of a function , 
▁ xxmaj to fine the faults whose fine stands in record , 
▁ xxmaj and let go by the actor . 
▁ xxup isabella . o just but severe law ! 
▁ i had a brother , then . xxmaj heaven keep your honour ! 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj give't not o'er so ; to him again , entreat him , 
▁ xxmaj kneel down before him , hang upon his gown ; 
▁ xxmaj you are too cold : if you should need a pin , 
▁ xxmaj you could not with more tame a tongue desire it . 
▁ xxmaj to him , i say . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj must he needs die ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj maiden , no remedy . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj yes ; i do think that you might pardon him . 
▁ xxmaj and neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy . 
▁ xxup angelo . i will not do't . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj but can you , if you would ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj look , what i will not , that i can not do . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj but might you do't , and do the world no wrong , 
▁ xxmaj if so your heart were touch'd with that remorse 
▁ xxmaj as mine is to him ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj he 's sentenc'd ; ' tis too late . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj you are too cold . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj too late ? xxmaj why , no ; xxup i , that do speak a word , 
▁ xxmaj may call it back again . xxmaj well , believe this : 
▁ xxmaj no ceremony that to great ones longs , 
▁ xxmaj not the king 's crown nor the deputed sword , 
▁ xxmaj the marshal 's truncheon nor the judge 's robe , 
▁ xxmaj become them with one half so good a grace 
▁ xxmaj as mercy does . 
▁ xxmaj if he had been as you , and you as he , 
▁ xxmaj you would have slipp'd like him ; but he , like you , 
▁ xxmaj would not have been so stern . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj pray you be gone . 
▁ xxup isabella . i would to heaven i had your potency , 
▁ xxmaj and you were xxmaj isabel ! xxmaj should it then be thus ? 
▁ xxmaj no ; i would tell what ' twere to be a judge 
▁ xxmaj and what a prisoner . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj ay , touch him ; there 's the vein . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj your brother is a forfeit of the law , 
▁ xxmaj and you but waste your words . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj alas ! xxmaj alas ! 
▁ xxmaj why , all the souls that were were forfeit once ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj he that might the vantage best have took 
▁ xxmaj found out the remedy . xxmaj how would you be 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj he , which is the top of judgment , should 
▁ xxmaj but judge you as you are ? xxup o , think on that ; 
▁ xxmaj and mercy then will breathe within your lips , 
▁ xxmaj like man new made . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj be you content , fair maid . 
▁ xxmaj it is the law , not i condemn your brother . 
▁ xxmaj were he my kinsman , brother , or my son , 
▁ xxmaj it should be thus with him . xxmaj he must die to - morrow . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj to - morrow ! xxup o , that 's sudden ! xxmaj spare him , spare him . 
▁ xxmaj he 's not prepar'd for death . xxmaj even for our kitchens 
▁ xxmaj we kill the fowl of season ; shall we serve heaven 
▁ xxmaj with less respect than we do minister 
▁ xxmaj to our gross selves ? xxmaj good , good my lord , bethink you . 
▁ xxmaj who is it that hath died for this offence ? 
▁ xxmaj there 's many have committed it . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ aside ] xxmaj ay , well said . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj the law hath not been dead , though it hath slept . 
▁ xxmaj those many had not dar'd to do that evil 
▁ xxmaj if the first that did th ' edict infringe 
▁ xxmaj had answer'd for his deed . xxmaj now ' tis awake , 
▁ xxmaj takes note of what is done , and , like a prophet , 
▁ xxmaj looks in a glass that shows what future evils- 
▁ xxmaj either now or by remissness new conceiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj and so in progress to be hatch'd and born- 
▁ xxmaj are now to have no successive degrees , 
▁ xxmaj but here they live to end . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj yet show some pity . 
▁ xxup angelo . i show it most of all when i show justice ; 
▁ xxmaj for then i pity those i do not know , 
▁ xxmaj which a dismiss'd offence would after gall , 
▁ xxmaj and do him right that , answering one foul wrong , 
▁ xxmaj lives not to act another . xxmaj be satisfied ; 
▁ xxmaj your brother dies to - morrow ; be content . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj so you must be the first that gives this sentence , 
▁ xxmaj and he that suffers . xxup o , it is excellent 
▁ xxmaj to have a giant 's strength ! xxmaj but it is tyrannous 
▁ xxmaj to use it like a giant . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj that 's well said . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj could great men thunder 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj jove himself does , xxmaj jove would never be quiet , 
▁ xxmaj for every pelting petty officer 
▁ xxmaj would use his heaven for thunder , 
▁ xxmaj nothing but thunder . xxmaj merciful xxmaj heaven , 
▁ xxmaj thou rather , with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt , 
▁ xxmaj splits the unwedgeable and gnarled oak 
▁ xxmaj than the soft myrtle . xxmaj but man , proud man , 
▁ xxmaj dress'd in a little brief authority , 
▁ xxmaj most ignorant of what he 's most assur'd , 
▁ xxmaj his glassy essence , like an angry ape , 
▁ xxmaj plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven 
▁ xxmaj as makes the angels weep ; who , with our speens , 
▁ xxmaj would all themselves laugh mortal . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxup o , to him , to him , wench ! xxmaj he will relent ; 
▁ xxmaj he 's coming ; i perceive ' t. 
▁ xxup provost . [ aside ] xxmaj pray heaven she win him . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj we can not weigh our brother with ourself . 
▁ xxmaj great men may jest with saints : ' tis wit in them ; 
▁ xxmaj but in the less foul profanation . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj thou'rt i ' th ' right , girl ; more o ' that . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj that in the captain 's but a choleric word 
▁ xxmaj which in the soldier is flat blasphemy . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj art avis'd o ' that ? xxmaj more on't . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj why do you put these sayings upon me ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj because authority , though it err like others , 
▁ xxmaj hath yet a kind of medicine in itself 
▁ xxmaj that skins the vice o ' th ' top . xxmaj go to your bosom , 
▁ xxmaj knock there , and ask your heart what it doth know 
▁ xxmaj that 's like my brother 's fault . xxmaj if it confess 
▁ a natural guiltiness such as is his , 
▁ xxmaj let it not sound a thought upon your tongue 
▁ xxmaj against my brother 's life . 
▁ xxup angelo . [ aside ] xxmaj she speaks , and ' tis 
▁ xxmaj such sense that my sense breeds with it.- xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj gentle my lord , turn back . 
▁ xxup angelo . i will bethink me . xxmaj come again to - morrow . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj hark how xxmaj i 'll bribe you ; good my lord , turn back . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj how , bribe me ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj ay , with such gifts that heaven shall share with you . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ) xxmaj you had marr'd all else . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj not with fond sicles of the tested gold , 
▁ xxmaj or stones , whose rate are either rich or poor 
▁ xxmaj as fancy values them ; but with true prayers 
▁ xxmaj that shall be up at heaven and enter there 
▁ xxmaj ere sun - rise , prayers from preserved souls , 
▁ xxmaj from fasting maids , whose minds are dedicate 
▁ xxmaj to nothing temporal . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj well ; come to me to - morrow . 
▁ xxup lucio . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj go to ; ' tis well ; away . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj heaven keep your honour safe ! 
▁ xxup angelo . [ aside ] xxmaj amen ; for i 
▁ xxmaj am that way going to temptation 
▁ xxmaj where prayers cross . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj at what hour to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj shall i attend your lordship ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj at any time ' fore noon . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj save your honour ! xxmaj exeunt all but xxup angelo 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj from thee ; even from thy virtue ! 
▁ xxmaj what 's this , what 's this ? xxmaj is this her fault or mine ? 
▁ xxmaj the tempter or the tempted , who sins most ? 
▁ xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj not she ; nor doth she tempt ; but it is i 
▁ xxmaj that , lying by the violet in the sun , 
▁ xxmaj do as the carrion does , not as the flow'r , 
▁ xxmaj corrupt with virtuous season . xxmaj can it be 
▁ xxmaj that modesty may more betray our sense 
▁ xxmaj than woman 's lightness ? xxmaj having waste ground enough , 
▁ xxmaj shall we desire to raze the sanctuary , 
▁ xxmaj and pitch our evils there ? xxup o , fie , fie , fie ! 
▁ xxmaj what dost thou , or what art thou , xxmaj angelo ? 
▁ xxmaj dost thou desire her foully for those things 
▁ xxmaj that make her good ? xxup o , let her brother live ! 
▁ xxmaj thieves for their robbery have authority 
▁ xxmaj when judges steal themselves . xxmaj what , do i love her , 
▁ xxmaj that i desire to hear her speak again , 
▁ xxmaj and feast upon her eyes ? xxmaj what is't i dream on ? 
▁ o cunning enemy , that , to catch a saint , 
▁ xxmaj with saints dost bait thy hook ! xxmaj most dangerous 
▁ xxmaj is that temptation that doth goad us on 
▁ xxmaj to sin in loving virtue . xxmaj never could the strumpet , 
▁ xxmaj with all her double vigour , art and nature , 
▁ xxmaj once stir my temper ; but this virtuous maid 
▁ xxmaj subdues me quite . xxmaj ever till now , 
▁ xxmaj when men were fond , i smil'd and wond'red how . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a prison 

 xxmaj enter , severally , xxup duke , disguised as a xxup friar , and xxup provost 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj hail to you , xxmaj provost ! so i think you are . 
▁ xxup provost . i am the xxmaj provost . xxmaj what 's your will , good friar ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj bound by my charity and my blest order , 
▁ i come to visit the afflicted spirits 
▁ xxmaj here in the prison . xxmaj do me the common right 
▁ xxmaj to let me see them , and to make me know 
▁ xxmaj the nature of their crimes , that i may minister 
▁ xxmaj to them accordingly . 
▁ xxup provost . i would do more than that , if more were needful . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup juliet 

▁ xxmaj look , here comes one ; a gentlewoman of mine , 
▁ xxmaj who , falling in the flaws of her own youth , 
▁ xxmaj hath blister'd her report . xxmaj she is with child ; 
▁ xxmaj and he that got it , sentenc'd- a young man 
▁ xxmaj more fit to do another such offence 
▁ xxmaj than die for this . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj when must he die ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj as i do think , to - morrow . 
▁ [ to xxup juliet ] i have provided for you ; stay awhile 
▁ xxmaj and you shall be conducted . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj repent you , fair one , of the sin you carry ? 
▁ xxup juliet . i do ; and bear the shame most patiently . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj i 'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience , 
▁ xxmaj and try your penitence , if it be sound 
▁ xxmaj or hollowly put on . 
▁ xxup juliet . xxmaj i 'll gladly learn . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj love you the man that wrong'd you ? 
▁ xxup juliet . xxmaj yes , as i love the woman that wrong'd him . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj so then , it seems , your most offenceful act 
▁ xxmaj was mutually committed . 
▁ xxup juliet . xxmaj mutually . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj then was your sin of heavier kind than his . 
▁ xxup juliet . i do confess it , and repent it , father . 
▁ xxup duke . ' tis meet so , daughter ; but lest you do repent 
▁ xxmaj as that the sin hath brought you to this shame , 
▁ xxmaj which sorrow is always toward ourselves , not heaven , 
▁ xxmaj showing we would not spare heaven as we love it , 
▁ xxmaj but as we stand in fear- 
▁ xxup juliet . i do repent me as it is an evil , 
▁ xxmaj and take the shame with joy . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there rest . 
▁ xxmaj your partner , as i hear , must die to - morrow , 
▁ xxmaj and i am going with instruction to him . 
▁ xxmaj grace go with you ! xxmaj benedicite ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup juliet . xxmaj must die to - morrow ! xxup o , injurious law , 
▁ xxmaj that respites me a life whose very comfort 
▁ xxmaj is still a dying horror ! 
▁ xxup provost . ' tis pity of him . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxup angelo 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup angelo 

▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj when i would pray and think , i think and pray 
▁ xxmaj to several subjects . xxmaj heaven hath my empty words , 
▁ xxmaj whilst my invention , hearing not my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj anchors on xxmaj isabel . xxmaj heaven in my mouth , 
▁ xxmaj as if i did but only chew his name , 
▁ xxmaj and in my heart the strong and swelling evil 
▁ xxmaj of my conception . xxmaj the state whereon i studied 
▁ xxmaj is , like a good thing being often read , 
▁ xxmaj grown sere and tedious ; yea , my gravity , 
▁ xxmaj wherein- let no man hear me- i take pride , 
▁ xxmaj could i with boot change for an idle plume 
▁ xxmaj which the air beats for vain . o place , o form , 
▁ xxmaj how often dost thou with thy case , thy habit , 
▁ xxmaj wrench awe from fools , and tie the wiser souls 
▁ xxmaj to thy false seeming ! xxmaj blood , thou art blood . 
▁ xxmaj let 's write ' good angel ' on the devil 's horn ; 
▁ ' tis not the devil 's crest . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup servant 

▁ xxmaj how now , who 's there ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj one xxmaj isabel , a sister , desires access to you . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj teach her the way . [ exit xxup servant ] o heavens ! 
▁ xxmaj why does my blood thus muster to my heart , 
▁ xxmaj making both it unable for itself 
▁ xxmaj and dispossessing all my other parts 
▁ xxmaj of necessary fitness ? 
▁ xxmaj so play the foolish throngs with one that swoons ; 
▁ xxmaj come all to help him , and so stop the air 
▁ xxmaj by which he should revive ; and even so 
▁ xxmaj the general subject to a well - wish'd king 
▁ xxmaj quit their own part , and in obsequious fondness 
▁ xxmaj crowd to his presence , where their untaught love 
▁ xxmaj must needs appear offence . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup isabella 
▁
▁ xxmaj how now , fair maid ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i am come to know your pleasure . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj that you might know it would much better please me 
▁ xxmaj than to demand what ' tis . xxmaj your brother can not live . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj even so ! xxmaj heaven keep your honour ! 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj yet may he live awhile , and , it may be , 
▁ xxmaj as long as you or xxup i ; yet he must die . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj under your sentence ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj yea . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj when ? i beseech you ; that in his reprieve , 
▁ xxmaj longer or shorter , he may be so fitted 
▁ xxmaj that his soul sicken not . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj fie , these filthy vices ! xxmaj it were as good 
▁ xxmaj to pardon him that hath from nature stol'n 
▁ a man already made , as to remit 
▁ xxmaj their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven 's image 
▁ xxmaj in stamps that are forbid ; ' tis all as easy 
▁ xxmaj falsely to take away a life true made 
▁ xxmaj as to put metal in restrained means 
▁ xxmaj to make a false one . 
▁ xxup isabella . ' tis set down so in heaven , but not in earth . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj say you so ? xxmaj then i shall pose you quickly . 
▁ xxmaj which had you rather- that the most just law 
▁ xxmaj now took your brother 's life ; or , to redeem him , 
▁ xxmaj give up your body to such sweet uncleanness 
▁ xxmaj as she that he hath stain'd ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj sir , believe this : 
▁ i had rather give my body than my soul . 
▁ xxup angelo . i talk not of your soul ; our compell'd sins 
▁ xxmaj stand more for number than for accompt . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj how say you ? 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll not warrant that ; for i can speak 
▁ xxmaj against the thing i say . xxmaj answer to this : 
▁ xxup i , now the voice of the recorded law , 
▁ xxmaj pronounce a sentence on your brother 's life ; 
▁ xxmaj might there not be a charity in sin 
▁ xxmaj to save this brother 's life ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj please you to do't , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll take it as a peril to my soul 
▁ xxmaj it is no sin at all , but charity . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj pleas'd you to do't at peril of your soul , 
▁ xxmaj were equal poise of sin and charity . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj that i do beg his life , if it be sin , 
▁ xxmaj heaven let me bear it ! xxmaj you granting of my suit , 
▁ xxmaj if that be sin , xxmaj i 'll make it my morn prayer 
▁ xxmaj to have it added to the faults of mine , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing of your answer . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj nay , but hear me ; 
▁ xxmaj your sense pursues not mine ; either you are ignorant 
▁ xxmaj or seem so , craftily ; and that 's not good . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj let me be ignorant , and in nothing good 
▁ xxmaj but graciously to know i am no better . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright 
▁ xxmaj when it doth tax itself ; as these black masks 
▁ xxmaj proclaim an enshielded beauty ten times louder 
▁ xxmaj than beauty could , display'd . xxmaj but mark me : 
▁ xxmaj to be received plain , xxmaj i 'll speak more gross- 
▁ xxmaj your brother is to die . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj so . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj and his offence is so , as it appears , 
▁ xxmaj accountant to the law upon that pain . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj true . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj admit no other way to save his life , 
▁ xxmaj as i subscribe not that , nor any other , 
▁ xxmaj but , in the loss of question , that you , his sister , 
▁ xxmaj finding yourself desir'd of such a person 
▁ xxmaj whose credit with the judge , or own great place , 
▁ xxmaj could fetch your brother from the manacles 
▁ xxmaj of the all - binding law ; and that there were 
▁ xxmaj no earthly mean to save him but that either 
▁ xxmaj you must lay down the treasures of your body 
▁ xxmaj to this supposed , or else to let him suffer- 
▁ xxmaj what would you do ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj as much for my poor brother as myself ; 
▁ xxmaj that is , were i under the terms of death , 
▁ xxmaj th ' impression of keen whips xxmaj i 'd wear as rubies , 
▁ xxmaj and strip myself to death as to a bed 
▁ xxmaj that longing have been sick for , ere xxmaj i 'd yield 
▁ xxmaj my body up to shame . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj then must your brother die . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj and ' twere the cheaper way : 
▁ xxmaj better it were a brother died at once 
▁ xxmaj than that a sister , by redeeming him , 
▁ xxmaj should die for ever . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj were not you , then , as cruel as the sentence 
▁ xxmaj that you have slander'd so ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj ignominy in ransom and free pardon 
▁ xxmaj are of two houses : lawful mercy 
▁ xxmaj is nothing kin to foul redemption . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj you seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant ; 
▁ xxmaj and rather prov'd the sliding of your brother 
▁ a merriment than a vice . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , pardon me , my lord ! xxmaj it oft falls out , 
▁ xxmaj to have what we would have , we speak not what we mean : 
▁ i something do excuse the thing i hate 
▁ xxmaj for his advantage that i dearly love . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj we are all frail . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj else let my brother die , 
▁ xxmaj if not a fedary but only he 
▁ xxmaj owe and succeed thy weakness . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj nay , women are frail too . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj ay , as the glasses where they view themselves , 
▁ xxmaj which are as easy broke as they make forms . 
▁ xxmaj women , help heaven ! xxmaj men their creation mar 
▁ xxmaj in profiting by them . xxmaj nay , call us ten times frail ; 
▁ xxmaj for we are soft as our complexions are , 
▁ xxmaj and credulous to false prints . 
▁ xxup angelo . i think it well ; 
▁ xxmaj and from this testimony of your own sex , 
▁ xxmaj since i suppose we are made to be no stronger 
▁ xxmaj than faults may shake our frames , let me be bold . 
▁ i do arrest your words . xxmaj be that you are , 
▁ xxmaj that is , a woman ; if you be more , you 're none ; 
▁ xxmaj if you be one , as you are well express'd 
▁ xxmaj by all external warrants , show it now 
▁ xxmaj by putting on the destin'd livery . 
▁ xxup isabella . i have no tongue but one ; gentle , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj let me intreat you speak the former language . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj plainly conceive , i love you . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj my brother did love xxmaj juliet , 
▁ xxmaj and you tell me that he shall die for't . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj he shall not , xxmaj isabel , if you give me love . 
▁ xxup isabella . i know your virtue hath a license in't , 
▁ xxmaj which seems a little fouler than it is , 
▁ xxmaj to pluck on others . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj believe me , on mine honour , 
▁ xxmaj my words express my purpose . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj ha ! little honour to be much believ'd , 
▁ xxmaj and most pernicious purpose ! xxmaj seeming , seeming ! 
▁ i will proclaim thee , xxmaj angelo , look for't . 
▁ xxmaj sign me a present pardon for my brother 
▁ xxmaj or , with an outstretch'd throat , xxmaj i 'll tell the world aloud 
▁ xxmaj what man thou art . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj who will believe thee , xxmaj isabel ? 
▁ xxmaj my unsoil'd name , th ' austereness of my life , 
▁ xxmaj my vouch against you , and my place i ' th ' state , 
▁ xxmaj will so your accusation overweigh 
▁ xxmaj that you shall stifle in your own report , 
▁ xxmaj and smell of calumny . i have begun , 
▁ xxmaj and now i give my sensual race the rein : 
▁ xxmaj fit thy consent to my sharp appetite ; 
▁ xxmaj lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes 
▁ xxmaj that banish what they sue for ; redeem thy brother 
▁ xxmaj by yielding up thy body to my will ; 
▁ xxmaj or else he must not only die the death , 
▁ xxmaj but thy unkindness shall his death draw out 
▁ xxmaj to ling'ring sufferance . xxmaj answer me to - morrow , 
▁ xxmaj or , by the affection that now guides me most , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll prove a tyrant to him . xxmaj as for you , 
▁ xxmaj say what you can : my false o'erweighs your true . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj to whom should i complain ? xxmaj did i tell this , 
▁ xxmaj who would believe me ? o perilous mouths 
▁ xxmaj that bear in them one and the self - same tongue 
▁ xxmaj either of condemnation or approof , 
▁ xxmaj bidding the law make curtsy to their will ; 
▁ xxmaj hooking both right and wrong to th ' appetite , 
▁ xxmaj to follow as it draws ! xxmaj i 'll to my brother . 
▁ xxmaj though he hath fall'n by prompture of the blood , 
▁ xxmaj yet hath he in him such a mind of honour 
▁ xxmaj that , had he twenty heads to tender down 
▁ xxmaj on twenty bloody blocks , he 'd yield them up 
▁ xxmaj before his sister should her body stoop 
▁ xxmaj to such abhorr'd pollution . 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj isabel , live chaste , and , brother , die : 
▁ xxmaj more than our brother is our chastity . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell him yet of xxmaj angelo 's request , 
▁ xxmaj and fit his mind to death , for his soul 's rest . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the prison 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke , disguised as before , xxup claudio , and xxup provost 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj so , then you hope of pardon from xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj the miserable have no other medicine 
▁ xxmaj but only hope : 
▁ i have hope to xxmaj eve , and am prepar'd to die . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be absolute for death ; either death or life 
▁ xxmaj shall thereby be the sweeter . xxmaj reason thus with life . 
▁ xxmaj if i do lose thee , i do lose a thing 
▁ xxmaj that none but fools would keep . a breath thou art , 
▁ xxmaj servile to all the skyey influences , 
▁ xxmaj that dost this habitation where thou keep'st 
▁ xxmaj hourly afflict . xxmaj merely , thou art xxmaj death 's fool ; 
▁ xxmaj for him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun 
▁ xxmaj and yet run'st toward him still . xxmaj thou art not noble ; 
▁ xxmaj for all th ' accommodations that thou bear'st 
▁ xxmaj are nurs'd by baseness . xxmaj thou ' rt by no means valiant ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou dost fear the soft and tender fork 
▁ xxmaj of a poor worm . xxmaj thy best of rest is sleep , 
▁ xxmaj and that thou oft provok'st ; yet grossly fear'st 
▁ xxmaj thy death , which is no more . xxmaj thou art not thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou exists on many a thousand grains 
▁ xxmaj that issue out of dust . xxmaj happy thou art not ; 
▁ xxmaj for what thou hast not , still thou striv'st to get , 
▁ xxmaj and what thou hast , forget'st . xxmaj thou art not certain ; 
▁ xxmaj for thy complexion shifts to strange effects , 
▁ xxmaj after the moon . xxmaj if thou art rich , thou'rt poor ; 
▁ xxmaj for , like an ass whose back with ingots bows , 
▁ xxmaj thou bear'st thy heavy riches but a journey , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj death unloads thee . xxmaj friend hast thou none ; 
▁ xxmaj for thine own bowels which do call thee sire , 
▁ xxmaj the mere effusion of thy proper loins , 
▁ xxmaj do curse the gout , serpigo , and the rheum , 
▁ xxmaj for ending thee no sooner . xxmaj thou hast nor youth nor age , 
▁ xxmaj but , as it were , an after - dinner 's sleep , 
▁ xxmaj dreaming on both ; for all thy blessed youth 
▁ xxmaj becomes as aged , and doth beg the alms 
▁ xxmaj of palsied eld ; and when thou art old and rich , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast neither heat , affection , limb , nor beauty , 
▁ xxmaj to make thy riches pleasant . xxmaj what 's yet in this 
▁ xxmaj that bears the name of life ? xxmaj yet in this life 
▁ xxmaj lie hid moe thousand deaths ; yet death we fear , 
▁ xxmaj that makes these odds all even . 
▁ xxup claudio . i humbly thank you . 
▁ xxmaj to sue to live , i find i seek to die ; 
▁ xxmaj and , seeking death , find life . xxmaj let it come on . 
▁ xxup isabella . [ within ] xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj peace here ; grace and good company ! 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj come in ; the wish deserves a welcome . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj dear sir , ere long xxmaj i 'll visit you again . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj most holy sir , i thank you . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup isabella 

▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj my business is a word or two with xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj and very welcome . xxmaj look , signior , here 's your sister . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj provost , a word with you . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj as many as you please . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj bring me to hear them speak , where i may be conceal'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup duke and xxup provost 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj now , sister , what 's the comfort ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj why , 
▁ xxmaj as all comforts are ; most good , most good , indeed . 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , having affairs to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj intends you for his swift ambassador , 
▁ xxmaj where you shall be an everlasting leiger . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , your best appointment make with speed ; 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow you set on . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj is there no remedy ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj none , but such remedy as , to save a head , 
▁ xxmaj to cleave a heart in twain . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj but is there any ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj yes , brother , you may live : 
▁ xxmaj there is a devilish mercy in the judge , 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll implore it , that will free your life , 
▁ xxmaj but fetter you till death . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj perpetual durance ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj ay , just ; perpetual durance , a restraint , 
▁ xxmaj though all the world 's vastidity you had , 
▁ xxmaj to a determin'd scope . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj but in what nature ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj in such a one as , you consenting to't , 
▁ xxmaj would bark your honour from that trunk you bear , 
▁ xxmaj and leave you naked . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj let me know the point . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , i do fear thee , xxmaj claudio ; and i quake , 
▁ xxmaj lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain , 
▁ xxmaj and six or seven winters more respect 
▁ xxmaj than a perpetual honour . xxmaj dar'st thou die ? 
▁ xxmaj the sense of death is most in apprehension ; 
▁ xxmaj and the poor beetle that we tread upon 
▁ xxmaj in corporal sufferance finds a pang as great 
▁ xxmaj as when a giant dies . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj why give you me this shame ? 
▁ xxmaj think you i can a resolution fetch 
▁ xxmaj from flow'ry tenderness ? xxmaj if i must die , 
▁ i will encounter darkness as a bride 
▁ xxmaj and hug it in mine arms . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj there spake my brother ; there my father 's grave 
▁ xxmaj did utter forth a voice . xxmaj yes , thou must die : 
▁ xxmaj thou art too noble to conserve a life 
▁ xxmaj in base appliances . xxmaj this outward - sainted deputy , 
▁ xxmaj whose settled visage and deliberate word 
▁ xxmaj nips youth i ' th ' head , and follies doth enew 
▁ xxmaj as falcon doth the fowl , is yet a devil ; 
▁ xxmaj his filth within being cast , he would appear 
▁ a pond as deep as hell . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj the precise xxmaj angelo ! 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , ' tis the cunning livery of hell 
▁ xxmaj the damned'st body to invest and cover 
▁ xxmaj in precise guards ! xxmaj dost thou think , xxmaj claudio , 
▁ xxmaj if i would yield him my virginity 
▁ xxmaj thou mightst be freed ? 
▁ xxup claudio . o heavens ! it can not be . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj yes , he would give't thee , from this rank offence , 
▁ xxmaj so to offend him still . xxmaj this night 's the time 
▁ xxmaj that i should do what i abhor to name , 
▁ xxmaj or else thou diest to - morrow . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj thou shalt not do't . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , were it but my life ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'd throw it down for your deliverance 
▁ xxmaj as frankly as a pin . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj thanks , dear xxmaj isabel . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj be ready , xxmaj claudio , for your death to - morrow . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj yes . xxmaj has he affections in him