xxbos xxmaj that thus can make him bite the law by th ' nose 
▁ xxmaj when he would force it ? xxmaj sure it is no sin ; 
▁ xxmaj or of the deadly seven it is the least . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj which is the least ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj if it were damnable , he being so wise , 
▁ xxmaj why would he for the momentary trick 
▁ xxmaj be perdurably fin'd?- o xxmaj isabel ! 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj what says my brother ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj death is a fearful thing . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj and shamed life a hateful . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj ay , but to die , and go we know not where ; 
▁ xxmaj to lie in cold obstruction , and to rot ; 
▁ xxmaj this sensible warm motion to become 
▁ a kneaded clod ; and the delighted spirit 
▁ xxmaj to bathe in fiery floods or to reside 
▁ xxmaj in thrilling region of thick - ribbed ice ; 
▁ xxmaj to be imprison'd in the viewless winds , 
▁ xxmaj and blown with restless violence round about 
▁ xxmaj the pendent world ; or to be worse than worst 
▁ xxmaj of those that lawless and incertain thought 
▁ xxmaj imagine howling- ' tis too horrible . 
▁ xxmaj the weariest and most loathed worldly life 
▁ xxmaj that age , ache , penury , and imprisonment , 
▁ xxmaj can lay on nature is a paradise 
▁ xxmaj to what we fear of death . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj alas , alas ! 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj sweet sister , let me live . 
▁ xxmaj what sin you do to save a brother 's life , 
▁ xxmaj nature dispenses with the deed so far 
▁ xxmaj that it becomes a virtue . 
▁ xxup isabella . o you beast ! 
▁ o faithless coward ! o dishonest wretch ! 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou be made a man out of my vice ? 
▁ xxmaj is't not a kind of incest to take life 
▁ xxmaj from thine own sister 's shame ? xxmaj what should i think ? 
▁ xxmaj heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair ! 
▁ xxmaj for such a warped slip of wilderness 
▁ xxmaj ne'er issu'd from his blood . xxmaj take my defiance ; 
▁ xxmaj die ; perish . xxmaj might but my bending down 
▁ xxmaj reprieve thee from thy fate , it should proceed . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death , 
▁ xxmaj no word to save thee . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj nay , hear me , xxmaj isabel . 
▁ xxup isabella . o fie , fie , fie ! 
▁ xxmaj thy sin 's not accidental , but a trade . 
▁ xxmaj mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd ; 
▁ ' tis best that thou diest quickly . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxup o , hear me , xxmaj isabella . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup duke 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj vouchsafe a word , young sister , but one word . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj might you dispense with your leisure , i would by and by have 
▁ some speech with you ; the satisfaction i would require is 
▁ likewise your own benefit . 
▁ xxup isabella . i have no superfluous leisure ; my stay must be stolen out 
▁ of other affairs ; but i will attend you awhile . 
▁ [ walks apart ] 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj son , i have overheard what hath pass'd between you and your 
▁ sister . xxmaj angelo had never the purpose to corrupt her ; only he hath 
▁ made an assay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the 
▁ disposition of natures . xxmaj she , having the truth of honour in her , 
▁ hath made him that gracious denial which he is most glad to 
▁ receive . i am confessor to xxmaj angelo , and i know this to be true ; 
▁ therefore prepare yourself to death . xxmaj do not satisfy your 
▁ resolution with hopes that are fallible ; to - morrow you must die ; 
▁ go to your knees and make ready . 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj let me ask my sister pardon . i am so out of love with life 
▁ that i will sue to be rid of it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj hold you there . xxmaj farewell . [ exit xxup claudio ] xxmaj provost , a word with 
▁ you . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup provost 
▁
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj what 's your will , father ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj that , now you are come , you will be gone . xxmaj leave me a while 
▁ with the maid ; my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch 
▁ her by my company . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj in good time . xxmaj exit xxup provost 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the hand that hath made you fair hath made you good ; the 
▁ goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty brief in goodness ; 
▁ but grace , being the soul of your complexion , shall keep the body 
▁ of it ever fair . xxmaj the assault that xxmaj angelo hath made to you , 
▁ fortune hath convey'd to my understanding ; and , but that frailty 
▁ hath examples for his falling , i should wonder at xxmaj angelo . xxmaj how 
▁ will you do to content this substitute , and to save your brother ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i am now going to resolve him ; i had rather my brother 
▁ die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born . xxmaj but , xxup o , how 
▁ much is the good xxmaj duke deceiv'd in xxmaj angelo ! xxmaj if ever he return , and 
▁ i can speak to him , i will open my lips in vain , or discover his 
▁ government . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj that shall not be much amiss ; yet , as the matter now stands , 
▁ he will avoid your accusation : he made trial of you only . 
▁ xxmaj therefore fasten your ear on my advisings ; to the love i have in 
▁ doing good a remedy presents itself . i do make myself believe 
▁ that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited 
▁ benefit ; redeem your brother from the angry law ; do no stain to 
▁ your own gracious person ; and much please the absent xxmaj duke , if 
▁ peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this 
▁ business . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj let me hear you speak farther ; i have spirit to do 
▁ anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj virtue is bold , and goodness never fearful . xxmaj have you not 
▁ heard speak of xxmaj mariana , the sister of xxmaj frederick , the great 
▁ soldier who miscarried at sea ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i have heard of the lady , and good words went with her 
▁ name . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj she should this xxmaj angelo have married ; was affianced to her by 
▁ oath , and the nuptial appointed ; between which time of the 
▁ contract and limit of the solemnity her brother xxmaj frederick was 
▁ wreck'd at sea , having in that perished vessel the dowry of his 
▁ sister . xxmaj but mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman : 
▁ there she lost a noble and renowned brother , in his love toward 
▁ her ever most kind and natural ; with him the portion and sinew of 
▁ her fortune , her marriage - dowry ; with both , her combinate 
▁ husband , this well - seeming xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj can this be so ? xxmaj did xxmaj angelo so leave her ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj left her in her tears , and dried not one of them with his 
▁ comfort ; swallowed his vows whole , pretending in her discoveries 
▁ of dishonour ; in few , bestow'd her on her own lamentation , which 
▁ she yet wears for his sake ; and he , a marble to her tears , is 
▁ washed with them , but relents not . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj what a merit were it in death to take this poor maid from 
▁ the world ! xxmaj what corruption in this life that it will let this man 
▁ live ! xxmaj but how out of this can she avail ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it is a rupture that you may easily heal ; and the cure of it 
▁ not only saves your brother , but keeps you from dishonour in 
▁ doing it . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj show me how , good father . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her 
▁ first affection ; his unjust unkindness , that in all reason should 
▁ have quenched her love , hath , like an impediment in the current , 
▁ made it more violent and unruly . xxmaj go you to xxmaj angelo ; answer his 
▁ requiring with a plausible obedience ; agree with his demands to 
▁ the point ; only refer yourself to this advantage : first , that 
▁ your stay with him may not be long ; that the time may have all 
▁ shadow and silence in it ; and the place answer to convenience . 
▁ xxmaj this being granted in course- and now follows all : we shall 
▁ advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment , go in your 
▁ place . xxmaj if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter , it may 
▁ compel him to her recompense ; and here , by this , is your brother 
▁ saved , your honour untainted , the poor xxmaj mariana advantaged , and 
▁ the corrupt deputy scaled . xxmaj the maid will i frame and make fit for 
▁ his attempt . xxmaj if you think well to carry this as you may , the 
▁ doubleness of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof . xxmaj what 
▁ think you of it ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj the image of it gives me content already ; and i trust it 
▁ will grow to a most prosperous perfection . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it lies much in your holding up . xxmaj haste you speedily to 
▁ xxmaj angelo ; if for this night he entreat you to his bed , give him 
▁ promise of satisfaction . i will presently to xxmaj saint xxmaj luke 's ; there , 
▁ at the moated grange , resides this dejected xxmaj mariana . xxmaj at that 
▁ place call upon me ; and dispatch with xxmaj angelo , that it may be 
▁ quickly . 
▁ xxup isabella . i thank you for this comfort . xxmaj fare you well , good father . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the street before the prison 

 xxmaj enter , on one side , xxup duke disguised as before ; on the other , xxup elbow , 
 and xxup officers with xxup pompey 

▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj nay , if there be no remedy for it , but that you will needs 
▁ buy and sell men and women like beasts , we shall have all the 
▁ world drink brown and white bastard . 
▁ xxup duke . o heavens ! what stuff is here ? 
▁ xxup pompey . ' twas never merry world since , of two usuries , the merriest 
▁ was put down , and the worser allow'd by order of law a furr'd 
▁ gown to keep him warm ; and furr'd with fox on lamb - skins too , to 
▁ signify that craft , being richer than innocency , stands for the 
▁ facing . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj come your way , sir . xxmaj bless you , good father friar . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and you , good brother father . xxmaj what offence hath this man made 
▁ you , sir ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj marry , sir , he hath offended the law ; and , sir , we take him 
▁ to be a thief too , sir , for we have found upon him , sir , a 
▁ strange picklock , which we have sent to the deputy . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj fie , sirrah , a bawd , a wicked bawd ! 
▁ xxmaj the evil that thou causest to be done , 
▁ xxmaj that is thy means to live . xxmaj do thou but think 
▁ xxmaj what ' tis to cram a maw or clothe a back 
▁ xxmaj from such a filthy vice ; say to thyself 
▁ ' from their abominable and beastly touches 
▁ i drink , i eat , array myself , and live . ' 
▁ xxmaj canst thou believe thy living is a life , 
▁ xxmaj so stinkingly depending ? xxmaj go mend , go mend . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj indeed , it does stink in some sort , sir ; but yet , sir , 
▁ i would prove- 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj nay , if the devil have given thee proofs for sin , 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt prove his . xxmaj take him to prison , officer ; 
▁ xxmaj correction and instruction must both work 
▁ xxmaj ere this rude beast will profit . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj he must before the deputy , sir ; he has given him warning . 
▁ xxmaj the deputy can not abide a whoremaster ; if he be a whoremonger , 
▁ and comes before him , he were as good go a mile on his errand . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj that we were all , as some would seem to be , 
▁ xxmaj from our faults , as his faults from seeming , free . 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj his neck will come to your waist- a cord , sir . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lucio 

▁ xxup pompey . i spy comfort ; i cry bail . xxmaj here 's a gentleman , and a friend 
▁ of mine . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj how now , noble xxmaj pompey ! xxmaj what , at the wheels of xxmaj caesar ? xxmaj art 
▁ thou led in triumph ? xxmaj what , is there none of xxmaj pygmalion 's images , 
▁ newly made woman , to be had now for putting the hand in the 
▁ pocket and extracting it clutch'd ? xxmaj what reply , ha ? xxmaj what say'st 
▁ thou to this tune , matter , and method ? xxmaj is't not drown'd i ' th ' 
▁ last rain , ha ? xxmaj what say'st thou , trot ? xxmaj is the world as it was , 
▁ man ? xxmaj which is the way ? xxmaj is it sad , and few words ? or how ? xxmaj the 
▁ trick of it ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj still thus , and thus ; still worse ! 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj how doth my dear morsel , thy mistress ? xxmaj procures she still , 
▁ ha ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj troth , sir , she hath eaten up all her beef , and she is 
▁ herself in the tub . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj why , ' tis good ; it is the right of it ; it must be so ; ever 
▁ your fresh whore and your powder'd bawd- an unshunn'd 
▁ consequence ; it must be so . xxmaj art going to prison , xxmaj pompey ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj yes , faith , sir . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj why , ' tis not amiss , xxmaj pompey . xxmaj farewell ; go , say i sent thee 
▁ thither . xxmaj for debt , xxmaj pompey- or how ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj for being a bawd , for being a bawd . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj well , then , imprison him . xxmaj if imprisonment be the due of a 
▁ bawd , why , ' tis his right . xxmaj bawd is he doubtless , and of 
▁ antiquity , too ; bawd - born . xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj pompey . xxmaj commend me to 
▁ the prison , xxmaj pompey . xxmaj you will turn good husband now , xxmaj pompey ; you 
▁ will keep the house . 
▁ xxup pompey . i hope , sir , your good worship will be my bail . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj no , indeed , will i not , xxmaj pompey ; it is not the wear . i will 
▁ pray , xxmaj pompey , to increase your bondage . xxmaj if you take it not 
▁ patiently , why , your mettle is the more . xxmaj adieu trusty xxmaj pompey . 
▁ xxmaj bless you , friar . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and you . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj does xxmaj bridget paint still , xxmaj pompey , ha ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj come your ways , sir ; come . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj you will not bail me then , sir ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj then , xxmaj pompey , nor now . xxmaj what news abroad , friar ? what news ? 
▁ xxup elbow . xxmaj come your ways , sir ; come . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj go to kennel , xxmaj pompey , go . 

▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup elbow , xxup pompey and xxup officers 

▁ xxmaj what news , friar , of the xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup duke . i know none . xxmaj can you tell me of any ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj some say he is with the xxmaj emperor of xxmaj russia ; other some , he is 
▁ in xxmaj rome ; but where is he , think you ? 
▁ xxup duke . i know not where ; but wheresoever , i wish him well . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the 
▁ state and usurp the beggary he was never born to . xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo 
▁ dukes it well in his absence ; he puts transgression to't . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj he does well in't . 
▁ xxup lucio . a little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him ; 
▁ something too crabbed that way , friar . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it is too general a vice , and severity must cure it . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj yes , in good sooth , the vice is of a great kindred ; it is 
▁ well allied ; but it is impossible to extirp it quite , friar , till 
▁ eating and drinking be put down . xxmaj they say this xxmaj angelo was not 
▁ made by man and woman after this downright way of creation . xxmaj is it 
▁ true , think you ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how should he be made , then ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj some report a sea - maid spawn'd him ; some , that he was begot 
▁ between two stock - fishes . xxmaj but it is certain that when he makes 
▁ water his urine is congeal'd ice ; that i know to be true . xxmaj and he 
▁ is a motion generative ; that 's infallible . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you are pleasant , sir , and speak apace . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj why , what a ruthless thing is this in him , for the rebellion 
▁ of a codpiece to take away the life of a man ! xxmaj would the xxmaj duke that 
▁ is absent have done this ? xxmaj ere he would have hang'd a man for the 
▁ getting a hundred bastards , he would have paid for the nursing a 
▁ thousand . xxmaj he had some feeling of the sport ; he knew the service , 
▁ and that instructed him to mercy . 
▁ xxup duke . i never heard the absent xxmaj duke much detected for women ; he was 
▁ not inclin'd that way . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxup o , sir , you are deceiv'd . 
▁ xxup duke . ' tis not possible . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj who- not the xxmaj duke ? xxmaj yes , your beggar of fifty ; and his use 
▁ was to put a ducat in her clack - dish . xxmaj the xxmaj duke had crotchets in 
▁ him . xxmaj he would be drunk too ; that let me inform you . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you do him wrong , surely . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj sir , i was an inward of his . a shy fellow was the xxmaj duke ; and 
▁ i believe i know the cause of his withdrawing . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what , i prithee , might be the cause ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj no , pardon ; ' tis a secret must be lock'd within the teeth 
▁ and the lips ; but this i can let you understand : the greater file 
▁ of the subject held the xxmaj duke to be wise . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj wise ? xxmaj why , no question but he was . 
▁ xxup lucio . a very superficial , ignorant , unweighing fellow . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj either this is envy in you , folly , or mistaking ; the very 
▁ stream of his life , and the business he hath helmed , must , upon a 
▁ warranted need , give him a better proclamation . xxmaj let him be but 
▁ testimonied in his own bringings - forth , and he shall appear to 
▁ the envious a scholar , a statesman , and a soldier . xxmaj therefore you 
▁ speak unskilfully ; or , if your knowledge be more , it is much 
▁ dark'ned in your malice . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj sir , i know him , and i love him . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj love talks with better knowledge , and knowledge with dearer 
▁ love . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj come , sir , i know what i know . 
▁ xxup duke . i can hardly believe that , since you know not what you speak . 
▁ xxmaj but , if ever the xxmaj duke return , as our prayers are he may , let me 
▁ desire you to make your answer before him . xxmaj if it be honest you 
▁ have spoke , you have courage to maintain it ; i am bound to call 
▁ upon you ; and i pray you your name ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj sir , my name is xxmaj lucio , well known to the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj he shall know you better , sir , if i may live to report you . 
▁ xxup lucio . i fear you not . 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , you hope the xxmaj duke will return no more ; or you imagine me 
▁ too unhurtful an opposite . xxmaj but , indeed , i can do you little harm : 
▁ you 'll forswear this again . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj i 'll be hang'd first . xxmaj thou art deceiv'd in me , friar . xxmaj but no 
▁ more of this . xxmaj canst thou tell if xxmaj claudio die to - morrow or no ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why should he die , sir ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj why ? xxmaj for filling a bottle with a tun - dish . i would the xxmaj duke 
▁ we talk of were return'd again . xxmaj this ungenitur'd agent will 
▁ unpeople the province with continency ; sparrows must not build in 
▁ his house - eaves because they are lecherous . xxmaj the xxmaj duke yet would 
▁ have dark deeds darkly answered ; he would never bring them to 
▁ light . xxmaj would he were return'd ! xxmaj marry , this xxmaj claudio is condemned 
▁ for untrussing . xxmaj farewell , good friar ; i prithee pray for me . xxmaj the 
▁ xxmaj duke , i say to thee again , would eat mutton on xxmaj fridays . xxmaj he 's not 
▁ past it yet ; and , i say to thee , he would mouth with a beggar 
▁ though she smelt brown bread and garlic . xxmaj say that i said so . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj no might nor greatness in mortality 
▁ xxmaj can censure scape ; back - wounding calumny 
▁ xxmaj the whitest virtue strikes . xxmaj what king so strong 
▁ xxmaj can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue ? 
▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup escalus , xxup provost , and xxup officers with 
▁ xxup mistress xxup overdone 

▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj go , away with her to prison . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj good my lord , be good to me ; your honour is 
▁ accounted a merciful man ; good my lord . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj double and treble admonition , and still forfeit in the 
▁ same kind ! xxmaj this would make mercy swear and play the tyrant . 
▁ xxup provost . a bawd of eleven years ' continuance , may it please your 
▁ honour . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup overdone . xxmaj my lord , this is one xxmaj lucio 's information against me . 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj kate xxmaj keepdown was with child by him in the xxmaj duke 's time ; 
▁ he promis'd her marriage . xxmaj his child is a year and a quarter old 
▁ come xxmaj philip and xxmaj jacob ; i have kept it myself ; and see how he goes 
▁ about to abuse me . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj that fellow is a fellow of much license . xxmaj let him be call'd 
▁ before us . xxmaj away with her to prison . xxmaj go to ; no more words . [ exeunt 
▁ xxup officers with xxup mistress xxup overdone ] xxmaj provost , my brother xxmaj angelo will 
▁ not be alter'd : xxmaj claudio must die to - morrow . xxmaj let him be furnish'd 
▁ with divines , and have all charitable preparation . xxmaj if my brother 
▁ wrought by my pity , it should not be so with him . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj so please you , this friar hath been with him , and advis'd 
▁ him for th ' entertainment of death . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj good even , good father . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj bliss and goodness on you ! 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj of whence are you ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj not of this country , though my chance is now 
▁ xxmaj to use it for my time . i am a brother 
▁ xxmaj of gracious order , late come from the xxmaj see 
▁ xxmaj in special business from his xxmaj holiness . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj what news abroad i ' th ' world ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj none , but that there is so great a fever on goodness that the 
▁ dissolution of it must cure it . xxmaj novelty is only in request ; and , 
▁ as it is , as dangerous to be aged in any kind of course as it is 
▁ virtuous to be constant in any undertakeing . xxmaj there is scarce 
▁ truth enough alive to make societies secure ; but security enough 
▁ to make fellowships accurst . xxmaj much upon this riddle runs the 
▁ wisdom of the world . xxmaj this news is old enough , yet it is every 
▁ day 's news . i pray you , sir , of what disposition was the xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj one that , above all other strifes , contended especially to 
▁ know himself . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what pleasure was he given to ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj rather rejoicing to see another merry than merry at 
▁ anything which profess'd to make him rejoice ; a gentleman of all 
▁ temperance . xxmaj but leave we him to his events , with a prayer they 
▁ may prove prosperous ; and let me desire to know how you find 
▁ xxmaj claudio prepar'd . i am made to understand that you have lent him 
▁ visitation . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj he professes to have received no sinister measure from his 
▁ judge , but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of 
▁ justice . xxmaj yet had he framed to himself , by the instruction of his 
▁ frailty , many deceiving promises of life ; which xxup i , by my good 
▁ leisure , have discredited to him , and now he is resolv'd to die . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj you have paid the heavens your function , and the prisoner 
▁ the very debt of your calling . i have labour'd for the poor 
▁ gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty ; but my brother 
▁ justice have i found so severe that he hath forc'd me to tell him 
▁ he is indeed xxmaj justice . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj if his own life answer the straitness of his proceeding , it 
▁ shall become him well ; wherein if he chance to fail , he hath 
▁ sentenc'd himself . 
▁ xxup escalus . i am going to visit the prisoner . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj peace be with you ! xxmaj exeunt xxup escalus and xxup provost 

▁ xxmaj he who the sword of heaven will bear 
▁ xxmaj should be as holy as severe ; 
▁ xxmaj pattern in himself to know , 
▁ xxmaj grace to stand , and virtue go ; 
▁ xxmaj more nor less to others paying 
▁ xxmaj than by self - offences weighing . 
▁ xxmaj shame to him whose cruel striking 
▁ xxmaj kills for faults of his own liking ! 
▁ xxmaj twice treble shame on xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj to weed my vice and let his grow ! 
▁ xxup o , what may man within him hide , 
▁ xxmaj though angel on the outward side ! 
▁ xxmaj how may likeness , made in crimes , 
▁ xxmaj make a practice on the times , 
▁ xxmaj to draw with idle spiders ' strings 
▁ xxmaj most ponderous and substantial things ! 
▁ xxmaj craft against vice i must apply . 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj angelo to - night shall lie 
▁ xxmaj his old betrothed but despised ; 
▁ xxmaj so disguise shall , by th ' disguised , 
▁ xxmaj pay with falsehood false exacting , 
▁ xxmaj and perform an old contracting . xxmaj exit 




 xxmaj act xxup iv . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the moated grange at xxmaj saint xxmaj duke 's 

 xxmaj enter xxup mariana ; and xxup boy singing 

▁ xxup song 

▁ xxmaj take , xxup o , take those lips away , 
▁ xxmaj that so sweetly were forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj and those eyes , the break of day , 
▁ xxmaj lights that do mislead the morn ; 
▁ xxmaj but my kisses bring again , bring again ; 
▁ xxmaj seals of love , but seal'd in vain , seal'd in vain . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke , disguised as before 

▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj break off thy song , and haste thee quick away ; 
▁ xxmaj here comes a man of comfort , whose advice 
▁ xxmaj hath often still'd my brawling discontent . xxmaj exit xxup boy 
▁ i cry you mercy , sir , and well could wish 
▁ xxmaj you had not found me here so musical . 
▁ xxmaj let me excuse me , and believe me so , 
▁ xxmaj my mirth it much displeas'd , but pleas'd my woe . 
▁ xxup duke . ' tis good ; though music oft hath such a charm 
▁ xxmaj to make bad good and good provoke to harm . 
▁ i pray you tell me hath anybody inquir'd for me here to - day . xxmaj much 
▁ upon this time have i promis'd here to meet . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj you have not been inquir'd after ; i have sat here all day . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup isabella 

▁ xxup duke . i do constantly believe you . xxmaj the time is come even now . i 
▁ shall crave your forbearance a little . xxmaj may be i will call upon 
▁ you anon , for some advantage to yourself . 
▁ xxup mariana . i am always bound to you . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj very well met , and well come . 
▁ xxmaj what is the news from this good deputy ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj he hath a garden circummur'd with brick , 
▁ xxmaj whose western side is with a vineyard back'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and to that vineyard is a planched gate 
▁ xxmaj that makes his opening with this bigger key ; 
▁ xxmaj this other doth command a little door 
▁ xxmaj which from the vineyard to the garden leads . 
▁ xxmaj there have i made my promise 
▁ xxmaj upon the heavy middle of the night 
▁ xxmaj to call upon him . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj but shall you on your knowledge find this way ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i have ta'en a due and wary note upon't ; 
▁ xxmaj with whispering and most guilty diligence , 
▁ xxmaj in action all of precept , he did show me 
▁ xxmaj the way twice o'er . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj are there no other tokens 
▁ xxmaj between you ' greed concerning her observance ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj no , none , but only a repair i ' th ' dark ; 
▁ xxmaj and that i have possess'd him my most stay 
▁ xxmaj can be but brief ; for i have made him know 
▁ i have a servant comes with me along , 
▁ xxmaj that stays upon me ; whose persuasion is 
▁ i come about my brother . 
▁ xxup duke . ' tis well borne up . 
▁ i have not yet made known to xxmaj mariana 
▁ a word of this . xxmaj what ho , within ! come forth . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup mariana 

▁ i pray you be acquainted with this maid ; 
▁ xxmaj she comes to do you good . 
▁ xxup isabella . i do desire the like . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj do you persuade yourself that i respect you ? 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj good friar , i know you do , and have found it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj take , then , this your companion by the hand , 
▁ xxmaj who hath a story ready for your ear . 
▁ i shall attend your leisure ; but make haste ; 
▁ xxmaj the vaporous night approaches . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj will't please you walk aside ? 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup mariana and xxup isabella 
▁ xxup duke . o place and greatness ! xxmaj millions of false eyes 
▁ xxmaj are stuck upon thee . xxmaj volumes of report 
▁ xxmaj run with these false , and most contrarious quest 
▁ xxmaj upon thy doings . xxmaj thousand escapes of wit 
▁ xxmaj make thee the father of their idle dream , 
▁ xxmaj and rack thee in their fancies . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup mariana and xxup isabella 

▁ xxmaj welcome , how agreed ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj she 'll take the enterprise upon her , father , 
▁ xxmaj if you advise it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it is not my consent , 
▁ xxmaj but my entreaty too . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj little have you to say , 
▁ xxmaj when you depart from him , but , soft and low , 
▁ ' remember now my brother . ' 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj fear me not . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj nor , gentle daughter , fear you not at all . 
▁ xxmaj he is your husband on a pre - contract . 
▁ xxmaj to bring you thus together ' tis no sin , 
▁ xxmaj sith that the justice of your title to him 
▁ xxmaj doth flourish the deceit . xxmaj come , let us go ; 
▁ xxmaj our corn 's to reap , for yet our tithe 's to sow . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the prison 

 xxmaj enter xxup provost and xxup pompey 

▁ xxup provost . xxmaj come hither , sirrah . xxmaj can you cut off a man 's head ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj if the man be a bachelor , sir , i can ; but if he be a 
▁ married man , he 's his wife 's head , and i can never cut of a 
▁ woman 's head . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj come , sir , leave me your snatches and yield me a direct 
▁ answer . xxmaj to - morrow morning are to die xxmaj claudio and xxmaj barnardine . xxmaj here 
▁ is in our prison a common executioner , who in his office lacks a 
▁ helper ; if you will take it on you to assist him , it shall redeem 
▁ you from your gyves ; if not , you shall have your full time of 
▁ imprisonment , and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping , for 
▁ you have been a notorious bawd . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , i have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind ; but yet 
▁ i will be content to be a lawful hangman . i would be glad to 
▁ receive some instructions from my fellow partner . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj what ho , xxmaj abhorson ! xxmaj where 's xxmaj abhorson there ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup abhorson 

▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj do you call , sir ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj sirrah , here 's a fellow will help you to - morrow in your 
▁ execution . xxmaj if you think it meet , compound with him by the year , 
▁ and let him abide here with you ; if not , use him for the present , 
▁ and dismiss him . xxmaj he can not plead his estimation with you ; he hath 
▁ been a bawd . 
▁ xxup abhorson . a bawd , sir ? xxmaj fie upon him ! xxmaj he will discredit our mystery . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj go to , sir ; you weigh equally ; a feather will turn the 
▁ scale . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj pray , sir , by your good favour- for surely , sir , a good 
▁ favour you have but that you have a hanging look- do you call , 
▁ sir , your occupation a mystery ? 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj ay , sir ; a mystery . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj painting , sir , i have heard say , is a mystery ; and your 
▁ whores , sir , being members of my occupation , using painting , do 
▁ prove my occupation a mystery ; but what mystery there should be 
▁ in hanging , if i should be hang'd , i can not imagine . 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj sir , it is a mystery . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj proof ? 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj every true man 's apparel fits your thief : if it be too 
▁ little for your thief , your true man thinks it big enough ; if it 
▁ be too big for your thief , your thief thinks it little enough ; so 
▁ every true man 's apparel fits your thief . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup provost 

▁ xxup provost . xxmaj are you agreed ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj sir , i will serve him ; for i do find your hangman is a more 
▁ penitent trade than your bawd ; he doth oftener ask forgiveness . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj you , sirrah , provide your block and your axe to - morrow 
▁ four o'clock . 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj come on , bawd ; i will instruct thee in my trade ; follow . 
▁ xxup pompey . i do desire to learn , sir ; and i hope , if you have occasion 
▁ to use me for your own turn , you shall find me yare ; for truly , 
▁ sir , for your kindness i owe you a good turn . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj call hither xxmaj barnardine and xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup abhorson and xxup pompey 
▁ xxmaj th ' one has my pity ; not a jot the other , 
▁ xxmaj being a murderer , though he were my brother . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup claudio 

▁ xxmaj look , here 's the warrant , xxmaj claudio , for thy death ; 
▁ ' tis now dead midnight , and by eight to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj thou must be made immortal . xxmaj where 's xxmaj barnardine ? 
▁ xxup claudio . xxmaj as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour 
▁ xxmaj when it lies starkly in the traveller 's bones . 
▁ xxmaj he will not wake . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj who can do good on him ? 
▁ xxmaj well , go , prepare yourself . [ knocking within ] xxmaj but hark , what 
▁ noise ? 
▁ xxmaj heaven give your spirits comfort ! xxmaj exit xxup claudio 
▁ [ knocking continues ] xxmaj by and by . 
▁ i hope it is some pardon or reprieve 
▁ xxmaj for the most gentle xxmaj claudio . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke , disguised as before 

▁ xxmaj welcome , father . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the best and wholesom'st spirits of the night 
▁ xxmaj envelop you , good xxmaj provost ! xxmaj who call'd here of late ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj none , since the curfew rung . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj not xxmaj isabel ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj they will then , ere't be long . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj what comfort is for xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there 's some in hope . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj it is a bitter deputy . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj not so , not so ; his life is parallel'd 
▁ xxmaj even with the stroke and line of his great justice ; 
▁ xxmaj he doth with holy abstinence subdue 
▁ xxmaj that in himself which he spurs on his pow'r 
▁ xxmaj to qualify in others . xxmaj were he meal'd with that 
▁ xxmaj which he corrects , then were he tyrannous ; 
▁ xxmaj but this being so , he 's just . [ knocking within ] xxmaj now are they 
▁ come . xxmaj exit xxup provost 
▁ xxmaj this is a gentle provost ; seldom when 
▁ xxmaj the steeled gaoler is the friend of men . [ knocking within ] 
▁ xxmaj how now , what noise ! xxmaj that spirit 's possess'd with haste 
▁ xxmaj that wounds th ' unsisting postern with these strokes . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup provost 

▁ xxup provost . xxmaj there he must stay until the officer 
▁ xxmaj arise to let him in ; he is call'd up . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj have you no countermand for xxmaj claudio yet 
▁ xxmaj but he must die to - morrow ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj none , sir , none . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj as near the dawning , xxmaj provost , as it is , 
▁ xxmaj you shall hear more ere morning . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj happily 
▁ xxmaj you something know ; yet i believe there comes 
▁ xxmaj no countermand ; no such example have we . 
▁ xxmaj besides , upon the very siege of justice , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo hath to the public ear 
▁ xxmaj profess'd the contrary . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 
▁ xxmaj this is his lordship 's man . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and here comes xxmaj claudio 's pardon . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord hath sent you this note ; and by me this further 
▁ charge , that you swerve not from the smallest article of it , 
▁ neither in time , matter , or other circumstance . xxmaj good morrow ; for 
▁ as i take it , it is almost day . 
▁ xxup provost . i shall obey him . xxmaj exit xxup messenger 
▁ xxup duke . [ aside ] xxmaj this is his pardon , purchas'd by such sin 
▁ xxmaj for which the pardoner himself is in ; 
▁ xxmaj hence hath offence his quick celerity , 
▁ xxmaj when it is borne in high authority . 
▁ xxmaj when vice makes mercy , mercy 's so extended 
▁ xxmaj that for the fault 's love is th ' offender friended . 
▁ xxmaj now , sir , what news ? 
▁ xxup provost . i told you : xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , belike thinking me remiss in mine 
▁ office , awakens me with this unwonted putting - on ; methinks 
▁ strangely , for he hath not us'd it before . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj pray you , let 's hear . 
▁ xxup provost . [ reads ] ' whatsoever you may hear to the contrary , let 
▁ xxmaj claudio be executed by four of the clock , and , in the afternoon , 
▁ xxmaj barnardine . xxmaj for my better satisfaction , let me have xxmaj claudio 's 
▁ head sent me by five . xxmaj let this be duly performed , with a thought 
▁ that more depends on it than we must yet deliver . xxmaj thus fail not 
▁ to do your office , as you will answer it at your peril . ' 
▁ xxmaj what say you to this , sir ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what is that xxmaj barnardine who is to be executed in th ' 
▁ afternoon ? 
▁ xxup provost . a xxmaj bohemian born ; but here nurs'd up and bred . 
▁ xxmaj one that is a prisoner nine years old . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how came it that the absent xxmaj duke had not either deliver'd him 
▁ to his liberty or executed him ? i have heard it was ever his 
▁ manner to do so . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj his friends still wrought reprieves for him ; and , indeed , 
▁ his fact , till now in the government of xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , came not to 
▁ an undoubted proof . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it is now apparent ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj most manifest , and not denied by himself . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj hath he borne himself penitently in prison ? xxmaj how seems he to 
▁ be touch'd ? 
▁ xxup provost . a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a 
▁ drunken sleep ; careless , reckless , and fearless , of what 's past , 
▁ present , or to come ; insensible of mortality and desperately 
▁ mortal . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj he wants advice . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj he will hear none . xxmaj he hath evermore had the liberty of the 
▁ prison ; give him leave to escape hence , he would not ; drunk many 
▁ times a day , if not many days entirely drunk . xxmaj we have very oft 
▁ awak'd him , as if to carry him to execution , and show'd him a 
▁ seeming warrant for it ; it hath not moved him at all . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj more of him anon . xxmaj there is written in your brow , xxmaj provost , 
▁ honesty and constancy . xxmaj if i read it not truly , my ancient skill 
▁ beguiles me ; but in the boldness of my cunning i will lay myself 
▁ in hazard . xxmaj claudio , whom here you have warrant to execute , is no 
▁ greater forfeit to the law than xxmaj angelo who hath sentenc'd him . xxmaj to 
▁ make you understand this in a manifested effect , i crave but four 
▁ days ' respite ; for the which you are to do me both a present and 
▁ a dangerous courtesy . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj pray , sir , in what ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj in the delaying death . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj alack ! xxmaj how may i do it , having the hour limited , and an 
▁ express command , under penalty , to deliver his head in the view 
▁ of xxmaj angelo ? i may make my case as xxmaj claudio 's , to cross this in the 
▁ smallest . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj by the vow of mine order , i warrant you , if my instructions 
▁ may be your guide . xxmaj let this xxmaj barnardine be this morning executed , 
▁ and his head borne to xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj angelo hath seen them both , and will discover the favour . 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , death 's a great disguiser ; and you may add to it . xxmaj shave 
▁ the head and tie the beard ; and say it was the desire of the 
▁ penitent to be so bar'd before his death . xxmaj you know the course is 
▁ common . xxmaj if anything fall to you upon this more than thanks and 
▁ good fortune , by the saint whom i profess , i will plead against 
▁ it with my life . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj pardon me , good father ; it is against my oath . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj were you sworn to the xxmaj duke , or to the deputy ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj to him and to his substitutes . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you will think you have made no offence if the xxmaj duke avouch 
▁ the justice of your dealing ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj but what likelihood is in that ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj not a resemblance , but a certainty . xxmaj yet since i see you 
▁ fearful , that neither my coat , integrity , nor persuasion , can 
▁ with ease attempt you , i will go further than i meant , to pluck 
▁ all fears out of you . xxmaj look you , sir , here is the hand and seal of 
▁ the xxmaj duke . xxmaj you know the character , i doubt not ; and the signet is 
▁ not strange to you . 
▁ xxup provost . i know them both . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the contents of this is the return of the xxmaj duke ; you shall 
▁ anon over - read it at your pleasure , where you shall find within 
▁ these two days he will be here . xxmaj this is a thing that xxmaj angelo knows 
▁ not ; for he this very day receives letters of strange tenour , 
▁ perchance of the xxmaj duke 's death , perchance entering into some 
▁ monastery ; but , by chance , nothing of what is writ . xxmaj look , th ' 
▁ unfolding star calls up the shepherd . xxmaj put not yourself into 
▁ amazement how these things should be : all difficulties are but 
▁ easy when they are known . xxmaj call your executioner , and off with 
▁ xxmaj barnardine 's head . i will give him a present shrift , and advise 
▁ him for a better place . xxmaj yet you are amaz'd , but this shall 
▁ absolutely resolve you . xxmaj come away ; it is almost clear dawn . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the prison 

 xxmaj enter xxup pompey 

▁ xxup pompey . i am as well acquainted here as i was in our house of 
▁ profession ; one would think it were xxmaj mistress xxmaj overdone 's own 
▁ house , for here be many of her old customers . xxmaj first , here 's young 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj rash ; he 's in for a commodity of brown paper and old 
▁ ginger , nine score and seventeen pounds , of which he made five 
▁ marks ready money . xxmaj marry , then ginger was not much in request , 
▁ for the old women were all dead . xxmaj then is there here one xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj caper , at the suit of xxmaj master xxmaj threepile the mercer , for some four 
▁ suits of peach - colour'd satin , which now peaches him a beggar . 
▁ xxmaj then have we here young xxmaj dizy , and young xxmaj master xxmaj deepvow , and 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj copperspur , and xxmaj master xxmaj starvelackey , the rapier and dagger 
▁ man , and young xxmaj dropheir that kill'd lusty xxmaj pudding , and xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj forthlight the tilter , and brave xxmaj master xxmaj shootie the great 
▁ traveller , and wild xxmaj halfcan that stabb'd xxmaj pots , and , i think , 
▁ forty more- all great doers in our trade , and are now ' for the 
▁ xxmaj lord 's sake . ' 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup abhorson 

▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj sirrah , bring xxmaj barnardine hither . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj master xxmaj barnardine ! xxmaj you must rise and be hang'd , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj barnardine ! 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj what ho , xxmaj barnardine ! 
▁ xxup barnardine . [ within ] a pox o ' your throats ! xxmaj who makes that noise 
▁ there ? xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj your friends , sir ; the hangman . xxmaj you must be so good , sir , 
▁ to rise and be put to death . 
▁ xxup barnardine . [ xxmaj within ] xxmaj away , you rogue , away ; i am sleepy . 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj tell him he must awake , and that quickly too . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj pray , xxmaj master xxmaj barnardine , awake till you are executed , and 
▁ sleep afterwards . 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj go in to him , and fetch him out . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj he is coming , sir , he is coming ; i hear his straw rustle . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup barnardine 

▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj is the axe upon the block , sirrah ? 
▁ xxup pompey . xxmaj very ready , sir . 
▁ xxup barnardine . xxmaj how now , xxmaj abhorson , what 's the news with you ? 
▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj truly , sir , i would desire you to clap into your prayers ; 
▁ for , look you , the warrant 's come . 
▁ xxup barnardine . xxmaj you rogue , i have been drinking all night ; i am not 
▁ fitted for't . 
▁ xxup pompey . xxup o , the better , sir ! xxmaj for he that drinks all night and is 
▁ hanged betimes in the morning may sleep the sounder all the next 
▁ day . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke , disguised as before 

▁ xxup abhorson . xxmaj look you , sir , here comes your ghostly father . 
▁ xxmaj do we jest now , think you ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir , induced by my charity , and hearing how hastily you are 
▁ to depart , i am come to advise you , comfort you , and pray with 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup barnardine . xxmaj friar , not xxup i ; i have been drinking hard all night , and 
▁ i will have more time to prepare me , or they shall beat out my 
▁ brains with billets . i will not consent to die this day , that 's 
▁ certain . 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , xxmaj sir , you must ; and therefore i beseech you 
▁ xxmaj look forward on the journey you shall go . 
▁ xxup barnardine . i swear i will not die to - day for any man 's persuasion . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj but hear you- 
▁ xxup barnardine . xxmaj not a word ; if you have anything to say to me , come to 
▁ my ward ; for thence will not i to - day . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj unfit to live or die . o gravel heart ! 
▁ xxmaj after him , fellows ; bring him to the block . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup abhorson and xxup pompey 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup provost 

▁ xxup provost . xxmaj now , sir , how do you find the prisoner ? 
▁ xxup duke . a creature unprepar'd , unmeet for death ; 
▁ xxmaj and to transport him in the mind he is 
▁ xxmaj were damnable . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj here in the prison , father , 
▁ xxmaj there died this morning of a cruel fever 
▁ xxmaj one xxmaj ragozine , a most notorious pirate , 
▁ a man of xxmaj claudio 's years ; his beard and head 
▁ xxmaj just of his colour . xxmaj what if we do omit 
▁ xxmaj this reprobate till he were well inclin'd , 
▁ xxmaj and satisfy the deputy with the visage 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj ragozine , more like to xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , ' tis an accident that heaven provides ! 
▁ xxmaj dispatch it presently ; the hour draws on 
▁ xxmaj prefix'd by xxmaj angelo . xxmaj see this be done , 
▁ xxmaj and sent according to command ; whiles i 
▁ xxmaj persuade this rude wretch willingly to die . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj this shall be done , good father , presently . 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj barnardine must die this afternoon ; 
▁ xxmaj and how shall we continue xxmaj claudio , 
▁ xxmaj to save me from the danger that might come 
▁ xxmaj if he were known alive ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj let this be done : 
▁ xxmaj put them in secret holds , both xxmaj barnardine and xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting 
▁ xxmaj to the under generation , you shall find 
▁ xxmaj your safety manifested . 
▁ xxup provost . i am your free dependant . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj quick , dispatch , and send the head to xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup provost 
▁ xxmaj now will i write letters to xxmaj angelo- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj provost , he shall bear them- whose contents 
▁ xxmaj shall witness to him i am near at home , 
▁ xxmaj and that , by great injunctions , i am bound 
▁ xxmaj to enter publicly . xxmaj him xxmaj i 'll desire 
▁ xxmaj to meet me at the consecrated fount , 
▁ a league below the city ; and from thence , 
▁ xxmaj by cold gradation and well - balanc'd form . 
▁ xxmaj we shall proceed with xxmaj angelo . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup provost 

▁ xxup provost . xxmaj here is the head ; xxmaj i 'll carry it myself . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj convenient is it . xxmaj make a swift return ; 
▁ xxmaj for i would commune with you of such things 
▁ xxmaj that want no ear but yours . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj i 'll make all speed . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup isabella . [ xxmaj within ] xxmaj peace , ho , be here ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the tongue of xxmaj isabel . xxmaj she 's come to know 
▁ xxmaj if yet her brother 's pardon be come hither ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will keep her ignorant of her good , 
▁ xxmaj to make her heavenly comforts of despair 
▁ xxmaj when it is least expected . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup isabella 

▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj ho , by your leave ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj good morning to you , fair and gracious daughter . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj the better , given me by so holy a man . 
▁ xxmaj hath yet the deputy sent my brother 's pardon ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj he hath releas'd him , xxmaj isabel , from the world . 
▁ xxmaj his head is off and sent to xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj nay , but it is not so . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it is no other . 
▁ xxmaj show your wisdom , daughter , in your close patience , 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , i will to him and pluck out his eyes ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you shall not be admitted to his sight . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj unhappy xxmaj claudio ! xxmaj wretched xxmaj isabel ! 
▁ xxmaj injurious world ! xxmaj most damned xxmaj angelo ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this nor hurts him nor profits you a jot ; 
▁ xxmaj forbear it , therefore ; give your cause to heaven . 
▁ xxmaj mark what i say , which you shall find 
▁ xxmaj by every syllable a faithful verity . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke comes home to - morrow . xxmaj nay , dry your eyes . 
▁ xxmaj one of our covent , and his confessor , 
▁ xxmaj gives me this instance . xxmaj already he hath carried 
▁ xxmaj notice to xxmaj escalus and xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj who do prepare to meet him at the gates , 
▁ xxmaj there to give up their pow'r . xxmaj if you can , pace your wisdom 
▁ xxmaj in that good path that i would wish it go , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall have your bosom on this wretch , 
▁ xxmaj grace of the xxmaj duke , revenges to your heart , 
▁ xxmaj and general honour . 
▁ xxup isabella . i am directed by you . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this letter , then , to xxmaj friar xxmaj peter give ; 
▁ ' tis that he sent me of the xxmaj duke 's return . 
▁ xxmaj say , by this token , i desire his company 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj mariana 's house to - night . xxmaj her cause and yours 
▁ xxmaj i 'll perfect him withal ; and he shall bring you 
▁ xxmaj before the xxmaj duke ; and to the head of xxmaj angelo 
▁ xxmaj accuse him home and home . xxmaj for my poor self , 
▁ i am combined by a sacred vow , 
▁ xxmaj and shall be absent . xxmaj wend you with this letter . 
▁ xxmaj command these fretting waters from your eyes 
▁ xxmaj with a light heart ; trust not my holy order , 
▁ xxmaj if i pervert your course . xxmaj who 's here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lucio 

▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj good even . xxmaj friar , where 's the xxmaj provost ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj not within , sir . 
▁ xxup lucio . o pretty xxmaj isabella , i am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes 
▁ so red . xxmaj thou must be patient . i am fain to dine and sup with 
▁ water and bran ; i dare not for my head fill my belly ; one 
▁ fruitful meal would set me to't . xxmaj but they say the xxmaj duke will be 
▁ here to - morrow . xxmaj by my troth , xxmaj isabel , i lov'd thy brother . xxmaj if the 
▁ old fantastical xxmaj duke of dark corners had been at home , he had 
▁ lived . xxmaj exit xxup isabella 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir , the xxmaj duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports ; 
▁ but the best is , he lives not in them . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj friar , thou knowest not the xxmaj duke so well as i do ; he 's a 
▁ better woodman than thou tak'st him for . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj well , you 'll answer this one day . xxmaj fare ye well . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj nay , tarry ; xxmaj i 'll go along with thee ; i can tell thee pretty 
▁ tales of the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you have told me too many of him already , sir , if they be 
▁ true ; if not true , none were enough . 
▁ xxup lucio . i was once before him for getting a wench with child . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj did you such a thing ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj yes , marry , did xxup i ; but i was fain to forswear it : they would 
▁ else have married me to the rotten medlar . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir , your company is fairer than honest . xxmaj rest you well . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj by my troth , xxmaj i 'll go with thee to the lane 's end . xxmaj if bawdy 
▁ talk offend you , we 'll have very little of it . xxmaj nay , friar , i am a 
▁ kind of burr ; i shall stick . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxup angelo 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup angelo and xxup escalus 

▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj every letter he hath writ hath disvouch'd other . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj in most uneven and distracted manner . xxmaj his actions show much 
▁ like to madness ; pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted ! xxmaj and why 
▁ meet him at the gates , and redeliver our authorities there ? 
▁ xxup escalus . i guess not . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj and why should we proclaim it in an hour before his 
▁ ent'ring that , if any crave redress of injustice , they should 
▁ exhibit their petitions in the street ? 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj he shows his reason for that : to have a dispatch of 
▁ complaints ; and to deliver us from devices hereafter , which 
▁ shall then have no power to stand against us . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj well , i beseech you , let it be proclaim'd ; 
▁ xxmaj betimes i ' th ' morn xxmaj i 'll call you at your house ; 
▁ xxmaj give notice to such men of sort and suit 
▁ xxmaj as are to meet him . 
▁ xxup escalus . i shall , sir ; fare you well . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj good night . xxmaj exit xxup escalus 
▁ xxmaj this deed unshapes me quite , makes me unpregnant 
▁ xxmaj and dull to all proceedings . a deflow'red maid ! 
▁ xxmaj and by an eminent body that enforc'd 
▁ xxmaj the law against it ! xxmaj but that her tender shame 
▁ xxmaj will not proclaim against her maiden loss , 
▁ xxmaj how might she tongue me ! xxmaj yet reason dares her no ; 
▁ xxmaj for my authority bears a so credent bulk 
▁ xxmaj that no particular scandal once can touch 
▁ xxmaj but it confounds the breather . xxmaj he should have liv'd , 
▁ xxmaj save that his riotous youth , with dangerous sense , 
▁ xxmaj might in the times to come have ta'en revenge , 
▁ xxmaj by so receiving a dishonour'd life 
▁ xxmaj with ransom of such shame . xxmaj would yet he had liv'd ! 
▁ xxmaj alack , when once our grace we have forgot , 
▁ xxmaj nothing goes right ; we would , and we would not . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj fields without the town