xxbos xxmaj enter xxup duke in his own habit , and xxmaj friar xxup peter 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj these letters at fit time deliver me . [ giving letters ] 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj provost knows our purpose and our plot . 
▁ xxmaj the matter being afoot , keep your instruction 
▁ xxmaj and hold you ever to our special drift ; 
▁ xxmaj though sometimes you do blench from this to that 
▁ xxmaj as cause doth minister . xxmaj go , call at xxmaj flavius ' house , 
▁ xxmaj and tell him where i stay ; give the like notice 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj valentinus , xxmaj rowland , and to xxmaj crassus , 
▁ xxmaj and bid them bring the trumpets to the gate ; 
▁ xxmaj but send me xxmaj flavius first . 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj it shall be speeded well . xxmaj exit xxup friar 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup varrius 

▁ xxup duke . i thank thee , xxmaj varrius ; thou hast made good haste . 
▁ xxmaj come , we will walk . xxmaj there 's other of our friends 
▁ xxmaj will greet us here anon . xxmaj my gentle xxmaj varrius ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 a street near the city gate 

 xxmaj enter xxup isabella and xxup mariana 

▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj to speak so indirectly i am loath ; 
▁ i would say the truth ; but to accuse him so , 
▁ xxmaj that is your part . xxmaj yet i am advis'd to do it ; 
▁ xxmaj he says , to veil full purpose . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj be rul'd by him . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj besides , he tells me that , if peradventure 
▁ xxmaj he speak against me on the adverse side , 
▁ i should not think it strange ; for ' tis a physic 
▁ xxmaj that 's bitter to sweet end . 
▁ xxup mariana . i would xxmaj friar xxmaj peter- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup friar xxup peter 

▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , peace ! the friar is come . 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj come , i have found you out a stand most fit , 
▁ xxmaj where you may have such vantage on the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj he shall not pass you . xxmaj twice have the trumpets sounded ; 
▁ xxmaj the generous and gravest citizens 
▁ xxmaj have hent the gates , and very near upon 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke is ent'ring ; therefore , hence , away . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the city gate 

 xxmaj enter at several doors xxup duke , xxup varrius , xxup lords ; xxup angelo , xxup escalus , xxmaj lucio , 
 xxup provost , xxup officers , and xxup citizens 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj my very worthy cousin , fairly met ! 
▁ xxmaj our old and faithful friend , we are glad to see you . 
▁ xxup angelo , xxup escalus . xxmaj happy return be to your royal xxmaj grace ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj many and hearty thankings to you both . 
▁ xxmaj we have made inquiry of you , and we hear 
▁ xxmaj such goodness of your justice that our soul 
▁ xxmaj can not but yield you forth to public thanks , 
▁ xxmaj forerunning more requital . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj you make my bonds still greater . 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , your desert speaks loud ; and i should wrong it 
▁ xxmaj to lock it in the wards of covert bosom , 
▁ xxmaj when it deserves , with characters of brass , 
▁ a forted residence ' gainst the tooth of time 
▁ xxmaj and razure of oblivion . xxmaj give me your hand . 
▁ xxmaj and let the subject see , to make them know 
▁ xxmaj that outward courtesies would fain proclaim 
▁ xxmaj favours that keep within . xxmaj come , xxmaj escalus , 
▁ xxmaj you must walk by us on our other hand , 
▁ xxmaj and good supporters are you . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup friar xxup peter and xxup isabella 

▁ xxup peter . xxmaj now is your time ; speak loud , and kneel before him . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj justice , o royal xxmaj duke ! xxmaj vail your regard 
▁ xxmaj upon a wrong'd- i would fain have said a maid ! 
▁ o worthy xxmaj prince , dishonour not your eye 
▁ xxmaj by throwing it on any other object 
▁ xxmaj till you have heard me in my true complaint , 
▁ xxmaj and given me justice , justice , justice , justice . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj relate your wrongs . xxmaj in what ? xxmaj by whom ? xxmaj be brief . 
▁ xxmaj here is xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo shall give you justice ; 
▁ xxmaj reveal yourself to him . 
▁ xxup isabella . o worthy xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj you bid me seek redemption of the devil ! 
▁ xxmaj hear me yourself ; for that which i must speak 
▁ xxmaj must either punish me , not being believ'd , 
▁ xxmaj or wring redress from you . xxmaj hear me , xxup o , hear me , here ! 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj my lord , her wits , i fear me , are not firm ; 
▁ xxmaj she hath been a suitor to me for her brother , 
▁ xxmaj cut off by course of justice- 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj by course of justice ! 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj and she will speak most bitterly and strange . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj most strange , but yet most truly , will i speak . 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj angelo 's forsworn , is it not strange ? 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj angelo 's a murderer , is't not strange ? 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj angelo is an adulterous thief , 
▁ xxmaj an hypocrite , a virgin - violator , 
▁ xxmaj is it not strange and strange ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj nay , it is ten times strange . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj it is not truer he is xxmaj angelo 
▁ xxmaj than this is all as true as it is strange ; 
▁ xxmaj nay , it is ten times true ; for truth is truth 
▁ xxmaj to th ' end of reck'ning . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj away with her . xxmaj poor soul , 
▁ xxmaj she speaks this in th ' infirmity of sense . 
▁ xxup isabella . o xxmaj prince ! i conjure thee , as thou believ'st 
▁ xxmaj there is another comfort than this world , 
▁ xxmaj that thou neglect me not with that opinion 
▁ xxmaj that i am touch'd with madness . xxmaj make not impossible 
▁ xxmaj that which but seems unlike : ' tis not impossible 
▁ xxmaj but one , the wicked'st caitiff on the ground , 
▁ xxmaj may seem as shy , as grave , as just , as absolute , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj angelo ; even so may xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj in all his dressings , characts , titles , forms , 
▁ xxmaj be an arch - villain . xxmaj believe it , royal xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj if he be less , he 's nothing ; but he 's more , 
▁ xxmaj had i more name for badness . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj by mine honesty , 
▁ xxmaj if she be mad , as i believe no other , 
▁ xxmaj her madness hath the oddest frame of sense , 
▁ xxmaj such a dependency of thing on thing , 
▁ xxmaj as e'er i heard in madness . 
▁ xxup isabella . o gracious xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj harp not on that ; nor do not banish reason 
▁ xxmaj for inequality ; but let your reason serve 
▁ xxmaj to make the truth appear where it seems hid , 
▁ xxmaj and hide the false seems true . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj many that are not mad 
▁ xxmaj have , sure , more lack of reason . xxmaj what would you say ? 
▁ xxup isabella . i am the sister of one xxmaj claudio , 
▁ xxmaj condemn'd upon the act of fornication 
▁ xxmaj to lose his head ; condemn'd by xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup i , in probation of a sisterhood , 
▁ xxmaj was sent to by my brother ; one xxmaj lucio 
▁ xxmaj as then the messenger- 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj that 's xxup i , an't like your xxmaj grace . 
▁ i came to her from xxmaj claudio , and desir'd her 
▁ xxmaj to try her gracious fortune with xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo 
▁ xxmaj for her poor brother 's pardon . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj that 's he , indeed . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you were not bid to speak . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj no , my good lord ; 
▁ xxmaj nor wish'd to hold my peace . 
▁ xxup duke . i wish you now , then ; 
▁ xxmaj pray you take note of it ; and when you have 
▁ a business for yourself , pray heaven you then 
▁ xxmaj be perfect . 
▁ xxup lucio . i warrant your honour . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the warrant 's for yourself ; take heed to't . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj this gentleman told somewhat of my tale . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj right . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it may be right ; but you are i ' the wrong 
▁ xxmaj to speak before your time . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup isabella . i went 
▁ xxmaj to this pernicious caitiff deputy . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj that 's somewhat madly spoken . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj pardon it ; 
▁ xxmaj the phrase is to the matter . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj mended again . xxmaj the matter- proceed . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj in brief- to set the needless process by , 
▁ xxmaj how i persuaded , how i pray'd , and kneel'd , 
▁ xxmaj how he refell'd me , and how i replied , 
▁ xxmaj for this was of much length- the vile conclusion 
▁ i now begin with grief and shame to utter : 
▁ xxmaj he would not , but by gift of my chaste body 
▁ xxmaj to his concupiscible intemperate lust , 
▁ xxmaj release my brother ; and , after much debatement , 
▁ xxmaj my sisterly remorse confutes mine honour , 
▁ xxmaj and i did yield to him . xxmaj but the next morn betimes , 
▁ xxmaj his purpose surfeiting , he sends a warrant 
▁ xxmaj for my poor brother 's head . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this is most likely ! 
▁ xxup isabella . o that it were as like as it is true ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj by heaven , fond wretch , thou know'st not what thou speak'st , 
▁ xxmaj or else thou art suborn'd against his honour 
▁ xxmaj in hateful practice . xxmaj first , his integrity 
▁ xxmaj stands without blemish ; next , it imports no reason 
▁ xxmaj that with such vehemency he should pursue 
▁ xxmaj faults proper to himself . xxmaj if he had so offended , 
▁ xxmaj he would have weigh'd thy brother by himself , 
▁ xxmaj and not have cut him off . xxmaj some one hath set you on ; 
▁ xxmaj confess the truth , and say by whose advice 
▁ xxmaj thou cam'st here to complain . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj and is this all ? 
▁ xxmaj then , o you blessed ministers above , 
▁ xxmaj keep me in patience ; and , with ripened time , 
▁ xxmaj unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
▁ xxmaj in countenance ! xxmaj heaven shield your xxmaj grace from woe , 
▁ xxmaj as xxup i , thus wrong'd , hence unbelieved go ! 
▁ xxup duke . i know you 'd fain be gone . xxmaj an officer ! 
▁ xxmaj to prison with her ! xxmaj shall we thus permit 
▁ a blasting and a scandalous breath to fall 
▁ xxmaj on him so near us ? xxmaj this needs must be a practice . 
▁ xxmaj who knew of your intent and coming hither ? 
▁ xxup isabella . xxmaj one that i would were here , xxmaj friar xxmaj lodowick . 
▁ xxup duke . a ghostly father , belike . xxmaj who knows that xxmaj lodowick ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj my lord , i know him ; ' tis a meddling friar . 
▁ i do not like the man ; had he been lay , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj for certain words he spake against your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj in your retirement , i had swing'd him soundly . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj words against me ? xxmaj this 's a good friar , belike ! 
▁ xxmaj and to set on this wretched woman here 
▁ xxmaj against our substitute ! xxmaj let this friar be found . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj but yesternight , my lord , she and that friar , 
▁ i saw them at the prison ; a saucy friar , 
▁ a very scurvy fellow . 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj blessed be your royal xxmaj grace ! 
▁ i have stood by , my lord , and i have heard 
▁ xxmaj your royal ear abus'd . xxmaj first , hath this woman 
▁ xxmaj most wrongfully accus'd your substitute ; 
▁ xxmaj who is as free from touch or soil with her 
▁ xxmaj as she from one ungot . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj we did believe no less . 
▁ xxmaj know you that xxmaj friar xxmaj lodowick that she speaks of ? 
▁ xxup peter . i know him for a man divine and holy ; 
▁ xxmaj not scurvy , nor a temporary meddler , 
▁ xxmaj as he 's reported by this gentleman ; 
▁ xxmaj and , on my trust , a man that never yet 
▁ xxmaj did , as he vouches , misreport your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj my lord , most villainously ; believe it . 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj well , he in time may come to clear himself ; 
▁ xxmaj but at this instant he is sick , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj of a strange fever . xxmaj upon his mere request- 
▁ xxmaj being come to knowledge that there was complaint 
▁ xxmaj intended ' gainst xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo- came i hither 
▁ xxmaj to speak , as from his mouth , what he doth know 
▁ xxmaj is true and false ; and what he , with his oath 
▁ xxmaj and all probation , will make up full clear , 
▁ xxmaj whensoever he 's convented . xxmaj first , for this woman- 
▁ xxmaj to justify this worthy nobleman , 
▁ xxmaj so vulgarly and personally accus'd- 
▁ xxmaj her shall you hear disproved to her eyes , 
▁ xxmaj till she herself confess it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj good friar , let 's hear it . xxmaj exit xxup isabella guarded 
▁ xxmaj do you not smile at this , xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo ? 
▁ o heaven , the vanity of wretched fools ! 
▁ xxmaj give us some seats . xxmaj come , cousin xxmaj angelo ; 
▁ xxmaj in this xxmaj i 'll be impartial ; be you judge 
▁ xxmaj of your own cause . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mariana veiled 

▁ xxmaj is this the witness , friar ? 
▁ xxup first let her show her face , and after speak . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj pardon , my lord ; i will not show my face 
▁ xxmaj until my husband bid me . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what , are you married ? 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj are you a maid ? 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj no , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . a widow , then ? 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj neither , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why , you are nothing then ; neither maid , widow , nor wife . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj my lord , she may be a punk ; for many of them are neither 
▁ maid , widow , nor wife . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj silence that fellow . i would he had some cause 
▁ xxmaj to prattle for himself . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj well , my lord . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj my lord , i do confess i ne'er was married , 
▁ xxmaj and i confess , besides , i am no maid . 
▁ i have known my husband ; yet my husband 
▁ xxmaj knows not that ever he knew me . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj he was drunk , then , my lord ; it can be no better . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj for the benefit of silence , would thou wert so too ! 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj well , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this is no witness for xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj now i come to't , my lord : 
▁ xxmaj she that accuses him of fornication , 
▁ xxmaj in self - same manner doth accuse my husband ; 
▁ xxmaj and charges him , my lord , with such a time 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj i 'll depose i had him in mine arms , 
▁ xxmaj with all th ' effect of love . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj charges she moe than me ? 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj not that i know . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj no ? xxmaj you say your husband . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj why , just , my lord , and that is xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj who thinks he knows that he ne'er knew my body , 
▁ xxmaj but knows he thinks that he knows xxmaj isabel 's . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj this is a strange abuse . xxmaj let 's see thy face . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj my husband bids me ; now i will unmask . 
▁ [ unveiling ] 
▁ xxmaj this is that face , thou cruel xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj which once thou swor'st was worth the looking on ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the hand which , with a vow'd contract , 
▁ xxmaj was fast belock'd in thine ; this is the body 
▁ xxmaj that took away the match from xxmaj isabel , 
▁ xxmaj and did supply thee at thy garden - house 
▁ xxmaj in her imagin'd person . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj know you this woman ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj carnally , she says . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sirrah , no more . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj enough , my lord . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj my lord , i must confess i know this woman ; 
▁ xxmaj and five years since there was some speech of marriage 
▁ xxmaj betwixt myself and her ; which was broke off , 
▁ xxmaj partly for that her promised proportions 
▁ xxmaj came short of composition ; but in chief 
▁ xxmaj for that her reputation was disvalued 
▁ xxmaj in levity . xxmaj since which time of five years 
▁ i never spake with her , saw her , nor heard from her , 
▁ xxmaj upon my faith and honour . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj noble xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj as there comes light from heaven and words from breath , 
▁ xxmaj as there is sense in truth and truth in virtue , 
▁ i am affianc'd this man 's wife as strongly 
▁ xxmaj as words could make up vows . xxmaj and , my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj tuesday night last gone , in 's garden - house , 
▁ xxmaj he knew me as a wife . xxmaj as this is true , 
▁ xxmaj let me in safety raise me from my knees , 
▁ xxmaj or else for ever be confixed here , 
▁ a marble monument ! 
▁ xxup angelo . i did but smile till now . 
▁ xxmaj now , good my lord , give me the scope of justice ; 
▁ xxmaj my patience here is touch'd . i do perceive 
▁ xxmaj these poor informal women are no more 
▁ xxmaj but instruments of some more mightier member 
▁ xxmaj that sets them on . xxmaj let me have way , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj to find this practice out . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay , with my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and punish them to your height of pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj thou foolish friar , and thou pernicious woman , 
▁ xxmaj compact with her that 's gone , think'st thou thy oaths , 
▁ xxmaj though they would swear down each particular saint , 
▁ xxmaj were testimonies against his worth and credit , 
▁ xxmaj that 's seal'd in approbation ? xxmaj you , xxmaj lord xxmaj escalus , 
▁ xxmaj sit with my cousin ; lend him your kind pains 
▁ xxmaj to find out this abuse , whence ' tis deriv'd . 
▁ xxmaj there is another friar that set them on ; 
▁ xxmaj let him be sent for . 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj would lie were here , my lord ! xxmaj for he indeed 
▁ xxmaj hath set the women on to this complaint . 
▁ xxmaj your provost knows the place where he abides , 
▁ xxmaj and he may fetch him . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj go , do it instantly . xxmaj exit xxup provost 
▁ xxmaj and you , my noble and well - warranted cousin , 
▁ xxmaj whom it concerns to hear this matter forth , 
▁ xxmaj do with your injuries as seems you best 
▁ xxmaj in any chastisement . i for a while will leave you ; 
▁ xxmaj but stir not you till you have well determin'd 
▁ xxmaj upon these slanderers . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj my lord , we 'll do it throughly . xxmaj exit xxup duke 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj lucio , did not you say you knew that xxmaj friar xxmaj lodowick to be 
▁ a dishonest person ? 
▁ xxup lucio . ' cucullus non facit monachum ' : honest in nothing but in his 
▁ clothes ; and one that hath spoke most villainous speeches of the 
▁ xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and 
▁ enforce them against him . xxmaj we shall find this friar a notable 
▁ fellow . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj as any in xxmaj vienna , on my word . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj call that same xxmaj isabel here once again ; i would speak with 
▁ her . [ exit an xxup attendant ] xxmaj pray you , my lord , give me leave to 
▁ question ; you shall see how xxmaj i 'll handle her . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj not better than he , by her own report . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj say you ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj marry , sir , i think , if you handled her privately , she would 
▁ sooner confess ; perchance , publicly , she 'll be asham'd . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup officers with xxup isabella ; and xxup provost with the 
▁ xxup duke in his friar 's habit 

▁ xxup escalus . i will go darkly to work with her . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj that 's the way ; for women are light at midnight . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj come on , mistress ; here 's a gentlewoman denies all that 
▁ you have said . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj my lord , here comes the rascal i spoke of , here with the 
▁ xxmaj provost . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj in very good time . xxmaj speak not you to him till we call upon 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj mum . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj come , sir ; did you set these women on to slander xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj angelo ? xxmaj they have confess'd you did . 
▁ xxup duke . ' tis false . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj how ! xxmaj know you where you are ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj respect to your great place ! and let the devil 
▁ xxmaj be sometime honour'd for his burning throne ! 
▁ xxmaj where is the xxmaj duke ? ' tis he should hear me speak . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj the xxmaj duke 's in us ; and we will hear you speak ; 
▁ xxmaj look you speak justly . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj boldly , at least . xxmaj but , xxup o , poor souls , 
▁ xxmaj come you to seek the lamb here of the fox , 
▁ xxmaj good night to your redress ! xxmaj is the xxmaj duke gone ? 
▁ xxmaj then is your cause gone too . xxmaj the xxmaj duke 's unjust 
▁ xxmaj thus to retort your manifest appeal , 
▁ xxmaj and put your trial in the villain 's mouth 
▁ xxmaj which here you come to accuse . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj this is the rascal ; this is he i spoke of . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj why , thou unreverend and unhallowed friar , 
▁ xxmaj is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women 
▁ xxmaj to accuse this worthy man , but , in foul mouth , 
▁ xxmaj and in the witness of his proper ear , 
▁ xxmaj to call him villain ; and then to glance from him 
▁ xxmaj to th ' xxmaj duke himself , to tax him with injustice ? 
▁ xxmaj take him hence ; to th ' rack with him ! xxmaj we 'll touze you 
▁ xxmaj joint by joint , but we will know his purpose . 
▁ xxmaj what , ' unjust ' ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be not so hot ; the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he 
▁ xxmaj dare rack his own ; his subject am i not , 
▁ xxmaj nor here provincial . xxmaj my business in this state 
▁ xxmaj made me a looker - on here in xxmaj vienna , 
▁ xxmaj where i have seen corruption boil and bubble 
▁ xxmaj till it o'errun the stew : laws for all faults , 
▁ xxmaj but faults so countenanc'd that the strong statutes 
▁ xxmaj stand like the forfeits in a barber 's shop , 
▁ xxmaj as much in mock as mark . 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj slander to th ' state ! xxmaj away with him to prison ! 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj what can you vouch against him , xxmaj signior xxmaj lucio ? 
▁ xxmaj is this the man that you did tell us of ? 
▁ xxup lucio . ' tis he , my lord . xxmaj come hither , good - man bald - pate . 
▁ xxmaj do you know me ? 
▁ xxup duke . i remember you , sir , by the sound of your voice . i met you at 
▁ the prison , in the absence of the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup lucio . o did you so ? xxmaj and do you remember what you said of the xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj most notedly , sir . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj do you so , sir ? xxmaj and was the xxmaj duke a fleshmonger , a fool , and 
▁ a coward , as you then reported him to be ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you must , sir , change persons with me ere you make that my 
▁ report ; you , indeed , spoke so of him ; and much more , much worse . 
▁ xxup lucio . o thou damnable fellow ! xxmaj did not i pluck thee by the nose for 
▁ thy speeches ? 
▁ xxup duke . i protest i love the xxmaj duke as i love myself . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj hark how the villain would close now , after his treasonable 
▁ abuses ! 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj such a fellow is not to be talk'd withal . xxmaj away with him to 
▁ prison ! xxmaj where is the xxmaj provost ? xxmaj away with him to prison ! xxmaj lay bolts 
▁ enough upon him ; let him speak no more . xxmaj away with those giglets 
▁ too , and with the other confederate companion ! 
▁ [ the xxup provost lays bands on the xxup duke ] 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj stay , sir ; stay awhile . 
▁ xxup angelo . xxmaj what , resists he ? xxmaj help him , xxmaj lucio . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj come , sir ; come , sir ; come , sir ; foh , sir ! xxmaj why , you 
▁ bald - pated lying rascal , you must be hooded , must you ? xxmaj show your 
▁ knave 's visage , with a pox to you ! xxmaj show your sheep - biting face , 
▁ and be hang'd an hour ! xxmaj will't not off ? 
▁ [ pulls off the xxup friar 's bood and discovers the xxup duke ] 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj thou art the first knave that e'er mad'st a duke . 
▁ xxmaj first , xxmaj provost , let me bail these gentle three . 
▁ [ to xxmaj lucio ] xxmaj sneak not away , sir , for the friar and you 
▁ xxmaj must have a word anon . xxmaj lay hold on him . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj this may prove worse than hanging . 
▁ xxup duke . [ to xxup escalus ] xxmaj what you have spoke i pardon ; sit you down . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll borrow place of him . [ to xxup angelo ] xxmaj sir , by your leave . 
▁ xxmaj hast thou or word , or wit , or impudence , 
▁ xxmaj that yet can do thee office ? xxmaj if thou hast , 
▁ xxmaj rely upon it till my tale be heard , 
▁ xxmaj and hold no longer out . 
▁ xxup angelo . o my dread lord , 
▁ i should be guiltier than my guiltiness , 
▁ xxmaj to think i can be undiscernible , 
▁ xxmaj when i perceive your xxmaj grace , like pow'r divine , 
▁ xxmaj hath look'd upon my passes . xxmaj then , good xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj no longer session hold upon my shame , 
▁ xxmaj but let my trial be mine own confession ; 
▁ xxmaj immediate sentence then , and sequent death , 
▁ xxmaj is all the grace i beg . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj mariana . 
▁ xxmaj say , wast thou e'er contracted to this woman ? 
▁ xxup angelo . i was , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj go , take her hence and marry her instantly . 
▁ xxmaj do you the office , friar ; which consummate , 
▁ xxmaj return him here again . xxmaj go with him , xxmaj provost . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup angelo , xxup mariana , xxup friar xxup peter , and xxup provost 
▁ xxup escalus . xxmaj my lord , i am more amaz'd at his dishonour 
▁ xxmaj than at the strangeness of it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj isabel . 
▁ xxmaj your friar is now your prince . xxmaj as i was then 
▁ xxmaj advertising and holy to your business , 
▁ xxmaj not changing heart with habit , i am still 
▁ xxmaj attorney'd at your service . 
▁ xxup isabella . xxup o , give me pardon , 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , your vassal have employ'd and pain'd 
▁ xxmaj your unknown sovereignty . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you are pardon'd , xxmaj isabel . 
▁ xxmaj and now , dear maid , be you as free to us . 
▁ xxmaj your brother 's death , i know , sits at your heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and you may marvel why i obscur'd myself , 
▁ xxmaj labouring to save his life , and would not rather 
▁ xxmaj make rash remonstrance of my hidden pow'r 
▁ xxmaj than let him so be lost . o most kind maid , 
▁ xxmaj it was the swift celerity of his death , 
▁ xxmaj which i did think with slower foot came on , 
▁ xxmaj that brain'd my purpose . xxmaj but peace be with him ! 
▁ xxmaj that life is better life , past fearing death , 
▁ xxmaj than that which lives to fear . xxmaj make it your comfort , 
▁ xxmaj so happy is your brother . 
▁ xxup isabella . i do , my lord . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup angelo , xxup mariana , xxup friar xxup peter , and xxup provost 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj for this new - married man approaching here , 
▁ xxmaj whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd 
▁ xxmaj your well - defended honour , you must pardon 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj mariana 's sake ; but as he adjudg'd your brother- 
▁ xxmaj being criminal in double violation 
▁ xxmaj of sacred chastity and of promise - breach , 
▁ xxmaj thereon dependent , for your brother 's life- 
▁ xxmaj the very mercy of the law cries out 
▁ xxmaj most audible , even from his proper tongue , 
▁ ' an xxmaj angelo for xxmaj claudio , death for death ! ' 
▁ xxmaj haste still pays haste , and leisure answers leisure ; 
▁ xxmaj like doth quit like , and xxmaj measure still for xxmaj measure . 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj angelo , thy fault 's thus manifested , 
▁ xxmaj which , though thou wouldst deny , denies thee vantage . 
▁ xxmaj we do condemn thee to the very block 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj claudio stoop'd to death , and with like haste . 
▁ xxmaj away with him ! 
▁ xxup mariana . o my most gracious lord , 
▁ i hope you will not mock me with a husband . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj it is your husband mock'd you with a husband . 
▁ xxmaj consenting to the safeguard of your honour , 
▁ i thought your marriage fit ; else imputation , 
▁ xxmaj for that he knew you , might reproach your life , 
▁ xxmaj and choke your good to come . xxmaj for his possessions , 
▁ xxmaj although by confiscation they are ours , 
▁ xxmaj we do instate and widow you withal 
▁ xxmaj to buy you a better husband . 
▁ xxup mariana . o my dear lord , 
▁ i crave no other , nor no better man . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj never crave him ; we are definitive . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj gentle my liege- [ kneeling ] 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you do but lose your labour . 
▁ xxmaj away with him to death ! [ to xxup lucio ] xxmaj now , sir , to you . 
▁ xxup mariana . o my good lord ! xxmaj sweet xxmaj isabel , take my part ; 
▁ xxmaj lend me your knees , and all my life to come 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lend you all my life to do you service . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj against all sense you do importune her . 
▁ xxmaj should she kneel down in mercy of this fact , 
▁ xxmaj her brother 's ghost his paved bed would break , 
▁ xxmaj and take her hence in horror . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj isabel , 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj isabel , do yet but kneel by me ; 
▁ xxmaj hold up your hands , say nothing ; xxmaj i 'll speak all . 
▁ xxmaj they say best men moulded out of faults ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for the most , become much more the better 
▁ xxmaj for being a little bad ; so may my husband . 
▁ o xxmaj isabel , will you not lend a knee ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj he dies for xxmaj claudio 's death . 
▁ xxup isabella . [ kneeling ] xxmaj most bounteous sir , 
▁ xxmaj look , if it please you , on this man condemn'd , 
▁ xxmaj as if my brother liv'd . i partly think 
▁ a due sincerity govern'd his deeds 
▁ xxmaj till he did look on me ; since it is so , 
▁ xxmaj let him not die . xxmaj my brother had but justice , 
▁ xxmaj in that he did the thing for which he died ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj angelo , 
▁ xxmaj his act did not o'ertake his bad intent , 
▁ xxmaj and must be buried but as an intent 
▁ xxmaj that perish'd by the way . xxmaj thoughts are no subjects ; 
▁ xxmaj intents but merely thoughts . 
▁ xxup mariana . xxmaj merely , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj your suit 's unprofitable ; stand up , i say . 
▁ i have bethought me of another fault . 
▁ xxmaj provost , how came it xxmaj claudio was beheaded 
▁ xxmaj at an unusual hour ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj it was commanded so . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj had you a special warrant for the deed ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj no , my good lord ; it was by private message . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj for which i do discharge you of your office ; 
▁ xxmaj give up your keys . 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj pardon me , noble lord ; 
▁ i thought it was a fault , but knew it not ; 
▁ xxmaj yet did repent me , after more advice ; 
▁ xxmaj for testimony whereof , one in the prison , 
▁ xxmaj that should by private order else have died , 
▁ i have reserv'd alive . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what 's he ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj his name is xxmaj barnardine . 
▁ xxup duke . i would thou hadst done so by xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj go fetch him hither ; let me look upon him . xxmaj exit xxup provost 
▁ xxup escalus . i am sorry one so learned and so wise 
▁ xxmaj as you , xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo , have still appear'd , 
▁ xxmaj should slip so grossly , both in the heat of blood 
▁ xxmaj and lack of temper'd judgment afterward . 
▁ xxup angelo . i am sorry that such sorrow i procure ; 
▁ xxmaj and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart 
▁ xxmaj that i crave death more willingly than mercy ; 
▁ ' tis my deserving , and i do entreat it . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup provost , with xxup barnardine , xxup claudio ( muffled ) 
▁ and xxup juliet 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj which is that xxmaj barnardine ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj this , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there was a friar told me of this man . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , thou art said to have a stubborn soul , 
▁ xxmaj that apprehends no further than this world , 
▁ xxmaj and squar'st thy life according . xxmaj thou'rt condemn'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but , for those earthly faults , i quit them all , 
▁ xxmaj and pray thee take this mercy to provide 
▁ xxmaj for better times to come . xxmaj friar , advise him ; 
▁ i leave him to your hand . xxmaj what muffl'd fellow 's that ? 
▁ xxup provost . xxmaj this is another prisoner that i sav'd , 
▁ xxmaj who should have died when xxmaj claudio lost his head ; 
▁ xxmaj as like almost to xxmaj claudio as himself . [ unmuffles xxup claudio ] 
▁ xxup duke . [ to xxup isabella ] xxmaj if he be like your brother , for his sake 
▁ xxmaj is he pardon'd ; and for your lovely sake , 
▁ xxmaj give me your hand and say you will be mine , 
▁ xxmaj he is my brother too . xxmaj but fitter time for that . 
▁ xxmaj by this xxmaj lord xxmaj angelo perceives he 's safe ; 
▁ xxmaj methinks i see a quick'ning in his eye . 
▁ xxmaj well , xxmaj angelo , your evil quits you well . 
▁ xxmaj look that you love your wife ; her worth worth yours . 
▁ i find an apt remission in myself ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet here 's one in place i can not pardon . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj lucio ] xxmaj you , sirrah , that knew me for a fool , a coward , 
▁ xxmaj one all of luxury , an ass , a madman ! 
▁ xxmaj wherein have i so deserv'd of you 
▁ xxmaj that you extol me thus ? 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj faith , my lord , i spoke it but according to the trick . 
▁ xxmaj if you will hang me for it , you may ; but i had rather it would 
▁ please you i might be whipt . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj whipt first , sir , and hang'd after . 
▁ xxmaj proclaim it , xxmaj provost , round about the city , 
▁ xxmaj if any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow- 
▁ xxmaj as i have heard him swear himself there 's one 
▁ xxmaj whom he begot with child , let her appear , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall marry her . xxmaj the nuptial finish'd , 
▁ xxmaj let him be whipt and hang'd . 
▁ xxup lucio . i beseech your xxmaj highness , do not marry me to a whore . xxmaj your 
▁ xxmaj highness said even now i made you a duke ; good my lord , do not 
▁ recompense me in making me a cuckold . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj upon mine honour , thou shalt marry her . 
▁ xxmaj thy slanders i forgive ; and therewithal 
▁ xxmaj remit thy other forfeits . xxmaj take him to prison ; 
▁ xxmaj and see our pleasure herein executed . 
▁ xxup lucio . xxmaj marrying a punk , my lord , is pressing to death , whipping , 
▁ and hanging . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj slandering a prince deserves it . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup officers with xxup lucio 
▁ xxmaj she , xxmaj claudio , that you wrong'd , look you restore . 
▁ xxmaj joy to you , xxmaj mariana ! xxmaj love her , xxmaj angelo ; 
▁ i have confess'd her , and i know her virtue . 
▁ xxmaj thanks , good friend xxmaj escalus , for thy much goodness ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's more behind that is more gratulate . 
▁ xxmaj thanks , xxmaj provost , for thy care and secrecy ; 
▁ xxmaj we shall employ thee in a worthier place . 
▁ xxmaj forgive him , xxmaj angelo , that brought you home 
▁ xxmaj the head of xxmaj ragozine for xxmaj claudio 's : 
▁ xxmaj th ' offence pardons itself . xxmaj dear xxmaj isabel , 
▁ i have a motion much imports your good ; 
▁ xxmaj whereto if you 'll a willing ear incline , 
▁ xxmaj what 's mine is yours , and what is yours is mine . 
▁ xxmaj so , bring us to our palace , where we 'll show 
▁ xxmaj what 's yet behind that 's meet you all should know . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1597 

 xxup the xxup merchant xxup of xxup venice 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup the xxup duke xxup of xxup venice 
▁ xxup the xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco , suitor to xxmaj portia 
▁ xxup the xxup prince xxup of xxup arragon , " " " 
▁ xxup antonio , a merchant of xxmaj venice 
▁ xxup bassanio , his friend , suitor to xxmaj portia 
▁ xxup solanio , friend to xxmaj antonio and xxmaj bassanio 
▁ xxup salerio , " " " " " 
▁ xxup gratiano , " " " " " 
▁ xxup lorenzo , in love with xxmaj jessica 
▁ xxup shylock , a rich xxmaj jew 
▁ xxup tubal , a xxmaj jew , his friend 
▁ xxup launcelot xxup gobbo , a clown , servant to xxmaj shylock 
▁ xxup old xxup gobbo , father to xxmaj launcelot 
▁ xxup leonardo , servant to xxmaj bassanio 
▁ xxup balthasar , servant to xxmaj portia 
▁ xxup stephano , " " " 

▁ xxup portia , a rich heiress 
▁ xxup nerissa , her waiting - maid 
▁ xxup jessica , daughter to xxmaj shylock 

▁ xxmaj magnificoes of xxmaj venice , xxmaj officers of the xxmaj court of xxmaj justice , 
▁ xxmaj gaoler , xxmaj servants , and other xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj venice , and xxup portia 's house at xxmaj belmont 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup antonio , xxup salerio , and xxup solanio 

▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj in sooth , i know not why i am so sad . 
▁ xxmaj it wearies me ; you say it wearies you ; 
▁ xxmaj but how i caught it , found it , or came by it , 
▁ xxmaj what stuff ' tis made of , whereof it is born , 
▁ i am to learn ; 
▁ xxmaj and such a want - wit sadness makes of me 
▁ xxmaj that i have much ado to know myself . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj your mind is tossing on the ocean ; 
▁ xxmaj there where your argosies , with portly sail- 
▁ xxmaj like signiors and rich burghers on the flood , 
▁ xxmaj or as it were the pageants of the sea- 
▁ xxmaj do overpeer the petty traffickers , 
▁ xxmaj that curtsy to them , do them reverence , 
▁ xxmaj as they fly by them with their woven wings . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj believe me , sir , had i such venture forth , 
▁ xxmaj the better part of my affections would 
▁ xxmaj be with my hopes abroad . i should be still 
▁ xxmaj plucking the grass to know where sits the wind , 
▁ xxmaj peering in maps for ports , and piers , and roads ; 
▁ xxmaj and every object that might make me fear 
▁ xxmaj misfortune to my ventures , out of doubt , 
▁ xxmaj would make me sad . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj my wind , cooling my broth , 
▁ xxmaj would blow me to an ague when i thought 
▁ xxmaj what harm a wind too great might do at sea . 
▁ i should not see the sandy hour - glass run 
▁ xxmaj but i should think of shallows and of flats , 
▁ xxmaj and see my wealthy xxmaj andrew dock'd in sand , 
▁ xxmaj vailing her high top lower than her ribs 
▁ xxmaj to kiss her burial . xxmaj should i go to church 
▁ xxmaj and see the holy edifice of stone , 
▁ xxmaj and not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks , 
▁ xxmaj which , touching but my gentle vessel 's side , 
▁ xxmaj would scatter all her spices on the stream , 
▁ xxmaj enrobe the roaring waters with my silks , 
▁ xxmaj and , in a word , but even now worth this , 
▁ xxmaj and now worth nothing ? xxmaj shall i have the thought 
▁ xxmaj to think on this , and shall i lack the thought 
▁ xxmaj that such a thing bechanc'd would make me sad ? 
▁ xxmaj but tell not me ; i know xxmaj antonio 
▁ xxmaj is sad to think upon his merchandise . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj believe me , no ; i thank my fortune for it , 
▁ xxmaj my ventures are not in one bottom trusted , 
▁ xxmaj nor to one place ; nor is my whole estate 
▁ xxmaj upon the fortune of this present year ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore my merchandise makes me not sad . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj why then you are in love . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj fie , fie ! 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj not in love neither ? xxmaj then let us say you are sad 
▁ xxmaj because you are not merry ; and ' twere as easy 
▁ xxmaj for you to laugh and leap and say you are merry , 
▁ xxmaj because you are not sad . xxmaj now , by two - headed xxmaj janus , 
▁ xxmaj nature hath fram'd strange fellows in her time : 
▁ xxmaj some that will evermore peep through their eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and laugh like parrots at a bag - piper ; 
▁ xxmaj and other of such vinegar aspect 
▁ xxmaj that they 'll not show their teeth in way of smile 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj nestor swear the jest be laughable . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bassanio , xxup lorenzo , and xxup gratiano 

▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj bassanio , your most noble kinsman , 
▁ xxmaj gratiano and xxmaj lorenzo . xxmaj fare ye well ; 
▁ xxmaj we leave you now with better company . 
▁ xxup salerio . i would have stay'd till i had made you merry , 
▁ xxmaj if worthier friends had not prevented me . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj your worth is very dear in my regard . 
▁ i take it your own business calls on you , 
▁ xxmaj and you embrace th ' occasion to depart . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj good morrow , my good lords . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj good signiors both , when shall we laugh ? xxmaj say when . 
▁ xxmaj you grow exceeding strange ; must it be so ? 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj we 'll make our leisures to attend on yours . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup salerio and xxup solanio 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio , since you have found xxmaj antonio , 
▁ xxmaj we two will leave you ; but at dinner - time , 
▁ i pray you , have in mind where we must meet . 
▁ xxup bassanio . i will not fail you . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj you look not well , xxmaj signior xxmaj antonio ; 
▁ xxmaj you have too much respect upon the world ; 
▁ xxmaj they lose it that do buy it with much care . 
▁ xxmaj believe me , you are marvellously chang'd . 
▁ xxup antonio . i hold the world but as the world , xxmaj gratiano- 
▁ a stage , where every man must play a part , 
▁ xxmaj and mine a sad one . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj let me play the fool . 
▁ xxmaj with mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come ; 
▁ xxmaj and let my liver rather heat with wine 
▁ xxmaj than my heart cool with mortifying groans . 
▁ xxmaj why should a man whose blood is warm within 
▁ xxmaj sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster , 
▁ xxmaj sleep when he wakes , and creep into the jaundice 
▁ xxmaj by being peevish ? i tell thee what , xxmaj antonio- 
▁ i love thee , and ' tis my love that speaks- 
▁ xxmaj there are a sort of men whose visages 
▁ xxmaj do cream and mantle like a standing pond , 
▁ xxmaj and do a wilful stillness entertain , 
▁ xxmaj with purpose to be dress'd in an opinion 
▁ xxmaj of wisdom , gravity , profound conceit ; 
▁ xxmaj as who should say ' i am xxmaj sir xxmaj oracle , 
▁ xxmaj and when i ope my lips let no dog bark . ' 
▁ o my xxmaj antonio , i do know of these 
▁ xxmaj that therefore only are reputed wise 
▁ xxmaj for saying nothing ; when , i am very sure , 
▁ xxmaj if they should speak , would almost damn those ears 
▁ xxmaj which , hearing them , would call their brothers fools . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell thee more of this another time . 
▁ xxmaj but fish not with this melancholy bait 
▁ xxmaj for this fool gudgeon , this opinion . 
▁ xxmaj come , good xxmaj lorenzo . xxmaj fare ye well awhile ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll end my exhortation after dinner . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj well , we will leave you then till dinner - time . 
▁ i must be one of these same dumb wise men , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj gratiano never lets me speak . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj well , keep me company but two years moe , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj fare you well ; xxmaj i 'll grow a talker for this gear . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj thanks , i ' faith , for silence is only commendable 
▁ xxmaj in a neat 's tongue dried , and a maid not vendible . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gratiano and xxup lorenzo 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj is that anything now ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing , more than 
▁ any man in all xxmaj venice . xxmaj his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid 
▁ in , two bushels of chaff : you shall seek all day ere you find 
▁ them , and when you have them they are not worth the search . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj well ; tell me now what lady is the same 
▁ xxmaj to whom you swore a secret pilgrimage , 
▁ xxmaj that you to - day promis'd to tell me of ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . ' tis not unknown to you , xxmaj antonio , 
▁ xxmaj how much i have disabled mine estate 
▁ xxmaj by something showing a more swelling port 
▁ xxmaj than my faint means would grant continuance ; 
▁ xxmaj nor do i now make moan to be abridg'd 
▁ xxmaj from such a noble rate ; but my chief care 
▁ xxmaj is to come fairly off from the great debts 
▁ xxmaj wherein my time , something too prodigal , 
▁ xxmaj hath left me gag'd . xxmaj to you , xxmaj antonio , 
▁ i owe the most , in money and in love ; 
▁ xxmaj and from your love i have a warranty 
▁ xxmaj to unburden all my plots and purposes 
▁ xxmaj how to get clear of all the debts i owe . 
▁ xxup antonio . i pray you , good xxmaj bassanio , let me know it ; 
▁ xxmaj and if it stand , as you yourself still do , 
▁ xxmaj within the eye of honour , be assur'd 
▁ xxmaj my purse , my person , my extremest means , 
▁ xxmaj lie all unlock'd to your occasions . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj in my school - days , when i had lost one shaft , 
▁ i shot his fellow of the self - same flight 
▁ xxmaj the self - same way , with more advised watch , 
▁ xxmaj to find the other forth ; and by adventuring both 
▁ i oft found both . i urge this childhood proof , 
▁ xxmaj because what follows is pure innocence . 
▁ i owe you much ; and , like a wilful youth , 
▁ xxmaj that which i owe is lost ; but if you please 
▁ xxmaj to shoot another arrow that self way 
▁ xxmaj which you did shoot the first , i do not doubt , 
▁ xxmaj as i will watch the aim , or to find both , 
▁ xxmaj or bring your latter hazard back again 
▁ xxmaj and thankfully rest debtor for the first . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj you know me well , and herein spend but time 
▁ xxmaj to wind about my love with circumstance ; 
▁ xxmaj and out of doubt you do me now more wrong 
▁ xxmaj in making question of my uttermost 
▁ xxmaj than if you had made waste of all i have . 
▁ xxmaj then do but say to me what i should do 
▁ xxmaj that in your knowledge may by me be done , 
▁ xxmaj and i am prest unto it ; therefore , speak . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj in xxmaj belmont is a lady richly left , 
▁ xxmaj and she is fair and , fairer than that word , 
▁ xxmaj of wondrous virtues . xxmaj sometimes from her eyes 
▁ i did receive fair speechless messages . 
▁ xxmaj her name is xxmaj portia- nothing undervalu'd 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj cato 's daughter , xxmaj brutus ' xxmaj portia . 
▁ xxmaj nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth ; 
▁ xxmaj for the four winds blow in from every coast 
▁ xxmaj renowned suitors , and her sunny locks 
▁ xxmaj hang on her temples like a golden fleece , 
▁ xxmaj which makes her seat of xxmaj belmont xxmaj colchos ' strond , 
▁ xxmaj and many xxmaj jasons come in quest of her . 
▁ o my xxmaj antonio , had i but the means 
▁ xxmaj to hold a rival place with one of them , 
▁ i have a mind presages me such thrift 
▁ xxmaj that i should questionless be fortunate . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea ; 
▁ xxmaj neither have i money nor commodity 
▁ xxmaj to raise a present sum ; therefore go forth , 
▁ xxmaj try what my credit can in xxmaj venice do ; 
▁ xxmaj that shall be rack'd , even to the uttermost , 
▁ xxmaj to furnish thee to xxmaj belmont to fair xxmaj portia . 
▁ xxmaj go presently inquire , and so will xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj where money is ; and i no question make 
▁ xxmaj to have it of my trust or for my sake . xxmaj exeunt 





 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj belmont . xxup portia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup portia with her waiting - woman , xxup nerissa 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj by my troth , xxmaj nerissa , my little body is aweary of this 
▁ great world . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj you would be , sweet madam , if your miseries were in the 
▁ same abundance as your good fortunes are ; and yet , for aught i 
▁ see , they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that 
▁ starve with nothing . xxmaj it is no mean happiness , therefore , to be 
▁ seated in the mean : superfluity come sooner by white hairs , but 
▁ competency lives longer . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj good sentences , and well pronounc'd . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj they would be better , if well followed . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj if to do were as easy as to know what were good to do , 
▁ chapels had been churches , and poor men 's cottages princes ' 
▁ palaces . xxmaj it is a good divine that follows his own instructions ; i 
▁ can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than to be one 
▁ of the twenty to follow mine own teaching . xxmaj the brain may devise 
▁ laws for the blood , but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree ; 
▁ such a hare is madness the youth , to skip o'er the meshes of good 
▁ counsel the cripple . xxmaj but this reasoning is not in the fashion to 
▁ choose me a husband . o me , the word ' choose ' ! i may neither 
▁ choose who i would nor refuse who i dislike ; so is the will of a 
▁ living daughter curb'd by the will of a dead father . xxmaj is it not 
▁ hard , xxmaj nerissa , that i can not choose one , nor refuse none ? 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj your father was ever virtuous , and holy men at their death 
▁ have good inspirations ; therefore the lott'ry that he hath 
▁ devised in these three chests , of gold , silver , and lead- whereof 
▁ who chooses his meaning chooses you- will no doubt never be 
▁ chosen by any rightly but one who you shall rightly love . xxmaj but 
▁ what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these 
▁ princely suitors that are already come ? 
▁ xxup portia . i pray thee over - name them ; and as thou namest them , i will 
▁ describe them ; and according to my description , level at my 
▁ affection . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj first , there is the xxmaj neapolitan prince . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj ay , that 's a colt indeed , for he doth nothing but talk of 
▁ his horse ; and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good 
▁ parts that he can shoe him himself ; i am much afear'd my lady his 
▁ mother play'd false with a smith . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj then is there the xxmaj county xxmaj palatine . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj he doth nothing but frown , as who should say ' an you will 
▁ not have me , choose . ' xxmaj he hears merry tales and smiles not . i fear 
▁ he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old , being so 
▁ full of unmannerly sadness in his youth . i had rather be married 
▁ to a death's - head with a bone in his mouth than to either of 
▁ these . xxmaj god defend me from these two ! 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj how say you by the xxmaj french lord , xxmaj monsieur xxmaj le xxmaj bon ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj god made him , and therefore let him pass for a man . xxmaj in 
▁ truth , i know it is a sin to be a mocker , but he- why , he hath a 
▁ horse better than the xxmaj neapolitan 's , a better bad habit of 
▁ frowning than the xxmaj count xxmaj palatine ; he is every man in no man . xxmaj if a 
▁ throstle sing he falls straight a - cap'ring ; he will fence with 
▁ his own shadow ; if i should marry him , i should marry twenty 
▁ husbands . xxmaj if he would despise me , i would forgive him ; for if he 
▁ love me to madness , i shall never requite him . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj what say you then to xxmaj falconbridge , the young baron of 
▁ xxmaj england ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you know i say nothing to him , for he understands not me , 
▁ nor i him : he hath neither xxmaj latin , xxmaj french , nor xxmaj italian , and you