xxbos will come into the court and swear that i have a poor pennyworth 
▁ in the xxmaj english . xxmaj he is a proper man 's picture ; but alas , who can 
▁ converse with a dumb - show ? xxmaj how oddly he is suited ! i think he 
▁ bought his doublet in xxmaj italy , his round hose in xxmaj france , his bonnet 
▁ in xxmaj germany , and his behaviour everywhere . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj what think you of the xxmaj scottish lord , his neighbour ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj that he hath a neighbourly charity in him , for he borrowed 
▁ a box of the ear of the xxmaj englishman , and swore he would pay him 
▁ again when he was able ; i think the xxmaj frenchman became his surety , 
▁ and seal'd under for another . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj how like you the young xxmaj german , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj saxony 's 
▁ nephew ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj very vilely in the morning when he is sober ; and most 
▁ vilely in the afternoon when he is drunk . xxmaj when he is best , he is 
▁ a little worse than a man , and when he is worst , he is little 
▁ better than a beast . xxmaj an the worst fall that ever fell , i hope i 
▁ shall make shift to go without him . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj if he should offer to choose , and choose the right casket , 
▁ you should refuse to perform your father 's will , if you should 
▁ refuse to accept him . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj therefore , for fear of the worst , i pray thee set a deep 
▁ glass of xxmaj rhenish wine on the contrary casket ; for if the devil be 
▁ within and that temptation without , i know he will choose it . i 
▁ will do anything , xxmaj nerissa , ere i will be married to a sponge . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj you need not fear , lady , the having any of these lords ; 
▁ they have acquainted me with their determinations , which is 
▁ indeed to return to their home , and to trouble you with no more 
▁ suit , unless you may be won by some other sort than your father 's 
▁ imposition , depending on the caskets . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj if i live to be as old as xxmaj sibylla , i will die as chaste as 
▁ xxmaj diana , unless i be obtained by the manner of my father 's will . i 
▁ am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable ; for there is not 
▁ one among them but i dote on his very absence , and i pray xxmaj god 
▁ grant them a fair departure . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj do you not remember , lady , in your father 's time , a 
▁ xxmaj venetian , a scholar and a soldier , that came hither in company of 
▁ the xxmaj marquis of xxmaj montferrat ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj yes , yes , it was xxmaj bassanio ; as i think , so was he call'd . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj true , madam ; he , of all the men that ever my foolish eyes 
▁ look'd upon , was the best deserving a fair lady . 
▁ xxup portia . i remember him well , and i remember him worthy of thy 
▁ praise . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servingman 

▁ xxmaj how now ! what news ? 
▁ xxup servingman . xxmaj the four strangers seek for you , madam , to take their 
▁ leave ; and there is a forerunner come from a fifth , the xxmaj prince of 
▁ xxmaj morocco , who brings word the xxmaj prince his master will be here 
▁ to - night . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj if i could bid the fifth welcome with so good heart as i 
▁ can bid the other four farewell , i should be glad of his 
▁ approach ; if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion 
▁ of a devil , i had rather he should shrive me than wive me . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj nerissa . xxmaj sirrah , go before . 
▁ xxmaj whiles we shut the gate upon one wooer , another knocks at the 
▁ door . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj venice . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup bassanio xxmaj with xxup shylock the xxmaj jew 

▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj three thousand ducats- well . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj ay , sir , for three months . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj for three months- well . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj for the which , as i told you , xxmaj antonio shall be bound . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj antonio shall become bound- well . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj may you stead me ? xxmaj will you pleasure me ? xxmaj shall i know your 
▁ answer ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj three thousand ducats for three months , and xxmaj antonio bound . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj your answer to that . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj antonio is a good man . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj have you heard any imputation to the contrary ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj ho , no , no , no , no ; my meaning in saying he is a good man 
▁ is to have you understand me that he is sufficient ; yet his means 
▁ are in supposition : he hath an argosy bound to xxmaj tripolis , another 
▁ to the xxmaj indies ; i understand , moreover , upon the xxmaj rialto , he hath a 
▁ third at xxmaj mexico , a fourth for xxmaj england- and other ventures he 
▁ hath , squand'red abroad . xxmaj but ships are but boards , sailors but 
▁ men ; there be land - rats and water - rats , water - thieves and 
▁ land - thieves- i mean pirates ; and then there is the peril of 
▁ waters , winds , and rocks . xxmaj the man is , notwithstanding , 
▁ sufficient . xxmaj three thousand ducats- i think i may take his bond . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj be assur'd you may . 
▁ xxup shylock . i will be assur'd i may ; and , that i may be assured , i 
▁ will bethink me . xxmaj may i speak with xxmaj antonio ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj if it please you to dine with us . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj yes , to smell pork , to eat of the habitation which your 
▁ prophet , the xxmaj nazarite , conjured the devil into ! i will buy with 
▁ you , sell with you , talk with you , walk with you , and so 
▁ following ; but i will not eat with you , drink with you , nor pray 
▁ with you . xxmaj what news on the xxmaj rialto ? xxmaj who is he comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antonio 

▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj this is xxmaj signior xxmaj antonio . 
▁ xxup shylock . [ aside ] xxmaj how like a fawning publican he looks ! 
▁ i hate him for he is a xxmaj christian ; 
▁ xxmaj but more for that in low simplicity 
▁ xxmaj he lends out money gratis , and brings down 
▁ xxmaj the rate of usance here with us in xxmaj venice . 
▁ xxmaj if i can catch him once upon the hip , 
▁ i will feed fat the ancient grudge i bear him . 
▁ xxmaj he hates our sacred nation ; and he rails , 
▁ xxmaj even there where merchants most do congregate , 
▁ xxmaj on me , my bargains , and my well - won thrift , 
▁ xxmaj which he calls interest . xxmaj cursed be my tribe 
▁ xxmaj if i forgive him ! 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj shylock , do you hear ? 
▁ xxup shylock . i am debating of my present store , 
▁ xxmaj and , by the near guess of my memory , 
▁ i can not instantly raise up the gross 
▁ xxmaj of full three thousand ducats . xxmaj what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj tubal , a wealthy xxmaj hebrew of my tribe , 
▁ xxmaj will furnish me . xxmaj but soft ! how many months 
▁ xxmaj do you desire ? [ to xxup antonio ] xxmaj rest you fair , good signior ; 
▁ xxmaj your worship was the last man in our mouths . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj shylock , albeit i neither lend nor borrow 
▁ xxmaj by taking nor by giving of excess , 
▁ xxmaj yet , to supply the ripe wants of my friend , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll break a custom . [ to xxup bassanio ] xxmaj is he yet possess'd 
▁ xxmaj how much ye would ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj ay , ay , three thousand ducats . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and for three months . 
▁ xxup shylock . i had forgot- three months ; you told me so . 
▁ xxmaj well then , your bond ; and , let me see- but hear you , 
▁ xxmaj methoughts you said you neither lend nor borrow 
▁ xxmaj upon advantage . 
▁ xxup antonio . i do never use it . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj when xxmaj jacob graz'd his uncle xxmaj laban 's sheep- 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj jacob from our holy xxmaj abram was , 
▁ xxmaj as his wise mother wrought in his behalf , 
▁ xxmaj the third possessor ; ay , he was the third- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and what of him ? xxmaj did he take interest ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj no , not take interest ; not , as you would say , 
▁ xxmaj directly int'rest ; mark what xxmaj jacob did : 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj laban and himself were compromis'd 
▁ xxmaj that all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied 
▁ xxmaj should fall as xxmaj jacob 's hire , the ewes , being rank , 
▁ xxmaj in end of autumn turned to the rams ; 
▁ xxmaj and when the work of generation was 
▁ xxmaj between these woolly breeders in the act , 
▁ xxmaj the skilful shepherd pill'd me certain wands , 
▁ xxmaj and , in the doing of the deed of kind , 
▁ xxmaj he stuck them up before the fulsome ewes , 
▁ xxmaj who , then conceiving , did in eaning time 
▁ xxmaj fall parti - colour'd lambs , and those were xxmaj jacob 's . 
▁ xxmaj this was a way to thrive , and he was blest ; 
▁ xxmaj and thrift is blessing , if men steal it not . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj this was a venture , sir , that xxmaj jacob serv'd for ; 
▁ a thing not in his power to bring to pass , 
▁ xxmaj but sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven . 
▁ xxmaj was this inserted to make interest good ? 
▁ xxmaj or is your gold and silver ewes and rams ? 
▁ xxup shylock . i can not tell ; i make it breed as fast . 
▁ xxmaj but note me , signior . 
▁ xxup antonio . [ aside ] xxmaj mark you this , xxmaj bassanio , 
▁ xxmaj the devil can cite xxmaj scripture for his purpose . 
▁ xxmaj an evil soul producing holy witness 
▁ xxmaj is like a villain with a smiling cheek , 
▁ a goodly apple rotten at the heart . 
▁ xxup o , what a goodly outside falsehood hath ! 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj three thousand ducats- ' tis a good round sum . 
▁ xxmaj three months from twelve ; then let me see , the rate- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj well , xxmaj shylock , shall we be beholding to you ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj signior xxmaj antonio , many a time and oft 
▁ xxmaj in the xxmaj rialto you have rated me 
▁ xxmaj about my moneys and my usances ; 
▁ xxmaj still have i borne it with a patient shrug , 
▁ xxmaj for suff'rance is the badge of all our tribe ; 
▁ xxmaj you call me misbeliever , cut - throat dog , 
▁ xxmaj and spit upon my xxmaj jewish gaberdine , 
▁ xxmaj and all for use of that which is mine own . 
▁ xxmaj well then , it now appears you need my help ; 
▁ xxmaj go to , then ; you come to me , and you say 
▁ ' shylock , we would have moneys . ' xxmaj you say so- 
▁ xxmaj you that did void your rheum upon my beard 
▁ xxmaj and foot me as you spurn a stranger cur 
▁ xxmaj over your threshold ; moneys is your suit . 
▁ xxmaj what should i say to you ? xxmaj should i not say 
▁ ' hath a dog money ? xxmaj is it possible 
▁ a cur can lend three thousand ducats ? ' xxmaj or 
▁ xxmaj shall i bend low and , in a bondman 's key , 
▁ xxmaj with bated breath and whisp'ring humbleness , 
▁ xxmaj say this : 
▁ ' fair sir , you spit on me on xxmaj wednesday last , 
▁ xxmaj you spurn'd me such a day ; another time 
▁ xxmaj you call'd me dog ; and for these courtesies 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lend you thus much moneys ' ? 
▁ xxup antonio . i am as like to call thee so again , 
▁ xxmaj to spit on thee again , to spurn thee too . 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt lend this money , lend it not 
▁ xxmaj as to thy friends- for when did friendship take 
▁ a breed for barren metal of his friend?- 
▁ xxmaj but lend it rather to thine enemy , 
▁ xxmaj who if he break thou mayst with better face 
▁ xxmaj exact the penalty . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj why , look you , how you storm ! 
▁ i would be friends with you , and have your love , 
▁ xxmaj forget the shames that you have stain'd me with , 
▁ xxmaj supply your present wants , and take no doit 
▁ xxmaj of usance for my moneys , and you 'll not hear me . 
▁ xxmaj this is kind i offer . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj this were kindness . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj this kindness will i show . 
▁ xxmaj go with me to a notary , seal me there 
▁ xxmaj your single bond , and , in a merry sport , 
▁ xxmaj if you repay me not on such a day , 
▁ xxmaj in such a place , such sum or sums as are 
▁ xxmaj express'd in the condition , let the forfeit 
▁ xxmaj be nominated for an equal pound 
▁ xxmaj of your fair flesh , to be cut off and taken 
▁ xxmaj in what part of your body pleaseth me . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj content , in faith ; xxmaj i 'll seal to such a bond , 
▁ xxmaj and say there is much kindness in the xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj you shall not seal to such a bond for me ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll rather dwell in my necessity . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj why , fear not , man ; i will not forfeit it ; 
▁ xxmaj within these two months- that 's a month before 
▁ xxmaj this bond expires- i do expect return 
▁ xxmaj of thrice three times the value of this bond . 
▁ xxup shylock . o father xxmaj abram , what these xxmaj christians are , 
▁ xxmaj whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect 
▁ xxmaj the thoughts of others ! xxmaj pray you , tell me this : 
▁ xxmaj if he should break his day , what should i gain 
▁ xxmaj by the exaction of the forfeiture ? 
▁ a pound of man 's flesh taken from a man 
▁ xxmaj is not so estimable , profitable neither , 
▁ xxmaj as flesh of muttons , beefs , or goats . i say , 
▁ xxmaj to buy his favour , i extend this friendship ; 
▁ xxmaj if he will take it , so ; if not , adieu ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for my love , i pray you wrong me not . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj yes , xxmaj shylock , i will seal unto this bond . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj then meet me forthwith at the notary 's ; 
▁ xxmaj give him direction for this merry bond , 
▁ xxmaj and i will go and purse the ducats straight , 
▁ xxmaj see to my house , left in the fearful guard 
▁ xxmaj of an unthrifty knave , and presently 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be with you . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj hie thee , gentle xxmaj jew . xxmaj exit xxup shylock 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj hebrew will turn xxmaj christian : he grows kind . 
▁ xxup bassanio . i like not fair terms and a villain 's mind . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj come on ; in this there can be no dismay ; 
▁ xxmaj my ships come home a month before the day . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj belmont . xxup portia 's house 

 xxmaj flourish of cornets . xxmaj enter the xxup prince of xxup morocco , a tawny xxmaj moor all in white , 
 and three or four xxup followers accordingly , with xxup portia , xxup nerissa , and train 

▁ xxup prince xxup of xxmaj morocco . xxmaj mislike me not for my complexion , 
▁ xxmaj the shadowed livery of the burnish'd sun , 
▁ xxmaj to whom i am a neighbour , and near bred . 
▁ xxmaj bring me the fairest creature northward born , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj phoebus ' fire scarce thaws the icicles , 
▁ xxmaj and let us make incision for your love 
▁ xxmaj to prove whose blood is reddest , his or mine . 
▁ i tell thee , lady , this aspect of mine 
▁ xxmaj hath fear'd the valiant ; by my love , i swear 
▁ xxmaj the best - regarded virgins of our clime 
▁ xxmaj have lov'd it too . i would not change this hue , 
▁ xxmaj except to steal your thoughts , my gentle queen . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj in terms of choice i am not solely led 
▁ xxmaj by nice direction of a maiden 's eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , the lott'ry of my destiny 
▁ xxmaj bars me the right of voluntary choosing . 
▁ xxmaj but , if my father had not scanted me , 
▁ xxmaj and hedg'd me by his wit to yield myself 
▁ xxmaj his wife who wins me by that means i told you , 
▁ xxmaj yourself , renowned xxmaj prince , then stood as fair 
▁ xxmaj as any comer i have look'd on yet 
▁ xxmaj for my affection . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco . xxmaj even for that i thank you . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , i pray you , lead me to the caskets 
▁ xxmaj to try my fortune . xxmaj by this scimitar , 
▁ xxmaj that slew the xxmaj sophy and a xxmaj persian prince , 
▁ xxmaj that won three fields of xxmaj sultan xxmaj solyman , 
▁ i would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look , 
▁ xxmaj outbrave the heart most daring on the earth , 
▁ xxmaj pluck the young sucking cubs from the she - bear , 
▁ xxmaj yea , mock the lion when ' a roars for prey , 
▁ xxmaj to win thee , lady . xxmaj but , alas the while ! 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj hercules and xxmaj lichas play at dice 
▁ xxmaj which is the better man , the greater throw 
▁ xxmaj may turn by fortune from the weaker band . 
▁ xxmaj so is xxmaj alcides beaten by his page ; 
▁ xxmaj and so may xxup i , blind xxmaj fortune leading me , 
▁ xxmaj miss that which one unworthier may attain , 
▁ xxmaj and die with grieving . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you must take your chance , 
▁ xxmaj and either not attempt to choose at all , 
▁ xxmaj or swear before you choose , if you choose wrong , 
▁ xxmaj never to speak to lady afterward 
▁ xxmaj in way of marriage ; therefore be advis'd . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco . xxmaj nor will not ; come , bring me unto my chance . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj first , forward to the temple . xxmaj after dinner 
▁ xxmaj your hazard shall be made . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco . xxmaj good fortune then , 
▁ xxmaj to make me blest or cursed'st among men ! 
▁ [ cornets , and exeunt ] 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup launcelot xxup gobbo 

▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this 
▁ xxmaj jew my master . xxmaj the fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me , saying 
▁ to me ' gobbo , xxmaj launcelot xxmaj gobbo , good xxmaj launcelot ' or ' good xxmaj gobbo ' or 
▁ ' good xxmaj launcelot xxmaj gobbo , use your legs , take the start , run away . ' 
▁ xxmaj my conscience says ' no ; take heed , honest xxmaj launcelot , take heed , 
▁ honest xxmaj gobbo ' or , as aforesaid , ' honest xxmaj launcelot xxmaj gobbo , do not 
▁ run ; scorn running with thy heels . ' xxmaj well , the most courageous 
▁ fiend bids me pack . ' via ! ' says the fiend ; ' away ! ' says the 
▁ fiend . ' for the heavens , rouse up a brave mind ' says the fiend 
▁ ' and run . ' xxmaj well , my conscience , hanging about the neck of my 
▁ heart , says very wisely to me ' my honest friend xxmaj launcelot , being 
▁ an honest man 's son ' or rather ' an honest woman 's son ' ; for 
▁ indeed my father did something smack , something grow to , he had a 
▁ kind of taste- well , my conscience says ' launcelot , budge not . ' 
▁ ' budge , ' says the fiend . ' budge not , ' says my conscience . 
▁ ' conscience , ' say xxup i , ( you counsel well . ' ' fiend , ' say xxup i , ' you 
▁ counsel well . ' xxmaj to be rul'd by my conscience , i should stay with 
▁ the xxmaj jew my master , who- xxmaj god bless the mark!- is a kind of devil ; 
▁ and , to run away from the xxmaj jew , i should be ruled by the fiend , 
▁ who- saving your reverence!- is the devil himself . xxmaj certainly the 
▁ xxmaj jew is the very devil incarnation ; and , in my conscience , my 
▁ conscience is but a kind of hard conscience to offer to counsel 
▁ me to stay with the xxmaj jew . xxmaj the fiend gives the more friendly 
▁ counsel . i will run , fiend ; my heels are at your commandment ; i 
▁ will run . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup old xxup gobbo , with a basket 

▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj master young man , you , i pray you , which is the way to 
▁ master xxmaj jew 's ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . [ aside ] o heavens ! xxmaj this is my true - begotten father , 
▁ who , being more than sand - blind , high - gravel blind , knows me not . 
▁ i will try confusions with him . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj master young gentleman , i pray you , which is the way to 
▁ master xxmaj jew 's ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj turn up on your right hand at the next turning , but , at 
▁ the next turning of all , on your left ; marry , at the very next 
▁ turning , turn of no hand , but turn down indirectly to the xxmaj jew 's 
▁ house . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj be xxmaj god 's sonties , ' twill be a hard way to hit ! xxmaj can you tell 
▁ me whether one xxmaj launcelot , that dwells with him , dwell with him or 
▁ no ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj talk you of young xxmaj master xxmaj launcelot ? [ aside ] xxmaj mark me 
▁ now ; now will i raise the waters.- xxmaj talk you of young xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj launcelot ? 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj no master , sir , but a poor man 's son ; his father , though i 
▁ say't , is an honest exceeding poor man , and , xxmaj god be thanked , well 
▁ to live . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj well , let his father be what ' a will , we talk of young 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj launcelot . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj your worship 's friend , and xxmaj launcelot , sir . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj but i pray you , ergo , old man , ergo , i beseech you , talk 
▁ you of young xxmaj master xxmaj launcelot ? 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj of xxmaj launcelot , an't please your mastership . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj ergo , xxmaj master xxmaj launcelot . xxmaj talk not of xxmaj master xxmaj launcelot , 
▁ father ; for the young gentleman , according to xxmaj fates and xxmaj destinies 
▁ and such odd sayings , the xxmaj sisters xxmaj three and such branches of 
▁ learning , is indeed deceased ; or , as you would say in plain 
▁ terms , gone to heaven . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj marry , xxmaj god forbid ! xxmaj the boy was the very staff of my age , my 
▁ very prop . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj do i look like a cudgel or a hovel - post , a staff or a 
▁ prop ? xxmaj do you know me , father ? 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj alack the day , i know you not , young gentleman ; but i pray 
▁ you tell me , is my boy- xxmaj god rest his soul!- alive or dead ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj do you not know me , father ? 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj alack , sir , i am sand - blind ; i know you not . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj nay , indeed , if you had your eyes , you might fail of the 
▁ knowing me : it is a wise father that knows his own child . xxmaj well , 
▁ old man , i will tell you news of your son . xxmaj give me your blessing ; 
▁ truth will come to light ; murder can not be hid long ; a man 's son 
▁ may , but in the end truth will out . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj pray you , sir , stand up ; i am sure you are not xxmaj launcelot my 
▁ boy . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj pray you , let 's have no more fooling about it , but give 
▁ me your blessing ; i am xxmaj launcelot , your boy that was , your son 
▁ that is , your child that shall be . 
▁ xxup gobbo . i can not think you are my son . 
▁ xxup launcelot . i know not what i shall think of that ; but i am 
▁ xxmaj launcelot , the xxmaj jew 's man , and i am sure xxmaj margery your wife is my 
▁ mother . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj her name is xxmaj margery , indeed . xxmaj i 'll be sworn , if thou be 
▁ xxmaj launcelot , thou art mine own flesh and blood . xxmaj lord worshipp'd 
▁ might he be , what a beard hast thou got ! xxmaj thou hast got more hair 
▁ on thy chin than xxmaj dobbin my fill - horse has on his tail . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj it should seem , then , that xxmaj dobbin 's tail grows backward ; 
▁ i am sure he had more hair of his tail than i have of my face 
▁ when i last saw him . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj lord , how art thou chang'd ! xxmaj how dost thou and thy master 
▁ agree ? i have brought him a present . xxmaj how ' gree you now ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj well , well ; but , for mine own part , as i have set up my 
▁ rest to run away , so i will not rest till i have run some ground . 
▁ xxmaj my master 's a very xxmaj jew . xxmaj give him a present ! xxmaj give him a halter . i 
▁ am famish'd in his service ; you may tell every finger i have with 
▁ my ribs . xxmaj father , i am glad you are come ; give me your present to 
▁ one xxmaj master xxmaj bassanio , who indeed gives rare new liveries ; if i 
▁ serve not him , i will run as far as xxmaj god has any ground . o rare 
▁ fortune ! xxmaj here comes the man . xxmaj to him , father , for i am a xxmaj jew , if i 
▁ serve the xxmaj jew any longer . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bassanio , with xxup leonardo , with a xxup follower or two 

▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj you may do so ; but let it be so hasted that supper be 
▁ ready at the farthest by five of the clock . xxmaj see these letters 
▁ delivered , put the liveries to making , and desire xxmaj gratiano to 
▁ come anon to my lodging . xxmaj exit a xxup servant 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj to him , father . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj god bless your worship ! 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj gramercy ; wouldst thou aught with me ? 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj here 's my son , sir , a poor boy- 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj not a poor boy , sir , but the rich xxmaj jew 's man , that would , 
▁ sir , as my father shall specify- 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj he hath a great infection , sir , as one would say , to serve- 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj indeed the short and the long is , i serve the xxmaj jew , and 
▁ have a desire , as my father shall specify- 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj his master and he , saving your worship 's reverence , are 
▁ scarce cater - cousins- 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj to be brief , the very truth is that the xxmaj jew , having done 
▁ me wrong , doth cause me , as my father , being i hope an old man , 
▁ shall frutify unto you- 
▁ xxup gobbo . i have here a dish of doves that i would bestow upon your 
▁ worship ; and my suit is- 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj in very brief , the suit is impertinent to myself , as 
▁ your worship shall know by this honest old man ; and , though i say 
▁ it , though old man , yet poor man , my father . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj one speak for both . xxmaj what would you ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj serve you , sir . 
▁ xxup gobbo . xxmaj that is the very defect of the matter , sir . 
▁ xxup bassanio . i know thee well ; thou hast obtain'd thy suit . 
▁ xxmaj shylock thy master spoke with me this day , 
▁ xxmaj and hath preferr'd thee , if it be preferment 
▁ xxmaj to leave a rich xxmaj jew 's service to become 
▁ xxmaj the follower of so poor a gentleman . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj the old proverb is very well parted between my master 
▁ xxmaj shylock and you , sir : you have the grace of xxmaj god , sir , and he hath 
▁ enough . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj thou speak'st it well . xxmaj go , father , with thy son . 
▁ xxmaj take leave of thy old master , and inquire 
▁ xxmaj my lodging out . [ to a xxup servant ] xxmaj give him a livery 
▁ xxmaj more guarded than his fellows ' ; see it done . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj father , in . i can not get a service , no ! i have ne'er a 
▁ tongue in my head ! [ looking on his palm ] xxmaj well ; if any man in 
▁ xxmaj italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book- i 
▁ shall have good fortune . xxmaj go to , here 's a simple line of life ; 
▁ here 's a small trifle of wives ; alas , fifteen wives is nothing ; 
▁ a'leven widows and nine maids is a simple coming - in for one man . 
▁ xxmaj and then to scape drowning thrice , and to be in peril of my life 
▁ with the edge of a feather - bed - here are simple scapes . xxmaj well , if 
▁ xxmaj fortune be a woman , she 's a good wench for this gear . xxmaj father , 
▁ come ; xxmaj i 'll take my leave of the xxmaj jew in the twinkling . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup launcelot and xxup old xxup gobbo 
▁ xxup bassanio . i pray thee , good xxmaj leonardo , think on this . 
▁ xxmaj these things being bought and orderly bestowed , 
▁ xxmaj return in haste , for i do feast to - night 
▁ xxmaj my best esteem'd acquaintance ; hie thee , go . 
▁ xxup leonardo . xxmaj my best endeavours shall be done herein . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup gratiano 

▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj where 's your master ? 
▁ xxup leonardo . xxmaj yonder , sir , he walks . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj signior xxmaj bassanio ! 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj gratiano ! 
▁ xxup gratiano . i have suit to you . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj you have obtain'd it . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj you must not deny me : i must go with you to xxmaj belmont . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj why , then you must . xxmaj but hear thee , xxmaj gratiano : 
▁ xxmaj thou art too wild , too rude , and bold of voice- 
▁ xxmaj parts that become thee happily enough , 
▁ xxmaj and in such eyes as ours appear not faults ; 
▁ xxmaj but where thou art not known , why there they show 
▁ xxmaj something too liberal . xxmaj pray thee , take pain 
▁ xxmaj to allay with some cold drops of modesty 
▁ xxmaj thy skipping spirit ; lest through thy wild behaviour 
▁ i be misconst'red in the place i go to 
▁ xxmaj and lose my hopes . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj signior xxmaj bassanio , hear me : 
▁ xxmaj if i do not put on a sober habit , 
▁ xxmaj talk with respect , and swear but now and then , 
▁ xxmaj wear prayer - books in my pocket , look demurely , 
▁ xxmaj nay more , while grace is saying hood mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj thus with my hat , and sigh , and say amen , 
▁ xxmaj use all the observance of civility 
▁ xxmaj like one well studied in a sad ostent 
▁ xxmaj to please his grandam , never trust me more . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj well , we shall see your bearing . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj nay , but i bar to - night ; you shall not gauge me 
▁ xxmaj by what we do to - night . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj no , that were pity ; 
▁ i would entreat you rather to put on 
▁ xxmaj your boldest suit of mirth , for we have friends 
▁ xxmaj that purpose merriment . xxmaj but fare you well ; 
▁ i have some business . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj and i must to xxmaj lorenzo and the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj but we will visit you at supper - time . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj venice . xxup shylock 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup jessica and xxup launcelot 

▁ xxup jessica . i am sorry thou wilt leave my father so . 
▁ xxmaj our house is hell ; and thou , a merry devil , 
▁ xxmaj didst rob it of some taste of tediousness . 
▁ xxmaj but fare thee well ; there is a ducat for thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj launcelot , soon at supper shalt thou see 
▁ xxmaj lorenzo , who is thy new master 's guest . 
▁ xxmaj give him this letter ; do it secretly . 
▁ xxmaj and so farewell . i would not have my father 
▁ xxmaj see me in talk with thee . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj adieu ! tears exhibit my tongue . xxmaj most beautiful pagan , 
▁ most sweet xxmaj jew ! xxmaj if a xxmaj christian do not play the knave and get 
▁ thee , i am much deceived . xxmaj but , adieu ! these foolish drops do 
▁ something drown my manly spirit ; adieu ! 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj farewell , good xxmaj launcelot . xxmaj exit xxup launcelot 
▁ xxmaj alack , what heinous sin is it in me 
▁ xxmaj to be asham'd to be my father 's child ! 
▁ xxmaj but though i am a daughter to his blood , 
▁ i am not to his manners . o xxmaj lorenzo , 
▁ xxmaj if thou keep promise , i shall end this strife , 
▁ xxmaj become a xxmaj christian and thy loving wife . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup gratiano , xxup lorenzo , xxup salerio , and xxup solanio 

▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj nay , we will slink away in suppertime , 
▁ xxmaj disguise us at my lodging , and return 
▁ xxmaj all in an hour . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj we have not made good preparation . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj we have not spoke us yet of torch - bearers . 
▁ xxup solanio . ' tis vile , unless it may be quaintly ordered ; 
▁ xxmaj and better in my mind not undertook . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . ' tis now but four o'clock ; we have two hours 
▁ xxmaj to furnish us . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup launcelot , xxmaj with a letter 

▁ xxmaj friend xxmaj launcelot , what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj an it shall please you to break up this , it shall seem 
▁ to signify . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . i know the hand ; in faith , ' tis a fair hand , 
▁ xxmaj and whiter than the paper it writ on 
▁ xxmaj is the fair hand that writ . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj love - news , in faith ! 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj by your leave , sir . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj whither goest thou ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj marry , sir , to bid my old master , the xxmaj jew , to sup 
▁ to - night with my new master , the xxmaj christian . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj hold , here , take this . xxmaj tell gentle xxmaj jessica 
▁ i will not fail her ; speak it privately . 
▁ xxmaj go , gentlemen , xxmaj exit xxup launcelot 
▁ xxmaj will you prepare you for this masque to - night ? 
▁ i am provided of a torch - bearer . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj ay , marry , xxmaj i 'll be gone about it straight . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj and so will xxup i. 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj meet me and xxmaj gratiano 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj gratiano 's lodging some hour hence . 
▁ xxup salerio . ' tis good we do so . xxmaj exeunt xxup salerio and xxup solanio 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj was not that letter from fair xxmaj jessica ? 
▁ xxup lorenzo . i must needs tell thee all . xxmaj she hath directed 
▁ xxmaj how i shall take her from her father 's house ; 
▁ xxmaj what gold and jewels she is furnish'd with ; 
▁ xxmaj what page 's suit she hath in readiness . 
▁ xxmaj if e'er the xxmaj jew her father come to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj it will be for his gentle daughter 's sake ; 
▁ xxmaj and never dare misfortune cross her foot , 
▁ xxmaj unless she do it under this excuse , 
▁ xxmaj that she is issue to a faithless xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxmaj come , go with me , peruse this as thou goest ; 
▁ xxmaj fair xxmaj jessica shall be my torch - bearer . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj venice . xxmaj before xxup shylock 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup shylock and xxup launcelot 

▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj well , thou shalt see ; thy eyes shall be thy judge , 
▁ xxmaj the difference of old xxmaj shylock and xxmaj bassanio.- 
▁ xxmaj what , xxmaj jessica!- xxmaj thou shalt not gormandize 
▁ xxmaj as thou hast done with me- xxmaj what , xxmaj jessica!- 
▁ xxmaj and sleep and snore , and rend apparel out- 
▁ xxmaj why , xxmaj jessica , i say ! 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj why , xxmaj jessica ! 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj who bids thee call ? i do not bid thee call . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj your worship was wo nt to tell me i could do nothing 
▁ without bidding . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jessica 

▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj call you ? xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxup shylock . i am bid forth to supper , xxmaj jessica ; 
▁ xxmaj there are my keys . xxmaj but wherefore should i go ? 
▁ i am not bid for love ; they flatter me ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet xxmaj i 'll go in hate , to feed upon 
▁ xxmaj the prodigal xxmaj christian . xxmaj jessica , my girl , 
▁ xxmaj look to my house . i am right loath to go ; 
▁ xxmaj there is some ill a - brewing towards my rest , 
▁ xxmaj for i did dream of money - bags to - night . 
▁ xxup launcelot . i beseech you , sir , go ; my young master doth expect your 
▁ reproach . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj so do i his . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj and they have conspired together ; i will not say you 
▁ shall see a masque , but if you do , then it was not for nothing 
▁ that my nose fell a - bleeding on xxmaj black xxmaj monday last at six o'clock 
▁ i ' th ' morning , falling out that year on xxmaj ash xxmaj wednesday was four 
▁ year , in th ' afternoon . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj what , are there masques ? xxmaj hear you me , xxmaj jessica : 
▁ xxmaj lock up my doors , and when you hear the drum , 
▁ xxmaj and the vile squealing of the wry - neck'd fife , 
▁ xxmaj clamber not you up to the casements then , 
▁ xxmaj nor thrust your head into the public street 
▁ xxmaj to gaze on xxmaj christian fools with varnish'd faces ; 
▁ xxmaj but stop my house 's ears- i mean my casements ; 
▁ xxmaj let not the sound of shallow fopp'ry enter 
▁ xxmaj my sober house . xxmaj by xxmaj jacob 's staff , i swear 
▁ i have no mind of feasting forth to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will go . xxmaj go you before me , sirrah ; 
▁ xxmaj say i will come . 
▁ xxup launcelot . i will go before , sir . xxmaj mistress , look out at window for 
▁ all this . 
▁ xxmaj there will come a xxmaj christian by 
▁ xxmaj will be worth a xxmaj jewess ' eye . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj what says that fool of xxmaj hagar 's offspring , ha ? 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj his words were ' farewell , mistress ' ; nothing else . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj the patch is kind enough , but a huge feeder , 
▁ xxmaj snail - slow in profit , and he sleeps by day 
▁ xxmaj more than the wild - cat ; drones hive not with me , 
▁ xxmaj therefore i part with him ; and part with him 
▁ xxmaj to one that i would have him help to waste 
▁ xxmaj his borrowed purse . xxmaj well , xxmaj jessica , go in ; 
▁ xxmaj perhaps i will return immediately . 
▁ xxmaj do as i bid you , shut doors after you . 
▁ xxmaj fast bind , fast find- 
▁ a proverb never stale in thrifty mind . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj farewell ; and if my fortune be not crost , 
▁ i have a father , you a daughter , lost . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj venice . xxmaj before xxup shylock 's house 

 xxmaj enter the maskers , xxup gratiano and xxup salerio 

▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj this is the pent - house under which xxmaj lorenzo 
▁ xxmaj desired us to make stand . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj his hour is almost past . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj and it is marvel he out - dwells his hour , 
▁ xxmaj for lovers ever run before the clock . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxup o , ten times faster xxmaj venus ' pigeons fly 
▁ xxmaj to seal love 's bonds new made than they are wo nt 
▁ xxmaj to keep obliged faith unforfeited ! 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj that ever holds : who riseth from a feast 
▁ xxmaj with that keen appetite that he sits down ? 
▁ xxmaj where is the horse that doth untread again 
▁ xxmaj his tedious measures with the unbated fire 
▁ xxmaj that he did pace them first ? xxmaj all things that are 
▁ xxmaj are with more spirit chased than enjoyed . 
▁ xxmaj how like a younker or a prodigal 
▁ xxmaj the scarfed bark puts from her native bay , 
▁ xxmaj hugg'd and embraced by the strumpet wind ; 
▁ xxmaj how like the prodigal doth she return , 
▁ xxmaj with over - weather'd ribs and ragged sails , 
▁ xxmaj lean , rent , and beggar'd by the strumpet wind ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lorenzo 

▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj here comes xxmaj lorenzo ; more of this hereafter . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj sweet friends , your patience for my long abode ! 
▁ xxmaj not xxup i , but my affairs , have made you wait . 
▁ xxmaj when you shall please to play the thieves for wives , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll watch as long for you then . xxmaj approach ; 
▁ xxmaj here dwells my father xxmaj jew . xxmaj ho ! who 's within ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jessica , above , in boy 's clothes 

▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj who are you ? xxmaj tell me , for more certainty , 
▁ xxmaj albeit xxmaj i 'll swear that i do know your tongue . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj lorenzo , and thy love . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj lorenzo , certain ; and my love indeed ; 
▁ xxmaj for who love i so much ? xxmaj and now who knows 
▁ xxmaj but you , xxmaj lorenzo , whether i am yours ? 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj here , catch this casket ; it is worth the pains . 
▁ i am glad ' tis night , you do not look on me , 
▁ xxmaj for i am much asham'd of my exchange ; 
▁ xxmaj but love is blind , and lovers can not see 
▁ xxmaj the pretty follies that themselves commit , 
▁ xxmaj for , if they could , xxmaj cupid himself would blush 
▁ xxmaj to see me thus transformed to a boy . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj descend , for you must be my torch - bearer . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj what ! must i hold a candle to my shames ? 
▁ xxmaj they in themselves , good sooth , are too too light . 
▁ xxmaj why , ' tis an office of discovery , love , 
▁ xxmaj and i should be obscur'd . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj so are you , sweet , 
▁ xxmaj even in the lovely garnish of a boy . 
▁ xxmaj but come at once , 
▁ xxmaj for the close night doth play the runaway , 
▁ xxmaj and we are stay'd for at xxmaj bassanio 's feast . 
▁ xxup jessica . i will make fast the doors , and gild myself 
▁ xxmaj with some moe ducats , and be with you straight . 
▁ xxmaj exit above 

▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj now , by my hood , a gentle , and no xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj beshrew me , but i love her heartily , 
▁ xxmaj for she is wise , if i can judge of her , 
▁ xxmaj and fair she is , if that mine eyes be true , 
▁ xxmaj and true she is , as she hath prov'd herself ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , like herself , wise , fair , and true , 
▁ xxmaj shall she be placed in my constant soul . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup jessica , below 

▁ xxmaj what , art thou come ? xxmaj on , gentlemen , away ; 
▁ xxmaj our masquing mates by this time for us stay . 
▁ xxmaj exit with xxup jessica and xxup salerio 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antonio 

▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj signior xxmaj antonio ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj fie , fie , xxmaj gratiano , where are all the rest ? 
▁ ' tis nine o'clock ; our friends all stay for you ; 
▁ xxmaj no masque to - night ; the wind is come about ; 
▁ xxmaj bassanio presently will go aboard ; 
▁ i have sent twenty out to seek for you . 
▁ xxup gratiano . i am glad on't ; i desire no more delight 
▁ xxmaj than to be under sail and gone to - night . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj belmont . portia 's house 

 xxmaj flourish of cornets . xxmaj enter xxup portia , with the xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco , 
 and their trains 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj go draw aside the curtains and discover 
▁ xxmaj the several caskets to this noble xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxmaj now make your choice . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco . xxmaj the first , of gold , who this inscription bears : 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire . ' 
▁ xxmaj the second , silver , which this promise carries : 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves . ' 
▁ xxmaj this third , dull lead , with warning all as blunt : 
▁ ' who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath . ' 
▁ xxmaj how shall i know if i do choose the right ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj the one of them contains my picture , xxmaj prince ; 
▁ xxmaj if you choose that , then i am yours withal . 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco . xxmaj some god direct my judgment ! xxmaj let me see ; 
▁ i will survey th ' inscriptions back again . 
▁ xxmaj what says this leaden casket ? 
▁ ' who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath . ' 
▁ xxmaj must give- for what ? xxmaj for lead ? xxmaj hazard for lead ! 
▁ xxmaj this casket threatens ; men that hazard all 
▁ xxmaj do it in hope of fair advantages . 
▁ a golden mind stoops not to shows of dross ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead . 
▁ xxmaj what says the silver with her virgin hue ? 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves . ' 
▁ xxmaj as much as he deserves ! xxmaj pause there , xxmaj morocco , 
▁ xxmaj and weigh thy value with an even hand . 
▁ xxmaj if thou beest rated by thy estimation , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost deserve enough , and yet enough 
▁ xxmaj may not extend so far as to the lady ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet to be afeard of my deserving 
▁ xxmaj were but a weak disabling of myself . 
▁ xxmaj as much as i deserve ? xxmaj why , that 's the lady ! 
▁ i do in birth deserve her , and in fortunes , 
▁ xxmaj in graces , and in qualities of breeding ; 
▁ xxmaj but more than these , in love i do deserve . 
▁ xxmaj what if i stray'd no farther , but chose here ? 
▁ xxmaj let 's see once more this saying grav'd in gold : 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire . ' 
▁ xxmaj why , that 's the lady ! xxmaj all the world desires her ; 
▁ xxmaj from the four corners of the earth they come 
▁ xxmaj to kiss this shrine , this mortal - breathing saint . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds 
▁ xxmaj of wide xxmaj arabia are as throughfares now 
▁ xxmaj for princes to come view fair xxmaj portia . 
▁ xxmaj the watery kingdom , whose ambitious head 
▁ xxmaj spits in the face of heaven , is no bar 
▁ xxmaj to stop the foreign spirits , but they come 
▁ xxmaj as o'er a brook to see fair xxmaj portia . 
▁ xxmaj one of these three contains her heavenly picture . 
▁ xxmaj is't like that lead contains her ? ' twere damnation 
▁ xxmaj to think so base a thought ; it were too gross 
▁ xxmaj to rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave . 
▁ xxmaj or shall i think in silver she 's immur'd , 
▁ xxmaj being ten times undervalued to tried gold ? 
▁ o sinful thought ! xxmaj never so rich a gem 
▁ xxmaj was set in worse than gold . xxmaj they have in xxmaj england 
▁ a coin that bears the figure of an angel 
▁ xxmaj stamp'd in gold ; but that 's insculp'd upon . 
▁ xxmaj but here an angel in a golden bed 
▁ xxmaj lies all within . xxmaj deliver me the key ; 
▁ xxmaj here do i choose , and thrive i as i may ! 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj there , take it , xxmaj prince , and if my form lie there , 
▁ xxmaj then i am yours . [ he opens the golden casket ] 
▁ xxup prince xxup of xxup morocco . o hell ! what have we here ? 
▁ a carrion xxmaj death , within whose empty eye 
▁ xxmaj there is a written scroll ! xxmaj i 'll read the writing . 
▁ ' all that glisters is not gold , 
▁ xxmaj often have you heard that told ; 
▁ xxmaj many a man his life hath sold 
▁ xxmaj but my outside to behold . 
▁ xxmaj gilded tombs do worms infold . 
▁ xxmaj had you been as wise as bold , 
▁ xxmaj young in limbs , in judgment old , 
▁ xxmaj your answer had not been inscroll'd . 
▁ xxmaj fare you well , your suit is cold . ' 
▁ xxmaj cold indeed , and labour lost , 
▁ xxmaj then farewell , heat , and welcome , frost . 
▁ xxmaj portia , adieu ! i have too griev'd a heart 
▁ xxmaj to take a tedious leave ; thus losers part . 
▁ xxmaj exit with his train . xxmaj flourish of cornets 
▁ xxup portia . a gentle riddance . xxmaj draw the curtains , go . 
▁ xxmaj let all of his complexion choose me so . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene v xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup salerio and xxup solanio 

▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj why , man , i saw xxmaj bassanio under sail ; 
▁ xxmaj with him is xxmaj gratiano gone along ; 
▁ xxmaj and in their ship i am sure xxmaj lorenzo is not . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj the villain xxmaj jew with outcries rais'd the xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj who went with him to search xxmaj bassanio 's ship . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj he came too late , the ship was under sail ; 
▁ xxmaj but there the xxmaj duke was given to understand 
▁ xxmaj that in a gondola were seen together 
▁ xxmaj lorenzo and his amorous xxmaj jessica ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , xxmaj antonio certified the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj they were not with xxmaj bassanio in his ship . 
▁ xxup solanio . i never heard a passion so confus'd , 
▁ xxmaj so strange , outrageous , and so variable , 
▁ xxmaj as the dog xxmaj jew did utter in the streets . 
▁ ' my daughter ! o my ducats ! o my daughter ! 
▁ xxmaj fled with a xxmaj christian ! o my xxmaj christian ducats ! 
▁ xxmaj justice ! the law ! xxmaj my ducats and my daughter ! 
▁ a sealed bag , two sealed bags of ducats , 
▁ xxmaj of double ducats , stol'n from me by my daughter ! 
▁ xxmaj and jewels- two stones , two rich and precious stones , 
▁ xxmaj stol'n by my daughter ! xxmaj justice ! xxmaj find the girl ; 
▁ xxmaj she hath the stones upon her and the ducats . ' 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj why , all the boys in xxmaj venice follow him , 
▁ xxmaj crying , his stones , his daughter , and his ducats . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj let good xxmaj antonio look he keep his day , 
▁ xxmaj or he shall pay for this . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj marry , well rememb'red ; 
▁ i reason'd with a xxmaj frenchman yesterday , 
▁ xxmaj who told me , in the narrow seas that part 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj french and xxmaj english , there miscarried 
▁ a vessel of our country richly fraught . 
▁ i thought upon xxmaj antonio when he told me , 
▁ xxmaj and wish'd in silence that it were not his . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj you were best to tell xxmaj antonio what you hear ; 
▁ xxmaj yet do not suddenly , for it may grieve him . 
▁ xxup salerio . a kinder gentleman treads not the earth . 
▁ i saw xxmaj bassanio and xxmaj antonio part . 
▁ xxmaj bassanio told him he would make some speed 
▁ xxmaj of his return . xxmaj he answered ' do not so ; 
▁ xxmaj slubber not business for my sake , xxmaj bassanio , 
▁ xxmaj but stay the very riping of the time ; 
▁ xxmaj and for the xxmaj jew 's bond which he hath of me , 
▁ xxmaj let it not enter in your mind of love ; 
▁ xxmaj be merry , and employ your chiefest thoughts 
▁ xxmaj to courtship , and such fair ostents of love 
▁ xxmaj as shall conveniently become you there . ' 
▁ xxmaj and even there , his eye being big with tears , 
▁ xxmaj turning his face , he put his hand behind him , 
▁ xxmaj and with affection wondrous sensible 
▁ xxmaj he wrung xxmaj bassanio 's hand ; and so they parted . 
▁ xxup solanio . i think he only loves the world for him . 
▁ i pray thee , let us go and find him out , 
▁ xxmaj and quicken his embraced heaviness 
▁ xxmaj with some delight or other . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj do we so . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ix . 
 xxmaj belmont . xxup portia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup nerissa , and a xxup servitor 

▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj quick , quick , i pray thee , draw the curtain straight ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince of xxmaj arragon hath ta'en his oath , 
▁ xxmaj and comes to his election presently . 

▁ xxmaj flourish of cornets . xxmaj enter the xxup prince xxup of xxup arragon , 
▁ xxup portia , and their trains 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj behold , there stand the caskets , noble xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxmaj if you choose that wherein i am contain'd , 
▁ xxmaj straight shall our nuptial rites be solemniz'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you fail , without more speech , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you must be gone from hence immediately . 
▁ xxup arragon . i am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things : 
▁ xxmaj first , never to unfold to any one 
▁ xxmaj which casket ' twas i chose ; next , if i fail 
▁ xxmaj of the right casket , never in my life 
▁ xxmaj to woo a maid in way of marriage ; 
▁ xxmaj lastly , 
▁ xxmaj if i do fail in fortune of my choice , 
▁ xxmaj immediately to leave you and be gone . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj to these injunctions every one doth swear 
▁ xxmaj that comes to hazard for my worthless self . 
▁ xxup arragon . xxmaj and so have i address'd me . xxmaj fortune now 
▁ xxmaj to my heart 's hope ! xxmaj gold , silver , and base lead . 
▁ ' who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath . ' 
▁ xxmaj you shall look fairer ere i give or hazard . 
▁ xxmaj what says the golden chest ? xxmaj ha ! let me see : 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire . ' 
▁ xxmaj what many men desire- that ' many ' may be meant 
▁ xxmaj by the fool multitude , that choose by show , 
▁ xxmaj not learning more than the fond eye doth teach ; 
▁ xxmaj which pries not to th ' interior , but , like the martlet , 
▁ xxmaj builds in the weather on the outward wall , 
▁ xxmaj even in the force and road of casualty . 
▁ i will not choose what many men desire , 
▁ xxmaj because i will not jump with common spirits 
▁ xxmaj and rank me with the barbarous multitudes . 
▁ xxmaj why , then to thee , thou silver treasure - house ! 
▁ xxmaj tell me once more what title thou dost bear . 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves . ' 
▁ xxmaj and well said too ; for who shall go about 
▁ xxmaj to cozen fortune , and be honourable 
▁ xxmaj without the stamp of merit ? xxmaj let none presume 
▁ xxmaj to wear an undeserved dignity . 
▁ o that estates , degrees , and offices , 
▁ xxmaj were not deriv'd corruptly , and that clear honour 
▁ xxmaj were purchas'd by the merit of the wearer ! 
▁ xxmaj how many then should cover that stand bare ! 
▁ xxmaj how many be commanded that command ! 
▁ xxmaj how much low peasantry would then be gleaned 
▁ xxmaj from the true seed of honour ! and how much honour 
▁ xxmaj pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times , 
▁ xxmaj to be new varnish'd ! xxmaj well , but to my choice . 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves . ' 
▁ i will assume desert . xxmaj give me a key for this , 
▁ xxmaj and instantly unlock my fortunes here . 
▁ [ he opens the silver casket ] 
▁ xxup portia . [ aside ] xxmaj too long a pause for that which you find there . 
▁ xxup arragon . xxmaj what 's here ? xxmaj the portrait of a blinking idiot 
▁ xxmaj presenting me a schedule ! i will read it . 
▁ xxmaj how much unlike art thou to xxmaj portia ! 
▁ xxmaj how much unlike my hopes and my deservings ! 
▁ ' who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves . ' 
▁ xxmaj did i deserve no more than a fool 's head ? 
▁ xxmaj is that my prize ? xxmaj are my deserts no better ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj to offend and judge are distinct offices 
▁ xxmaj and of opposed natures .