xxbos xxup arragon . xxmaj what is here ? [ reads ] 

▁ ' the fire seven times tried this ; 
▁ xxmaj seven times tried that judgment is 
▁ xxmaj that did never choose amiss . 
▁ xxmaj some there be that shadows kiss , 
▁ xxmaj such have but a shadow 's bliss . 
▁ xxmaj there be fools alive iwis 
▁ xxmaj silver'd o'er , and so was this . 
▁ xxmaj take what wife you will to bed , 
▁ i will ever be your head . 
▁ xxmaj so be gone ; you are sped . ' 

▁ xxmaj still more fool i shall appear 
▁ xxmaj by the time i linger here . 
▁ xxmaj with one fool 's head i came to woo , 
▁ xxmaj but i go away with two . 
▁ xxmaj sweet , adieu ! xxmaj i 'll keep my oath , 
▁ xxmaj patiently to bear my wroth . xxmaj exit with his train 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj thus hath the candle sing'd the moth . 
▁ xxup o , these deliberate fools ! xxmaj when they do choose , 
▁ xxmaj they have the wisdom by their wit to lose . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj the ancient saying is no heresy : 
▁ xxmaj hanging and wiving goes by destiny . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj come , draw the curtain , xxmaj nerissa . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj where is my lady ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj here ; what would my lord ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj madam , there is alighted at your gate 
▁ a young xxmaj venetian , one that comes before 
▁ xxmaj to signify th ' approaching of his lord , 
▁ xxmaj from whom he bringeth sensible regreets ; 
▁ xxmaj to wit , besides commends and courteous breath , 
▁ xxmaj gifts of rich value . xxmaj yet i have not seen 
▁ xxmaj so likely an ambassador of love . 
▁ a day in xxmaj april never came so sweet 
▁ xxmaj to show how costly summer was at hand 
▁ xxmaj as this fore - spurrer comes before his lord . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj no more , i pray thee ; i am half afeard 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee , 
▁ xxmaj thou spend'st such high - day wit in praising him . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , xxmaj nerissa , for i long to see 
▁ xxmaj quick xxmaj cupid 's post that comes so mannerly . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj bassanio , xxmaj lord xxmaj love , if thy will it be ! xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup solanio and xxup salerio 

▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj now , what news on the xxmaj rialto ? 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj why , yet it lives there uncheck'd that xxmaj antonio hath a ship 
▁ of rich lading wreck'd on the narrow seas ; the xxmaj goodwins i think 
▁ they call the place , a very dangerous flat and fatal , where the 
▁ carcases of many a tall ship lie buried , as they say , if my 
▁ gossip xxmaj report be an honest woman of her word . 
▁ xxup solanio . i would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapp'd 
▁ ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a 
▁ third husband . xxmaj but it is true , without any slips of prolixity or 
▁ crossing the plain highway of talk , that the good xxmaj antonio , the 
▁ honest xxmaj antonio- o that i had a title good enough to keep his name 
▁ company!- 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj come , the full stop . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj what sayest thou ? xxmaj why , the end is , he hath lost a 
▁ ship . 
▁ xxup salerio . i would it might prove the end of his losses . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj let me say amen betimes , lest the devil cross my prayer , 
▁ for here he comes in the likeness of a xxmaj jew . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup shylock 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj shylock ? xxmaj what news among the merchants ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj you knew , none so well , none so well as you , of my 
▁ daughter 's flight . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj that 's certain ; xxup i , for my part , knew the tailor that made 
▁ the wings she flew withal . 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj and xxmaj shylock , for his own part , knew the bird was flidge ; 
▁ and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj she is damn'd for it . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj that 's certain , if the devil may be her judge . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj my own flesh and blood to rebel ! 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj out upon it , old carrion ! xxmaj rebels it at these years ? 
▁ xxup shylock . i say my daughter is my flesh and my blood . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj there is more difference between thy flesh and hers than 
▁ between jet and ivory ; more between your bloods than there is 
▁ between red wine and xxmaj rhenish . xxmaj but tell us , do you hear whether 
▁ xxmaj antonio have had any loss at sea or no ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj there i have another bad match : a bankrupt , a prodigal , 
▁ who dare scarce show his head on the xxmaj rialto ; a beggar , that was 
▁ us'd to come so smug upon the mart . xxmaj let him look to his bond . xxmaj he 
▁ was wo nt to call me usurer ; let him look to his bond . xxmaj he was wo nt 
▁ to lend money for a xxmaj christian courtesy ; let him look to his bond . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj why , i am sure , if he forfeit , thou wilt not take his 
▁ flesh . xxmaj what 's that good for ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj to bait fish withal . xxmaj if it will feed nothing else , it will 
▁ feed my revenge . xxmaj he hath disgrac'd me and hind'red me half a 
▁ million ; laugh'd at my losses , mock'd at my gains , scorned my 
▁ nation , thwarted my bargains , cooled my friends , heated mine 
▁ enemies . xxmaj and what 's his reason ? i am a xxmaj jew . xxmaj hath not a xxmaj jew eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj hath not a xxmaj jew hands , organs , dimensions , senses , affections , 
▁ passions , fed with the same food , hurt with the same weapons , 
▁ subject to the same diseases , healed by the same means , warmed 
▁ and cooled by the same winter and summer , as a xxmaj christian is ? xxmaj if 
▁ you prick us , do we not bleed ? xxmaj if you tickle us , do we not laugh ? 
▁ xxmaj if you poison us , do we not die ? xxmaj and if you wrong us , shall we 
▁ not revenge ? xxmaj if we are like you in the rest , we will resemble you 
▁ in that . xxmaj if a xxmaj jew wrong a xxmaj christian , what is his humility ? 
▁ xxmaj revenge . xxmaj if a xxmaj christian wrong a xxmaj jew , what should his sufferance 
▁ be by xxmaj christian example ? xxmaj why , revenge . xxmaj the villainy you teach me 
▁ i will execute ; and itshall go hard but i will better the 
▁ instruction . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup man from xxup antonio 

▁ xxup man . xxmaj gentlemen , my master xxmaj antonio is at his house , and desires to 
▁ speak with you both . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj we have been up and down to seek him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup tubal 

▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj here comes another of the tribe ; a third can not be 
▁ match'd , unless the devil himself turn xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup solanio , xxup salerio , and xxup man 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj how now , xxmaj tubal , what news from xxmaj genoa ? xxmaj hast thou found my 
▁ daughter ? 
▁ xxup tubal . i often came where i did hear of her , but can not find her . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj why there , there , there , there ! a diamond gone , cost me 
▁ two thousand ducats in xxmaj frankfort ! xxmaj the curse never fell upon our 
▁ nation till now ; i never felt it till now . xxmaj two thousand ducats in 
▁ that , and other precious , precious jewels . i would my daughter 
▁ were dead at my foot , and the jewels in her ear ; would she were 
▁ hears'd at my foot , and the ducats in her coffin ! xxmaj no news of 
▁ them ? xxmaj why , so- and i know not what 's spent in the search . xxmaj why , 
▁ thou- loss upon loss ! xxmaj the thief gone with so much , and so much to 
▁ find the thief ; and no satisfaction , no revenge ; nor no ill luck 
▁ stirring but what lights o ' my shoulders ; no sighs but o ' my 
▁ breathing ; no tears but o ' my shedding ! 
▁ xxup tubal . xxmaj yes , other men have ill luck too : xxmaj antonio , as i heard in 
▁ xxmaj genoa- 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj what , what , what ? xxmaj ill luck , ill luck ? 
▁ xxup tubal . xxmaj hath an argosy cast away coming from xxmaj tripolis . 
▁ xxup shylock . i thank xxmaj god , i thank xxmaj god . xxmaj is it true , is it true ? 
▁ xxup tubal . i spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck . 
▁ xxup shylock . i thank thee , good xxmaj tubal . xxmaj good news , good news- ha , ha!- 
▁ heard in xxmaj genoa . 
▁ xxup tubal . xxmaj your daughter spent in xxmaj genoa , as i heard , one night , 
▁ fourscore ducats . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj thou stick'st a dagger in me- i shall never see my gold 
▁ again . xxmaj fourscore ducats at a sitting ! xxmaj fourscore ducats ! 
▁ xxup tubal . xxmaj there came divers of xxmaj antonio 's creditors in my company to 
▁ xxmaj venice that swear he can not choose but break . 
▁ xxup shylock . i am very glad of it ; xxmaj i 'll plague him , xxmaj i 'll torture him ; i 
▁ am glad of it . 
▁ xxup tubal . xxmaj one of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter 
▁ for a monkey . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj out upon her ! xxmaj thou torturest me , xxmaj tubal . xxmaj it was my 
▁ turquoise ; i had it of xxmaj leah when i was a bachelor ; i would not 
▁ have given it for a wilderness of monkeys . 
▁ xxup tubal . xxmaj but xxmaj antonio is certainly undone . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj nay , that 's true ; that 's very true . xxmaj go , xxmaj tubal , fee me an 
▁ officer ; bespeak him a fortnight before . i will have the heart of 
▁ him , if he forfeit ; for , were he out of xxmaj venice , i can make what 
▁ merchandise i will . xxmaj go , xxmaj tubal , and meet me at our synagogue ; go , 
▁ good xxmaj tubal ; at our synagogue , xxmaj tubal . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj belmont . xxup portia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup bassanio , xxup portia , xxup gratiano , xxup nerissa , and all their trains 

▁ xxup portia . i pray you tarry ; pause a day or two 
▁ xxmaj before you hazard ; for , in choosing wrong , 
▁ i lose your company ; therefore forbear a while . 
▁ xxmaj there 's something tells me- but it is not love- 
▁ i would not lose you ; and you know yourself 
▁ xxmaj hate counsels not in such a quality . 
▁ xxmaj but lest you should not understand me well- 
▁ xxmaj and yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought- 
▁ i would detain you here some month or two 
▁ xxmaj before you venture for me . i could teach you 
▁ xxmaj how to choose right , but then i am forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj so will i never be ; so may you miss me ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you do , you 'll make me wish a sin , 
▁ xxmaj that i had been forsworn . xxmaj beshrew your eyes ! 
▁ xxmaj they have o'erlook'd me and divided me ; 
▁ xxmaj one half of me is yours , the other half yours- 
▁ xxmaj mine own , i would say ; but if mine , then yours , 
▁ xxmaj and so all yours . xxup o ! these naughty times 
▁ xxmaj puts bars between the owners and their rights ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , though yours , not yours . xxmaj prove it so , 
▁ xxmaj let fortune go to hell for it , not xxup i. 
▁ i speak too long , but ' tis to peize the time , 
▁ xxmaj to eke it , and to draw it out in length , 
▁ xxmaj to stay you from election . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj let me choose ; 
▁ xxmaj for as i am , i live upon the rack . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj upon the rack , xxmaj bassanio ? xxmaj then confess 
▁ xxmaj what treason there is mingled with your love . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj none but that ugly treason of mistrust 
▁ xxmaj which makes me fear th ' enjoying of my love ; 
▁ xxmaj there may as well be amity and life 
▁ ' tween snow and fire as treason and my love . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj ay , but i fear you speak upon the rack , 
▁ xxmaj where men enforced do speak anything . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj promise me life , and xxmaj i 'll confess the truth . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj well then , confess and live . 
▁ xxup bassanio . ' confess ' and ' love ' 
▁ xxmaj had been the very sum of my confession . 
▁ o happy torment , when my torturer 
▁ xxmaj doth teach me answers for deliverance ! 
▁ xxmaj but let me to my fortune and the caskets . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj away , then ; i am lock'd in one of them . 
▁ xxmaj if you do love me , you will find me out . 
▁ xxmaj nerissa and the rest , stand all aloof ; 
▁ xxmaj let music sound while he doth make his choice ; 
▁ xxmaj then , if he lose , he makes a swan - like end , 
▁ xxmaj fading in music . xxmaj that the comparison 
▁ xxmaj may stand more proper , my eye shall be the stream 
▁ xxmaj and wat'ry death - bed for him . xxmaj he may win ; 
▁ xxmaj and what is music then ? xxmaj then music is 
▁ xxmaj even as the flourish when true subjects bow 
▁ xxmaj to a new - crowned monarch ; such it is 
▁ xxmaj as are those dulcet sounds in break of day 
▁ xxmaj that creep into the dreaming bridegroom 's ear 
▁ xxmaj and summon him to marriage . xxmaj now he goes , 
▁ xxmaj with no less presence , but with much more love , 
▁ xxmaj than young xxmaj alcides when he did redeem 
▁ xxmaj the virgin tribute paid by howling xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj to the sea - monster . i stand for sacrifice ; 
▁ xxmaj the rest aloof are the xxmaj dardanian wives , 
▁ xxmaj with bleared visages come forth to view 
▁ xxmaj the issue of th ' exploit . xxmaj go , xxmaj hercules ! 
▁ xxmaj live thou , i live . xxmaj with much much more dismay 
▁ i view the fight than thou that mak'st the fray . 

▁ a xxup song 

▁ the whilst xxup bassanio comments on the caskets to himself 

▁ xxmaj tell me where is fancy bred , 
▁ xxmaj or in the heart or in the head , 
▁ xxmaj how begot , how nourished ? 
▁ xxmaj reply , reply . 
▁ xxmaj it is engend'red in the eyes , 
▁ xxmaj with gazing fed ; and fancy dies 
▁ xxmaj in the cradle where it lies . 
▁ xxmaj let us all ring fancy 's knell : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll begin it- xxmaj ding , dong , bell . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj ding , dong , bell . 

▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj so may the outward shows be least themselves ; 
▁ xxmaj the world is still deceiv'd with ornament . 
▁ xxmaj in law , what plea so tainted and corrupt 
▁ xxmaj but , being season'd with a gracious voice , 
▁ xxmaj obscures the show of evil ? xxmaj in religion , 
▁ xxmaj what damned error but some sober brow 
▁ xxmaj will bless it , and approve it with a text , 
▁ xxmaj hiding the grossness with fair ornament ? 
▁ xxmaj there is no vice so simple but assumes 
▁ xxmaj some mark of virtue on his outward parts . 
▁ xxmaj how many cowards , whose hearts are all as false 
▁ xxmaj as stairs of sand , wear yet upon their chins 
▁ xxmaj the beards of xxmaj hercules and frowning xxmaj mars ; 
▁ xxmaj who , inward search'd , have livers white as milk ! 
▁ xxmaj and these assume but valour 's excrement 
▁ xxmaj to render them redoubted . xxmaj look on beauty 
▁ xxmaj and you shall see ' tis purchas'd by the weight , 
▁ xxmaj which therein works a miracle in nature , 
▁ xxmaj making them lightest that wear most of it ; 
▁ xxmaj so are those crisped snaky golden locks 
▁ xxmaj which make such wanton gambols with the wind 
▁ xxmaj upon supposed fairness often known 
▁ xxmaj to be the dowry of a second head- 
▁ xxmaj the skull that bred them in the sepulchre . 
▁ xxmaj thus ornament is but the guiled shore 
▁ xxmaj to a most dangerous sea ; the beauteous scarf 
▁ xxmaj veiling an xxmaj indian beauty ; in a word , 
▁ xxmaj the seeming truth which cunning times put on 
▁ xxmaj to entrap the wisest . xxmaj therefore , thou gaudy gold , 
▁ xxmaj hard food for xxmaj midas , i will none of thee ; 
▁ xxmaj nor none of thee , thou pale and common drudge 
▁ ' tween man and man ; but thou , thou meagre lead , 
▁ xxmaj which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught , 
▁ xxmaj thy plainness moves me more than eloquence , 
▁ xxmaj and here choose xxup i. xxmaj joy be the consequence ! 
▁ xxup portia . [ aside ] xxmaj how all the other passions fleet to air , 
▁ xxmaj as doubtful thoughts , and rash - embrac'd despair , 
▁ xxmaj and shudd'ring fear , and green - ey'd jealousy ! 
▁ o love , be moderate , allay thy ecstasy , 
▁ xxmaj in measure rain thy joy , scant this excess ! 
▁ i feel too much thy blessing . xxmaj make it less , 
▁ xxmaj for fear i surfeit . 
▁ xxup bassanio . [ opening the leaden casket ] xxmaj what find i here ? 
▁ xxmaj fair xxmaj portia 's counterfeit ! xxmaj what demi - god 
▁ xxmaj hath come so near creation ? xxmaj move these eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj or whether riding on the balls of mine 
▁ xxmaj seem they in motion ? xxmaj here are sever'd lips , 
▁ xxmaj parted with sugar breath ; so sweet a bar 
▁ xxmaj should sunder such sweet friends . xxmaj here in her hairs 
▁ xxmaj the painter plays the spider , and hath woven 
▁ a golden mesh t ' entrap the hearts of men 
▁ xxmaj faster than gnats in cobwebs . xxmaj but her eyes- 
▁ xxmaj how could he see to do them ? xxmaj having made one , 
▁ xxmaj methinks it should have power to steal both his , 
▁ xxmaj and leave itself unfurnish'd . xxmaj yet look how far 
▁ xxmaj the substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow 
▁ xxmaj in underprizing it , so far this shadow 
▁ xxmaj doth limp behind the substance . xxmaj here 's the scroll , 
▁ xxmaj the continent and summary of my fortune . 
▁ ' you that choose not by the view , 
▁ xxmaj chance as fair and choose as true ! 
▁ xxmaj since this fortune falls to you , 
▁ xxmaj be content and seek no new . 
▁ xxmaj if you be well pleas'd with this , 
▁ xxmaj and hold your fortune for your bliss , 
▁ xxmaj turn to where your lady is 
▁ xxmaj and claim her with a loving kiss . ' 
▁ a gentle scroll . xxmaj fair lady , by your leave ; 
▁ i come by note , to give and to receive . 
▁ xxmaj like one of two contending in a prize , 
▁ xxmaj that thinks he hath done well in people 's eyes , 
▁ xxmaj hearing applause and universal shout , 
▁ xxmaj giddy in spirit , still gazing in a doubt 
▁ xxmaj whether those peals of praise be his or no ; 
▁ xxmaj so , thrice - fair lady , stand i even so , 
▁ xxmaj as doubtful whether what i see be true , 
▁ xxmaj until confirm'd , sign'd , ratified by you . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you see me , xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio , where i stand , 
▁ xxmaj such as i am . xxmaj though for myself alone 
▁ i would not be ambitious in my wish 
▁ xxmaj to wish myself much better , yet for you 
▁ i would be trebled twenty times myself , 
▁ a thousand times more fair , ten thousand times more rich , 
▁ xxmaj that only to stand high in your account 
▁ i might in virtues , beauties , livings , friends , 
▁ xxmaj exceed account . xxmaj but the full sum of me 
▁ xxmaj is sum of something which , to term in gross , 
▁ xxmaj is an unlesson'd girl , unschool'd , unpractis'd ; 
▁ xxmaj happy in this , she is not yet so old 
▁ xxmaj but she may learn ; happier than this , 
▁ xxmaj she is not bred so dull but she can learn ; 
▁ xxmaj happiest of all is that her gentle spirit 
▁ xxmaj commits itself to yours to be directed , 
▁ xxmaj as from her lord , her governor , her king . 
▁ xxmaj myself and what is mine to you and yours 
▁ xxmaj is now converted . xxmaj but now i was the lord 
▁ xxmaj of this fair mansion , master of my servants , 
▁ xxmaj queen o'er myself ; and even now , but now , 
▁ xxmaj this house , these servants , and this same myself , 
▁ xxmaj are yours- my lord 's . i give them with this ring , 
▁ xxmaj which when you part from , lose , or give away , 
▁ xxmaj let it presage the ruin of your love , 
▁ xxmaj and be my vantage to exclaim on you . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj madam , you have bereft me of all words ; 
▁ xxmaj only my blood speaks to you in my veins ; 
▁ xxmaj and there is such confusion in my powers 
▁ xxmaj as , after some oration fairly spoke 
▁ xxmaj by a beloved prince , there doth appear 
▁ xxmaj among the buzzing pleased multitude , 
▁ xxmaj where every something , being blent together , 
▁ xxmaj turns to a wild of nothing , save of joy 
▁ xxmaj express'd and not express'd . xxmaj but when this ring 
▁ xxmaj parts from this finger , then parts life from hence ; 
▁ xxup o , then be bold to say xxmaj bassanio 's dead ! 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj my lord and lady , it is now our time 
▁ xxmaj that have stood by and seen our wishes prosper 
▁ xxmaj to cry ' good joy . ' xxmaj good joy , my lord and lady ! 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio , and my gentle lady , 
▁ i wish you all the joy that you can wish , 
▁ xxmaj for i am sure you can wish none from me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , when your honours mean to solemnize 
▁ xxmaj the bargain of your faith , i do beseech you 
▁ xxmaj even at that time i may be married too . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj with all my heart , so thou canst get a wife . 
▁ xxup gratiano . i thank your lordship , you have got me one . 
▁ xxmaj my eyes , my lord , can look as swift as yours : 
▁ xxmaj you saw the mistress , i beheld the maid ; 
▁ xxmaj you lov'd , i lov'd ; for intermission 
▁ xxmaj no more pertains to me , my lord , than you . 
▁ xxmaj your fortune stood upon the caskets there , 
▁ xxmaj and so did mine too , as the matter falls ; 
▁ xxmaj for wooing here until i sweat again , 
▁ xxmaj and swearing till my very roof was dry 
▁ xxmaj with oaths of love , at last- if promise last- 
▁ i got a promise of this fair one here 
▁ xxmaj to have her love , provided that your fortune 
▁ xxmaj achiev'd her mistress . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj is this true , xxmaj nerissa ? 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj madam , it is , so you stand pleas'd withal . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj and do you , xxmaj gratiano , mean good faith ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj yes , faith , my lord . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj our feast shall be much honoured in your marriage . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj we 'll play with them : the first boy for a thousand 
▁ ducats . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj what , and stake down ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj no ; we shall ne'er win at that sport , and stake down- 
▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? xxmaj lorenzo and his infidel ? 
▁ xxmaj what , and my old xxmaj venetian friend , xxmaj salerio ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lorenzo , xxup jessica , and xxup salerio , a messenger 
▁ from xxmaj venice 

▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj lorenzo and xxmaj salerio , welcome hither , 
▁ xxmaj if that the youth of my new int'rest here 
▁ xxmaj have power to bid you welcome . xxmaj by your leave , 
▁ i bid my very friends and countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj portia , welcome . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj so do xxup i , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj they are entirely welcome . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . i thank your honour . xxmaj for my part , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj my purpose was not to have seen you here ; 
▁ xxmaj but meeting with xxmaj salerio by the way , 
▁ xxmaj he did entreat me , past all saying nay , 
▁ xxmaj to come with him along . 
▁ xxup salerio . i did , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj and i have reason for it . xxmaj signior xxmaj antonio 
▁ xxmaj commends him to you . [ gives xxup bassanio a letter ] 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj ere i ope his letter , 
▁ i pray you tell me how my good friend doth . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj not sick , my lord , unless it be in mind ; 
▁ xxmaj nor well , unless in mind ; his letter there 
▁ xxmaj will show you his estate . [ bassanio opens the letter ] 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj nerissa , cheer yond stranger ; bid her welcome . 
▁ xxmaj your hand , xxmaj salerio . xxmaj what 's the news from xxmaj venice ? 
▁ xxmaj how doth that royal merchant , good xxmaj antonio ? 
▁ i know he will be glad of our success : 
▁ xxmaj we are the xxmaj jasons , we have won the fleece . 
▁ xxup salerio . i would you had won the fleece that he hath lost . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj there are some shrewd contents in yond same paper 
▁ xxmaj that steals the colour from xxmaj bassanio 's cheek : 
▁ xxmaj some dear friend dead , else nothing in the world 
▁ xxmaj could turn so much the constitution 
▁ xxmaj of any constant man . xxmaj what , worse and worse ! 
▁ xxmaj with leave , xxmaj bassanio : i am half yourself , 
▁ xxmaj and i must freely have the half of anything 
▁ xxmaj that this same paper brings you . 
▁ xxup bassanio . o sweet xxmaj portia , 
▁ xxmaj here are a few of the unpleasant'st words 
▁ xxmaj that ever blotted paper ! xxmaj gentle lady , 
▁ xxmaj when i did first impart my love to you , 
▁ i freely told you all the wealth i had 
▁ xxmaj ran in my veins- i was a gentleman ; 
▁ xxmaj and then i told you true . xxmaj and yet , dear lady , 
▁ xxmaj rating myself at nothing , you shall see 
▁ xxmaj how much i was a braggart . xxmaj when i told you 
▁ xxmaj my state was nothing , i should then have told you 
▁ xxmaj that i was worse than nothing ; for indeed 
▁ i have engag'd myself to a dear friend , 
▁ xxmaj engag'd my friend to his mere enemy , 
▁ xxmaj to feed my means . xxmaj here is a letter , lady , 
▁ xxmaj the paper as the body of my friend , 
▁ xxmaj and every word in it a gaping wound 
▁ xxmaj issuing life - blood . xxmaj but is it true , xxmaj salerio ? 
▁ xxmaj hath all his ventures fail'd ? xxmaj what , not one hit ? 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj tripolis , from xxmaj mexico , and xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj lisbon , xxmaj barbary , and xxmaj india , 
▁ xxmaj and not one vessel scape the dreadful touch 
▁ xxmaj of merchant - marring rocks ? 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj not one , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj besides , it should appear that , if he had 
▁ xxmaj the present money to discharge the xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj he would not take it . xxmaj never did i know 
▁ a creature that did bear the shape of man 
▁ xxmaj so keen and greedy to confound a man . 
▁ xxmaj he plies the xxmaj duke at morning and at night , 
▁ xxmaj and doth impeach the freedom of the state , 
▁ xxmaj if they deny him justice . xxmaj twenty merchants , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke himself , and the magnificoes 
▁ xxmaj of greatest port , have all persuaded with him ; 
▁ xxmaj but none can drive him from the envious plea 
▁ xxmaj of forfeiture , of justice , and his bond . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj when i was with him , i have heard him swear 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj tubal and to xxmaj chus , his countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj that he would rather have xxmaj antonio 's flesh 
▁ xxmaj than twenty times the value of the sum 
▁ xxmaj that he did owe him ; and i know , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj if law , authority , and power , deny not , 
▁ xxmaj it will go hard with poor xxmaj antonio . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj the dearest friend to me , the kindest man , 
▁ xxmaj the best condition'd and unwearied spirit 
▁ xxmaj in doing courtesies ; and one in whom 
▁ xxmaj the ancient xxmaj roman honour more appears 
▁ xxmaj than any that draws breath in xxmaj italy . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj what sum owes he the xxmaj jew ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj for me , three thousand ducats . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj what ! no more ? 
▁ xxmaj pay him six thousand , and deface the bond ; 
▁ xxmaj double six thousand , and then treble that , 
▁ xxmaj before a friend of this description 
▁ xxmaj shall lose a hair through xxmaj bassanio 's fault . 
▁ xxmaj first go with me to church and call me wife , 
▁ xxmaj and then away to xxmaj venice to your friend ; 
▁ xxmaj for never shall you lie by xxmaj portia 's side 
▁ xxmaj with an unquiet soul . xxmaj you shall have gold 
▁ xxmaj to pay the petty debt twenty times over . 
▁ xxmaj when it is paid , bring your true friend along . 
▁ xxmaj my maid xxmaj nerissa and myself meantime 
▁ xxmaj will live as maids and widows . xxmaj come , away ; 
▁ xxmaj for you shall hence upon your wedding day . 
▁ xxmaj bid your friends welcome , show a merry cheer ; 
▁ xxmaj since you are dear bought , i will love you dear . 
▁ xxmaj but let me hear the letter of your friend . 
▁ xxup bassanio . [ reads ] ' sweet xxmaj bassanio , my ships have all miscarried , 
▁ my creditors grow cruel , my estate is very low , my bond to the 
▁ xxmaj jew is forfeit ; and since , in paying it , it is impossible i 
▁ should live , all debts are clear'd between you and xxup i , if i might 
▁ but see you at my death . xxmaj notwithstanding , use your pleasure ; if 
▁ your love do not persuade you to come , let not my letter . ' 
▁ xxup portia . o love , dispatch all business and be gone ! 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj since i have your good leave to go away , 
▁ i will make haste ; but , till i come again , 
▁ xxmaj no bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay , 
▁ xxmaj nor rest be interposer ' twixt us twain . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup shylock , xxup solanio , xxup antonio , and xxup gaoler 

▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj gaoler , look to him . xxmaj tell not me of mercy- 
▁ xxmaj this is the fool that lent out money gratis . 
▁ xxmaj gaoler , look to him . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj hear me yet , good xxmaj shylock . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj i 'll have my bond ; speak not against my bond . 
▁ i have sworn an oath that i will have my bond . 
▁ xxmaj thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause , 
▁ xxmaj but , since i am a dog , beware my fangs ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke shall grant me justice . i do wonder , 
▁ xxmaj thou naughty gaoler , that thou art so fond 
▁ xxmaj to come abroad with him at his request . 
▁ xxup antonio . i pray thee hear me speak . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj i 'll have my bond . i will not hear thee speak ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have my bond ; and therefore speak no more . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not be made a soft and dull - ey'd fool , 
▁ xxmaj to shake the head , relent , and sigh , and yield , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj christian intercessors . xxmaj follow not ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have no speaking ; i will have my bond . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup solanio . xxmaj it is the most impenetrable cur 
▁ xxmaj that ever kept with men . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj let him alone ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow him no more with bootless prayers . 
▁ xxmaj he seeks my life ; his reason well i know : 
▁ i oft deliver'd from his forfeitures 
▁ xxmaj many that have at times made moan to me ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore he hates me . 
▁ xxup solanio . i am sure the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj will never grant this forfeiture to hold . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj the xxmaj duke can not deny the course of law ; 
▁ xxmaj for the commodity that strangers have 
▁ xxmaj with us in xxmaj venice , if it be denied , 
▁ xxmaj will much impeach the justice of the state , 
▁ xxmaj since that the trade and profit of the city 
▁ xxmaj consisteth of all nations . xxmaj therefore , go ; 
▁ xxmaj these griefs and losses have so bated me 
▁ xxmaj that i shall hardly spare a pound of flesh 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow to my bloody creditor . 
▁ xxmaj well , gaoler , on ; pray xxmaj god xxmaj bassanio come 
▁ xxmaj to see me pay his debt , and then i care not . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj belmont . xxup portia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup portia , xxup nerissa , xxup lorenzo , xxup jessica , and xxup balthasar 

▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj madam , although i speak it in your presence , 
▁ xxmaj you have a noble and a true conceit 
▁ xxmaj of godlike amity , which appears most strongly 
▁ xxmaj in bearing thus the absence of your lord . 
▁ xxmaj but if you knew to whom you show this honour , 
▁ xxmaj how true a gentleman you send relief , 
▁ xxmaj how dear a lover of my lord your husband , 
▁ i know you would be prouder of the work 
▁ xxmaj than customary bounty can enforce you . 
▁ xxup portia . i never did repent for doing good , 
▁ xxmaj nor shall not now ; for in companions 
▁ xxmaj that do converse and waste the time together , 
▁ xxmaj whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love , 
▁ xxmaj there must be needs a like proportion 
▁ xxmaj of lineaments , of manners , and of spirit , 
▁ xxmaj which makes me think that this xxmaj antonio , 
▁ xxmaj being the bosom lover of my lord , 
▁ xxmaj must needs be like my lord . xxmaj if it be so , 
▁ xxmaj how little is the cost i have bestowed 
▁ xxmaj in purchasing the semblance of my soul 
▁ xxmaj from out the state of hellish cruelty ! 
▁ xxmaj this comes too near the praising of myself ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , no more of it ; hear other things . 
▁ xxmaj lorenzo , i commit into your hands 
▁ xxmaj the husbandry and manage of my house 
▁ xxmaj until my lord 's return ; for mine own part , 
▁ i have toward heaven breath'd a secret vow 
▁ xxmaj to live in prayer and contemplation , 
▁ xxmaj only attended by xxmaj nerissa here , 
▁ xxmaj until her husband and my lord 's return . 
▁ xxmaj there is a monastery two miles off , 
▁ xxmaj and there we will abide . i do desire you 
▁ xxmaj not to deny this imposition , 
▁ xxmaj the which my love and some necessity 
▁ xxmaj now lays upon you . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj madam , with all my heart 
▁ i shall obey you in an fair commands . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj my people do already know my mind , 
▁ xxmaj and will acknowledge you and xxmaj jessica 
▁ xxmaj in place of xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio and myself . 
▁ xxmaj so fare you well till we shall meet again . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you ! 
▁ xxup jessica . i wish your ladyship all heart 's content . 
▁ xxup portia . i thank you for your wish , and am well pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj to wish it back on you . xxmaj fare you well , xxmaj jessica . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup jessica and xxup lorenzo 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj balthasar , 
▁ xxmaj as i have ever found thee honest - true , 
▁ xxmaj so let me find thee still . xxmaj take this same letter , 
▁ xxmaj and use thou all th ' endeavour of a man 
▁ xxmaj in speed to xxmaj padua ; see thou render this 
▁ xxmaj into my cousin 's hands , xxmaj doctor xxmaj bellario ; 
▁ xxmaj and look what notes and garments he doth give thee , 
▁ xxmaj bring them , i pray thee , with imagin'd speed 
▁ xxmaj unto the traject , to the common ferry 
▁ xxmaj which trades to xxmaj venice . xxmaj waste no time in words , 
▁ xxmaj but get thee gone ; i shall be there before thee . 
▁ xxup balthasar . xxmaj madam , i go with all convenient speed . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj come on , xxmaj nerissa , i have work in hand 
▁ xxmaj that you yet know not of ; we 'll see our husbands 
▁ xxmaj before they think of us . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj shall they see us ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj they shall , xxmaj nerissa ; but in such a habit 
▁ xxmaj that they shall think we are accomplished 
▁ xxmaj with that we lack . xxmaj i 'll hold thee any wager , 
▁ xxmaj when we are both accoutred like young men , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll prove the prettier fellow of the two , 
▁ xxmaj and wear my dagger with the braver grace , 
▁ xxmaj and speak between the change of man and boy 
▁ xxmaj with a reed voice ; and turn two mincing steps 
▁ xxmaj into a manly stride ; and speak of frays 
▁ xxmaj like a fine bragging youth ; and tell quaint lies , 
▁ xxmaj how honourable ladies sought my love , 
▁ xxmaj which i denying , they fell sick and died- 
▁ i could not do withal . xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll repent , 
▁ xxmaj and wish for all that , that i had not kill'd them . 
▁ xxmaj and twenty of these puny lies xxmaj i 'll tell , 
▁ xxmaj that men shall swear i have discontinued school 
▁ xxmaj about a twelvemonth . i have within my mind 
▁ a thousand raw tricks of these bragging xxmaj jacks , 
▁ xxmaj which i will practise . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj why , shall we turn to men ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj fie , what a question 's that , 
▁ xxmaj if thou wert near a lewd interpreter ! 
▁ xxmaj but come , xxmaj i 'll tell thee all my whole device 
▁ xxmaj when i am in my coach , which stays for us 
▁ xxmaj at the park gate ; and therefore haste away , 
▁ xxmaj for we must measure twenty miles to - day . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj belmont . xxmaj the garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup launcelot and xxup jessica 

▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj yes , truly ; for , look you , the sins of the father are to 
▁ be laid upon the children ; therefore , i promise you , i fear you . 
▁ i was always plain with you , and so now i speak my agitation of 
▁ the matter ; therefore be o ' good cheer , for truly i think you are 
▁ damn'd . xxmaj there is but one hope in it that can do you any good , and 
▁ that is but a kind of bastard hope , neither . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj and what hope is that , i pray thee ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj marry , you may partly hope that your father got you not- 
▁ that you are not the xxmaj jew 's daughter . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj that were a kind of bastard hope indeed ; so the sins of my 
▁ mother should be visited upon me . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj truly then i fear you are damn'd both by father and 
▁ mother ; thus when i shun xxmaj scylla , your father , i fall into 
▁ xxmaj charybdis , your mother ; well , you are gone both ways . 
▁ xxup jessica . i shall be sav'd by my husband ; he hath made me a 
▁ xxmaj christian . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj truly , the more to blame he ; we were xxmaj christians enow 
▁ before , e'en as many as could well live one by another . xxmaj this 
▁ making of xxmaj christians will raise the price of hogs ; if we grow all 
▁ to be pork - eaters , we shall not shortly have a rasher on the 
▁ coals for money . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lorenzo 

▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj i 'll tell my husband , xxmaj launcelot , what you say ; here he 
▁ comes . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . i shall grow jealous of you shortly , xxmaj launcelot , if you 
▁ thus get my wife into corners . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj nay , you need nor fear us , xxmaj lorenzo ; xxmaj launcelot and i are 
▁ out ; he tells me flatly there 's no mercy for me in heaven , 
▁ because i am a xxmaj jew 's daughter ; and he says you are no good member 
▁ of the commonwealth , for in converting xxmaj jews to xxmaj christians you 
▁ raise the price of pork . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . i shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you 
▁ can the getting up of the negro 's belly ; the xxmaj moor is with child 
▁ by you , xxmaj launcelot . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj it is much that the xxmaj moor should be more than reason ; but 
▁ if she be less than an honest woman , she is indeed more than i 
▁ took her for . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj how every fool can play upon the word ! i think the best 
▁ grace of wit will shortly turn into silence , and discourse grow 
▁ commendable in none only but parrots . xxmaj go in , sirrah ; bid them 
▁ prepare for dinner . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj that is done , sir ; they have all stomachs . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj goodly xxmaj lord , what a wit - snapper are you ! xxmaj then bid them 
▁ prepare dinner . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj that is done too , sir , only ' cover ' is the word . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj will you cover , then , sir ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj not so , sir , neither ; i know my duty . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj yet more quarrelling with occasion ! xxmaj wilt thou show the 
▁ whole wealth of thy wit in an instant ? i pray thee understand a 
▁ plain man in his plain meaning : go to thy fellows , bid them cover 
▁ the table , serve in the meat , and we will come in to dinner . 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj for the table , sir , it shall be serv'd in ; for the meat , 
▁ sir , it shall be cover'd ; for your coming in to dinner , sir , why , 
▁ let it be as humours and conceits shall govern . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lorenzo . o dear discretion , how his words are suited ! 
▁ xxmaj the fool hath planted in his memory 
▁ xxmaj an army of good words ; and i do know 
▁ a many fools that stand in better place , 
▁ xxmaj garnish'd like him , that for a tricksy word 
▁ xxmaj defy the matter . xxmaj how cheer'st thou , xxmaj jessica ? 
▁ xxmaj and now , good sweet , say thy opinion , 
▁ xxmaj how dost thou like the xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio 's wife ? 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj past all expressing . xxmaj it is very meet 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio live an upright life , 
▁ xxmaj for , having such a blessing in his lady , 
▁ xxmaj he finds the joys of heaven here on earth ; 
▁ xxmaj and if on earth he do not merit it , 
▁ xxmaj in reason he should never come to heaven . 
▁ xxmaj why , if two gods should play some heavenly match , 
▁ xxmaj and on the wager lay two earthly women , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj portia one , there must be something else 
▁ xxmaj pawn'd with the other ; for the poor rude world 
▁ xxmaj hath not her fellow . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj even such a husband 
▁ xxmaj hast thou of me as she is for a wife . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj nay , but ask my opinion too of that . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . i will anon ; first let us go to dinner . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj nay , let me praise you while i have a stomach . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj no , pray thee , let it serve for table - talk ; 
▁ xxmaj then howsome'er thou speak'st , ' mong other things 
▁ i shall digest it . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll set you forth . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj venice . xxmaj the court of justice 

 xxmaj enter the xxup duke , the xxup magnificoes , xxup antonio , xxup bassanio , xxup gratiano , xxup salerio , 
 and xxup others 

▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj what , is xxmaj antonio here ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj ready , so please your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . i am sorry for thee ; thou art come to answer 
▁ a stony adversary , an inhuman wretch , 
▁ xxmaj uncapable of pity , void and empty 
▁ xxmaj from any dram of mercy . 
▁ xxup antonio . i have heard 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify 
▁ xxmaj his rigorous course ; but since he stands obdurate , 
▁ xxmaj and that no lawful means can carry me 
▁ xxmaj out of his envy 's reach , i do oppose 
▁ xxmaj my patience to his fury , and am arm'd 
▁ xxmaj to suffer with a quietness of spirit 
▁ xxmaj the very tyranny and rage of his . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj go one , and call the xxmaj jew into the court . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj he is ready at the door ; he comes , my lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup shylock 

▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj make room , and let him stand before our face . 
▁ xxmaj shylock , the world thinks , and i think so too , 
▁ xxmaj that thou but leadest this fashion of thy malice 
▁ xxmaj to the last hour of act ; and then , ' tis thought , 
▁ xxmaj thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse , more strange 
▁ xxmaj than is thy strange apparent cruelty ; 
▁ xxmaj and where thou now exacts the penalty , 
▁ xxmaj which is a pound of this poor merchant 's flesh , 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture , 
▁ xxmaj but , touch'd with human gentleness and love , 
▁ xxmaj forgive a moiety of the principal , 
▁ xxmaj glancing an eye of pity on his losses , 
▁ xxmaj that have of late so huddled on his back- 
▁ xxmaj enow to press a royal merchant down , 
▁ xxmaj and pluck commiseration of his state 
▁ xxmaj from brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint , 
▁ xxmaj from stubborn xxmaj turks and xxmaj tartars , never train'd 
▁ xxmaj to offices of tender courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj we all expect a gentle answer , xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxup shylock . i have possess'd your xxmaj grace of what i purpose , 
▁ xxmaj and by our holy xxmaj sabbath have i sworn 
▁ xxmaj to have the due and forfeit of my bond . 
▁ xxmaj if you deny it , let the danger light 
▁ xxmaj upon your charter and your city 's freedom . 
▁ xxmaj you 'll ask me why i rather choose to have 
▁ a weight of carrion flesh than to receive 
▁ xxmaj three thousand ducats . xxmaj i 'll not answer that , 
▁ xxmaj but say it is my humour- is it answer'd ? 
▁ xxmaj what if my house be troubled with a rat , 
▁ xxmaj and i be pleas'd to give ten thousand ducats 
▁ xxmaj to have it ban'd ? xxmaj what , are you answer'd yet ? 
▁ xxmaj some men there are love not a gaping pig ; 
▁ xxmaj some that are mad if they behold a cat ; 
▁ xxmaj and others , when the bagpipe sings i ' th ' nose , 
▁ xxmaj can not contain their urine ; for affection , 
▁ xxmaj mistress of passion , sways it to the mood 
▁ xxmaj of what it likes or loathes . xxmaj now , for your answer : 
▁ xxmaj as there is no firm reason to be rend'red 
▁ xxmaj why he can not abide a gaping pig ; 
▁ xxmaj why he , a harmless necessary cat ; 
▁ xxmaj why he , a woollen bagpipe , but of force 
▁ xxmaj must yield to such inevitable shame 
▁ xxmaj as to offend , himself being offended ; 
▁ xxmaj so can i give no reason , nor i will not , 
▁ xxmaj more than a lodg'd hate and a certain loathing 
▁ i bear xxmaj antonio , that i follow thus 
▁ a losing suit against him . xxmaj are you answered ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj this is no answer , thou unfeeling man , 
▁ xxmaj to excuse the current of thy cruelty . 
▁ xxup shylock . i am not bound to please thee with my answers . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj do all men kill the things they do not love ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj hates any man the thing he would not kill ? 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj every offence is not a hate at first . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj what , wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice ? 
▁ xxup antonio . i pray you , think you question with the xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxmaj you may as well go stand upon the beach 
▁ xxmaj and bid the main flood bate his usual height ; 
▁ xxmaj you may as well use question with the wolf , 
▁ xxmaj why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb ; 
▁ xxmaj you may as well forbid the mountain pines 
▁ xxmaj to wag their high tops and to make no noise 
▁ xxmaj when they are fretten with the gusts of heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj you may as well do anything most hard 
▁ xxmaj as seek to soften that- than which what 's harder?- 
▁ xxmaj his jewish heart . xxmaj therefore , i do beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj make no moe offers , use no farther means , 
▁ xxmaj but with all brief and plain conveniency 
▁ xxmaj let me have judgment , and the xxmaj jew his will . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj for thy three thousand ducats here is six . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj if every ducat in six thousand ducats 
▁ xxmaj were in six parts , and every part a ducat , 
▁ i would not draw them ; i would have my bond . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj how shalt thou hope for mercy , rend'ring none ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj what judgment shall i dread , doing no wrong ? 
▁ xxmaj you have among you many a purchas'd slave , 
▁ xxmaj which , fike your asses and your dogs and mules , 
▁ xxmaj you use in abject and in slavish parts , 
▁ xxmaj because you bought them ; shall i say to you 
▁ ' let them be free , marry them to your heirs- 
▁ xxmaj why sweat they under burdens?- let their beds 
▁ xxmaj be made as soft as yours , and let their palates 
▁ xxmaj be season'd with such viands ' ? xxmaj you will answer 
▁ ' the slaves are ours . ' xxmaj so do i answer you : 
▁ xxmaj the pound of flesh which i demand of him 
▁ xxmaj is dearly bought , ' tis mine , and i will have it . 
▁ xxmaj if you deny me , fie upon your law ! 
▁ xxmaj there is no force in the decrees of xxmaj venice . 
▁ i stand for judgment ; answer ; shall i have it ? 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj upon my power i may dismiss this court , 
▁ xxmaj unless xxmaj bellario , a learned doctor , 
▁ xxmaj whom i have sent for to determine this , 
▁ xxmaj come here to - day . 
▁ xxup salerio . xxmaj my lord , here stays without 
▁ a messenger with letters from the doctor , 
▁ xxmaj new come from xxmaj padua . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj bring us the letters ; call the messenger . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj good cheer , xxmaj antonio ! xxmaj what , man , courage yet ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj jew shall have my flesh , blood , bones , and all , 
▁ xxmaj ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood . 
▁ xxup antonio . i am a tainted wether of the flock , 
▁ xxmaj meetest for death ; the weakest kind of fruit 
▁ xxmaj drops earliest to the ground , and so let me . 
▁ xxmaj you can not better be employ'd , xxmaj bassanio , 
▁ xxmaj than to live still , and write mine epitaph . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup nerissa dressed like a lawyer 's clerk 

▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj came you from xxmaj padua , from xxmaj bellario ? 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj from both , my lord . xxmaj bellario greets your xxmaj grace . 
▁ [ presents a letter ] 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj to cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj not on thy sole , but on thy soul , harsh xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj thou mak'st thy knife keen ; but no metal can , 
▁ xxmaj no , not the hangman 's axe , bear half the keenness 
▁ xxmaj of thy sharp envy . xxmaj can no prayers pierce thee ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj no , none that thou hast wit enough to make . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxup o , be thou damn'd , inexecrable dog ! 
▁ xxmaj and for thy life let justice be accus'd . 
▁ xxmaj thou almost mak'st me waver in my faith , 
▁ xxmaj to hold opinion with xxmaj pythagoras 
▁ xxmaj that souls of animals infuse themselves 
▁ xxmaj into the trunks of men . xxmaj thy currish spirit 
▁ xxmaj govern'd a wolf who , hang'd for human slaughter , 
▁ xxmaj even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet , 
▁ xxmaj and , whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam , 
▁ xxmaj infus'd itself in thee ; for thy desires 
▁ xxmaj are wolfish , bloody , starv'd and ravenous . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond , 
▁ xxmaj thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud ; 
▁ xxmaj repair thy wit , good youth , or it will fall 
▁ xxmaj to cureless ruin . i stand here for law . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj this letter from xxmaj bellario doth commend 
▁ a young and learned doctor to our court . 
▁ xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj he attendeth here hard by 
▁ xxmaj to know your answer , whether you 'll admit him . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj with all my heart . xxmaj some three or four of you 
▁ xxmaj go give him courteous conduct to this place . 
▁ xxmaj meantime , the court shall hear xxmaj bellario 's letter . 
▁ xxup clerk . [ reads ] ' your xxmaj grace shall understand that at the receipt 
▁ of your letter i am very sick ; but in the instant that your 
▁ messenger came , in loving visitation was with me a young doctor 
▁ of xxmaj rome- his name is xxmaj balthazar . i acquainted him with the cause 
▁ in controversy between the xxmaj jew and xxmaj antonio the merchant ; we 
▁ turn'd o'er many books together ; he is furnished with my opinion 
▁ which , bettered with his own learning - the greatness whereof i 
▁ can not enough commend- comes with him at my importunity to fill 
▁ up your xxmaj grace 's request in my stead . i beseech you let his lack 
▁ of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation , 
▁ for i never knew so young a body with so old a head . i leave him 
▁ to your gracious acceptance , whose trial shall better publish his 
▁ commendation . ' 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup portia for xxup balthazar , dressed like a xxmaj doctor of xxmaj laws 

▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxup you hear the learn'd xxmaj bellario , what he writes ; 
▁ xxmaj and here , i take it , is the doctor come . 
▁ xxmaj give me your hand ; come you from old xxmaj bellario ? 
▁ xxup portia . i did , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj you are welcome ; take your place . 
▁ xxmaj are you acquainted with the difference 
▁ xxmaj that holds this present question in the court ? 
▁ xxup portia . i am informed throughly of the cause . 
▁ xxmaj which is the merchant here , and which the xxmaj jew ? 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj antonio and old xxmaj shylock , both stand forth . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj is your name xxmaj shylock ? 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj shylock is my name . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj of a strange nature is the suit you follow ; 
▁ xxmaj yet in such rule that the xxmaj venetian law 
▁ xxmaj can not impugn you as you do proceed . 
▁ xxmaj you stand within his danger , do you not ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj ay , so he says . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj do you confess the bond ? 
▁ xxup antonio . i do . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj then must the xxmaj jew be merciful . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj on what compulsion must xxup i ? xxmaj tell me that . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj the quality of mercy is not strain'd ; 
▁ xxmaj it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven 
▁ xxmaj upon the place beneath . xxmaj it is twice blest : 
▁ xxmaj it blesseth him that gives and him that takes . 
▁ ' tis mightiest in the mightiest ; it becomes 
▁ xxmaj the throned monarch better than his crown ; 
▁ xxmaj his sceptre shows the force of temporal power , 
▁ xxmaj the attribute to awe and majesty , 
▁ xxmaj wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings ; 
▁ xxmaj but mercy is above this sceptred sway , 
▁ xxmaj it is enthroned in the hearts of kings , 
▁ xxmaj it is an attribute to xxmaj god himself ; 
▁ xxmaj and earthly power doth then show likest xxmaj god 's 
▁ xxmaj when mercy seasons justice . xxmaj therefore , xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj though justice be thy plea , consider this- 
▁ xxmaj that in the course of justice none of us 
▁ xxmaj should see salvation ; we do pray for mercy , 
▁ xxmaj and that same prayer doth teach us all to render 
▁ xxmaj the deeds of mercy . i have spoke thus much 
▁ xxmaj to mitigate the justice of thy plea , 
▁ xxmaj which if thou follow , this strict court of xxmaj venice