xxbos xxmaj must needs give sentence ' gainst the merchant there . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj my deeds upon my head ! i crave the law , 
▁ xxmaj the penalty and forfeit of my bond . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj yes ; here i tender it for him in the court ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , twice the sum ; if that will not suffice , 
▁ i will be bound to pay it ten times o'er 
▁ xxmaj on forfeit of my hands , my head , my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj if this will not suffice , it must appear 
▁ xxmaj that malice bears down truth . xxmaj and , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj wrest once the law to your authority ; 
▁ xxmaj to do a great right do a little wrong , 
▁ xxmaj and curb this cruel devil of his will . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj it must not be ; there is no power in xxmaj venice 
▁ xxmaj can alter a decree established ; 
▁ ' twill be recorded for a precedent , 
▁ xxmaj and many an error , by the same example , 
▁ xxmaj will rush into the state ; it can not be . 
▁ xxup shylock . a xxmaj daniel come to judgment ! xxmaj yea , a xxmaj daniel ! 
▁ o wise young judge , how i do honour thee ! 
▁ xxup portia . i pray you , let me look upon the bond . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj here ' tis , most reverend xxmaj doctor ; here it is . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj shylock , there 's thrice thy money off'red thee . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj an oath , an oath ! i have an oath in heaven . 
▁ xxmaj shall i lay perjury upon my soul ? 
▁ xxmaj no , not for xxmaj venice . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj why , this bond is forfeit ; 
▁ xxmaj and lawfully by this the xxmaj jew may claim 
▁ a pound of flesh , to be by him cut off 
▁ xxmaj nearest the merchant 's heart . xxmaj be merciful . 
▁ xxmaj take thrice thy money ; bid me tear the bond . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj when it is paid according to the tenour . 
▁ xxmaj it doth appear you are a worthy judge ; 
▁ xxmaj you know the law ; your exposition 
▁ xxmaj hath been most sound ; i charge you by the law , 
▁ xxmaj whereof you are a well - deserving pillar , 
▁ xxmaj proceed to judgment . xxmaj by my soul i swear 
▁ xxmaj there is no power in the tongue of man 
▁ xxmaj to alter me . i stay here on my bond . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj most heartily i do beseech the court 
▁ xxmaj to give the judgment . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj why then , thus it is : 
▁ xxmaj you must prepare your bosom for his knife . 
▁ xxup shylock . o noble judge ! o excellent young man ! 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj for the intent and purpose of the law 
▁ xxmaj hath full relation to the penalty , 
▁ xxmaj which here appeareth due upon the bond . 
▁ xxup shylock . ' tis very true . o wise and upright judge , 
▁ xxmaj how much more elder art thou than thy looks ! 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj therefore , lay bare your bosom . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj ay , his breast- 
▁ xxmaj so says the bond ; doth it not , noble judge ? 
▁ ' nearest his heart , ' those are the very words . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj it is so . xxmaj are there balance here to weigh 
▁ xxmaj the flesh ? 
▁ xxup shylock . i have them ready . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj have by some surgeon , xxmaj shylock , on your charge , 
▁ xxmaj to stop his wounds , lest he do bleed to death . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj is it so nominated in the bond ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj it is not so express'd , but what of that ? 
▁ ' twere good you do so much for charity . 
▁ xxup shylock . i can not find it ; ' tis not in the bond . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you , merchant , have you anything to say ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj but little : i am arm'd and well prepar'd . 
▁ xxmaj give me your hand , xxmaj bassanio ; fare you well . 
▁ xxmaj grieve not that i am fall'n to this for you , 
▁ xxmaj for herein xxmaj fortune shows herself more kind 
▁ xxmaj than is her custom . xxmaj it is still her use 
▁ xxmaj to let the wretched man outlive his wealth , 
▁ xxmaj to view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow 
▁ xxmaj an age of poverty ; from which ling'ring penance 
▁ xxmaj of such misery doth she cut me off . 
▁ xxmaj commend me to your honourable wife ; 
▁ xxmaj tell her the process of xxmaj antonio 's end ; 
▁ xxmaj say how i lov'd you ; speak me fair in death ; 
▁ xxmaj and , when the tale is told , bid her be judge 
▁ xxmaj whether xxmaj bassanio had not once a love . 
▁ xxmaj repent but you that you shall lose your friend , 
▁ xxmaj and he repents not that he pays your debt ; 
▁ xxmaj for if the xxmaj jew do cut but deep enough , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll pay it instantly with all my heart . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj antonio , i am married to a wife 
▁ xxmaj which is as dear to me as life itself ; 
▁ xxmaj but life itself , my wife , and all the world , 
▁ xxmaj are not with me esteem'd above thy life ; 
▁ i would lose all , ay , sacrifice them all 
▁ xxmaj here to this devil , to deliver you . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj your wife would give you little thanks for that , 
▁ xxmaj if she were by to hear you make the offer . 
▁ xxup gratiano . i have a wife who i protest i love ; 
▁ i would she were in heaven , so she could 
▁ xxmaj entreat some power to change this currish xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxup nerissa . ' tis well you offer it behind her back ; 
▁ xxmaj the wish would make else an unquiet house . 
▁ xxup shylock . [ aside ] xxmaj these be the xxmaj christian husbands ! i have a 
▁ daughter- 
▁ xxmaj would any of the stock of xxmaj barrabas 
▁ xxmaj had been her husband , rather than a xxmaj christian!- 
▁ xxmaj we trifle time ; i pray thee pursue sentence . 
▁ xxup portia . a pound of that same merchant 's flesh is thine . 
▁ xxmaj the court awards it and the law doth give it . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj most rightful judge ! 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj and you must cut this flesh from off his breast . 
▁ xxmaj the law allows it and the court awards it . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj most learned judge ! a sentence ! xxmaj come , prepare . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj tarry a little ; there is something else . 
▁ xxmaj this bond doth give thee here no jot of blood : 
▁ xxmaj the words expressly are ' a pound of flesh . ' 
▁ xxmaj take then thy bond , take thou thy pound of flesh ; 
▁ xxmaj but , in the cutting it , if thou dost shed 
▁ xxmaj one drop of xxmaj christian blood , thy lands and goods 
▁ xxmaj are , by the laws of xxmaj venice , confiscate 
▁ xxmaj unto the state of xxmaj venice . 
▁ xxup gratiano . o upright judge ! xxmaj mark , xxmaj jew . o learned judge ! 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj is that the law ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj thyself shalt see the act ; 
▁ xxmaj for , as thou urgest justice , be assur'd 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt have justice , more than thou desir'st . 
▁ xxup gratiano . o learned judge ! xxmaj mark , xxmaj jew . a learned judge ! 
▁ xxup shylock . i take this offer then : pay the bond thrice , 
▁ xxmaj and let the xxmaj christian go . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj here is the money . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj soft ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj jew shall have all justice . xxmaj soft ! xxmaj no haste . 
▁ xxmaj he shall have nothing but the penalty . 
▁ xxup gratiano . o xxmaj jew ! an upright judge , a learned judge ! 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj therefore , prepare thee to cut off the flesh . 
▁ xxmaj shed thou no blood , nor cut thou less nor more 
▁ xxmaj but just a pound of flesh ; if thou tak'st more 
▁ xxmaj or less than a just pound- be it but so much 
▁ xxmaj as makes it light or heavy in the substance , 
▁ xxmaj or the division of the twentieth part 
▁ xxmaj of one poor scruple ; nay , if the scale do turn 
▁ xxmaj but in the estimation of a hair- 
▁ xxmaj thou diest , and all thy goods are confiscate . 
▁ xxup gratiano . a second xxmaj daniel , a xxmaj daniel , xxmaj jew ! 
▁ xxmaj now , infidel , i have you on the hip . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj why doth the xxmaj jew pause ? xxmaj take thy forfeiture . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj give me my principal , and let me go . 
▁ xxup bassanio . i have it ready for thee ; here it is . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj he hath refus'd it in the open court ; 
▁ xxmaj he shall have merely justice , and his bond . 
▁ xxup gratiano . a xxmaj daniel still say xxup i , a second xxmaj daniel ! 
▁ i thank thee , xxmaj jew , for teaching me that word . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj shall i not have barely my principal ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture 
▁ xxmaj to be so taken at thy peril , xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj why , then the devil give him good of it ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll stay no longer question . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj tarry , xxmaj jew . 
▁ xxmaj the law hath yet another hold on you . 
▁ xxmaj it is enacted in the laws of xxmaj venice , 
▁ xxmaj if it be proved against an alien 
▁ xxmaj that by direct or indirect attempts 
▁ xxmaj he seek the life of any citizen , 
▁ xxmaj the party ' gainst the which he doth contrive 
▁ xxmaj shall seize one half his goods ; the other half 
▁ xxmaj comes to the privy coffer of the state ; 
▁ xxmaj and the offender 's life lies in the mercy 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj duke only , ' gainst all other voice . 
▁ xxmaj in which predicament , i say , thou stand'st ; 
▁ xxmaj for it appears by manifest proceeding 
▁ xxmaj that indirectly , and directly too , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast contrived against the very life 
▁ xxmaj of the defendant ; and thou hast incurr'd 
▁ xxmaj the danger formerly by me rehears'd . 
▁ xxmaj down , therefore , and beg mercy of the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , thy wealth being forfeit to the state , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast not left the value of a cord ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore thou must be hang'd at the state 's charge . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj that thou shalt see the difference of our spirit , 
▁ i pardon thee thy life before thou ask it . 
▁ xxmaj for half thy wealth , it is xxmaj antonio 's ; 
▁ xxmaj the other half comes to the general state , 
▁ xxmaj which humbleness may drive unto a fine . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj ay , for the state ; not for xxmaj antonio . 
▁ xxup shylock . xxmaj nay , take my life and all , pardon not that . 
▁ xxmaj you take my house when you do take the prop 
▁ xxmaj that doth sustain my house ; you take my life 
▁ xxmaj when you do take the means whereby i live . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj what mercy can you render him , xxmaj antonio ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . a halter gratis ; nothing else , for xxmaj god 's sake ! 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj so please my lord the xxmaj duke and all the court 
▁ xxmaj to quit the fine for one half of his goods ; 
▁ i am content , so he will let me have 
▁ xxmaj the other half in use , to render it 
▁ xxmaj upon his death unto the gentleman 
▁ xxmaj that lately stole his daughter- 
▁ xxmaj two things provided more ; that , for this favour , 
▁ xxmaj he presently become a xxmaj christian ; 
▁ xxmaj the other , that he do record a gift , 
▁ xxmaj here in the court , of all he dies possess'd 
▁ xxmaj unto his son xxmaj lorenzo and his daughter . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj he shall do this , or else i do recant 
▁ xxmaj the pardon that i late pronounced here . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj art thou contented , xxmaj jew ? xxmaj what dost thou say ? 
▁ xxup shylock . i am content . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj clerk , draw a deed of gift . 
▁ xxup shylock . i pray you , give me leave to go from hence ; 
▁ i am not well ; send the deed after me 
▁ xxmaj and i will sign it . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj get thee gone , but do it . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj in christ'ning shalt thou have two god - fathers ; 
▁ xxmaj had i been judge , thou shouldst have had ten more , 
▁ xxmaj to bring thee to the gallows , not to the font . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup shylock 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . xxmaj sir , i entreat you home with me to dinner . 
▁ xxup portia . i humbly do desire your xxmaj grace of pardon ; 
▁ i must away this night toward xxmaj padua , 
▁ xxmaj and it is meet i presently set forth . 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup venice . i am sorry that your leisure serves you not . 
▁ xxmaj antonio , gratify this gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj for in my mind you are much bound to him . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup duke , xxup magnificoes , and train 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj most worthy gentleman , i and my friend 
▁ xxmaj have by your wisdom been this day acquitted 
▁ xxmaj of grievous penalties ; in lieu whereof 
▁ xxmaj three thousand ducats , due unto the xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj we freely cope your courteous pains withal . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and stand indebted , over and above , 
▁ xxmaj in love and service to you evermore . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj he is well paid that is well satisfied , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , delivering you , am satisfied , 
▁ xxmaj and therein do account myself well paid . 
▁ xxmaj my mind was never yet more mercenary . 
▁ i pray you , know me when we meet again ; 
▁ i wish you well , and so i take my leave . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj dear sir , of force i must attempt you further ; 
▁ xxmaj take some remembrance of us , as a tribute , 
▁ xxmaj not as fee . xxmaj grant me two things , i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj not to deny me , and to pardon me . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you press me far , and therefore i will yield . 
▁ [ to xxup antonio ] xxmaj give me your gloves , xxmaj i 'll wear them for your sake . 
▁ [ to xxup bassanio ] xxmaj and , for your love , xxmaj i 'll take this ring from you . 
▁ xxmaj do not draw back your hand ; xxmaj i 'll take no more , 
▁ xxmaj and you in love shall not deny me this . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj this ring , good sir- alas , it is a trifle ; 
▁ i will not shame myself to give you this . 
▁ xxup portia . i will have nothing else but only this ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , methinks , i have a mind to it . 
▁ xxup bassanio .. xxmaj there 's more depends on this than on the value . 
▁ xxmaj the dearest ring in xxmaj venice will i give you , 
▁ xxmaj and find it out by proclamation ; 
▁ xxmaj only for this , i pray you , pardon me . 
▁ xxup portia . i see , sir , you are liberal in offers ; 
▁ xxmaj you taught me first to beg , and now , methinks , 
▁ xxmaj you teach me how a beggar should be answer'd . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj good sir , this ring was given me by my wife ; 
▁ xxmaj and , when she put it on , she made me vow 
▁ xxmaj that i should neither sell , nor give , nor lose it . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj that ' scuse serves many men to save their gifts . 
▁ xxmaj and if your wife be not a mad woman , 
▁ xxmaj and know how well i have deserv'd this ring , 
▁ xxmaj she would not hold out enemy for ever 
▁ xxmaj for giving it to me . xxmaj well , peace be with you ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup portia and xxup nerissa 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio , let him have the ring . 
▁ xxmaj let his deservings , and my love withal , 
▁ xxmaj be valued ' gainst your wife 's commandment . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj go , xxmaj gratiano , run and overtake him ; 
▁ xxmaj give him the ring , and bring him , if thou canst , 
▁ xxmaj unto xxmaj antonio 's house . xxmaj away , make haste . xxmaj exit xxup gratiano 
▁ xxmaj come , you and i will thither presently ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the morning early will we both 
▁ xxmaj fly toward xxmaj belmont . xxmaj come , xxmaj antonio . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj venice . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup portia and xxup nerissa 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj inquire the xxmaj jew 's house out , give him this deed , 
▁ xxmaj and let him sign it ; we 'll away tonight , 
▁ xxmaj and be a day before our husbands home . 
▁ xxmaj this deed will be well welcome to xxmaj lorenzo . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gratiano 

▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj fair sir , you are well o'erta'en . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio , upon more advice , 
▁ xxmaj hath sent you here this ring , and doth entreat 
▁ xxmaj your company at dinner . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj that can not be . 
▁ xxmaj his ring i do accept most thankfully , 
▁ xxmaj and so , i pray you , tell him . xxmaj furthermore , 
▁ i pray you show my youth old xxmaj shylock 's house . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj that will i do . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj sir , i would speak with you . 
▁ [ aside to xxup portia ] xxmaj i 'll xxmaj see if i can get my husband 's ring , 
▁ xxmaj which i did make him swear to keep for ever . 
▁ xxup portia . [ to xxup nerissa ] xxmaj thou xxmaj mayst , i warrant . xxmaj we shall have old 
▁ swearing 
▁ xxmaj that they did give the rings away to men ; 
▁ xxmaj but we 'll outface them , and outswear them too . 
▁ [ aloud ] xxmaj away , make haste , thou know'st where i will tarry . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj come , good sir , will you show me to this house ? 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj belmont . xxmaj the garden before xxup portia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup lorenzo and xxup jessica 

▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj the moon shines bright . xxmaj in such a night as this , 
▁ xxmaj when the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees , 
▁ xxmaj and they did make no noise- in such a night , 
▁ xxmaj troilus methinks mounted the xxmaj troyan walls , 
▁ xxmaj and sigh'd his soul toward the xxmaj grecian tents , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj cressid lay that night . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ xxmaj did xxmaj thisby fearfully o'ertrip the dew , 
▁ xxmaj and saw the lion 's shadow ere himself , 
▁ xxmaj and ran dismayed away . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ xxmaj stood xxmaj dido with a willow in her hand 
▁ xxmaj upon the wild sea - banks , and waft her love 
▁ xxmaj to come again to xxmaj carthage . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ xxmaj medea gathered the enchanted herbs 
▁ xxmaj that did renew old aeson . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ xxmaj did xxmaj jessica steal from the wealthy xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj and with an unthrift love did run from xxmaj venice 
▁ xxmaj as far as xxmaj belmont . 
▁ xxup jessica . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ xxmaj did young xxmaj lorenzo swear he lov'd her well , 
▁ xxmaj stealing her soul with many vows of faith , 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er a true one . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj in such a night 
▁ xxmaj did pretty xxmaj jessica , like a little shrew , 
▁ xxmaj slander her love , and he forgave it her . 
▁ xxup jessica . i would out - night you , did no body come ; 
▁ xxmaj but , hark , i hear the footing of a man . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup stephano 

▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj who comes so fast in silence of the night ? 
▁ xxup stephano . a friend . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . a friend ! xxmaj what friend ? xxmaj your name , i pray you , friend ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj stephano is my name , and i bring word 
▁ xxmaj my mistress will before the break of day 
▁ xxmaj be here at xxmaj belmont ; she doth stray about 
▁ xxmaj by holy crosses , where she kneels and prays 
▁ xxmaj for happy wedlock hours . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj who comes with her ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj none but a holy hermit and her maid . 
▁ i pray you , is my master yet return'd ? 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj he is not , nor we have not heard from him . 
▁ xxmaj but go we in , i pray thee , xxmaj jessica , 
▁ xxmaj and ceremoniously let us prepare 
▁ xxmaj some welcome for the mistress of the house . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup launcelot 

▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj sola , sola ! wo ha , ho ! sola , sola ! 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj who calls ? 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj sola ! xxmaj did you see xxmaj master xxmaj lorenzo ? xxmaj master xxmaj lorenzo ! xxmaj sola , 
▁ sola ! 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj leave holloaing , man . xxmaj here ! 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj sola ! xxmaj where , where ? 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj here ! 
▁ xxup launcelot . xxmaj tell him there 's a post come from my master with his 
▁ horn full of good news ; my master will be here ere morning . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj sweet soul , let 's in , and there expect their coming . 
▁ xxmaj and yet no matter- why should we go in ? 
▁ xxmaj my friend xxmaj stephano , signify , i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj within the house , your mistress is at hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and bring your music forth into the air . xxmaj exit xxup stephano 
▁ xxmaj how sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank ! 
▁ xxmaj here will we sit and let the sounds of music 
▁ xxmaj creep in our ears ; soft stillness and the night 
▁ xxmaj become the touches of sweet harmony . 
▁ xxmaj sit , xxmaj jessica . xxmaj look how the floor of heaven 
▁ xxmaj is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st 
▁ xxmaj but in his motion like an angel sings , 
▁ xxmaj still quiring to the young - ey'd cherubins ; 
▁ xxmaj such harmony is in immortal souls , 
▁ xxmaj but whilst this muddy vesture of decay 
▁ xxmaj doth grossly close it in , we can not hear it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup musicians 

▁ xxmaj come , ho , and wake xxmaj diana with a hymn ; 
▁ xxmaj with sweetest touches pierce your mistress ' ear . 
▁ xxmaj and draw her home with music . [ music ] 
▁ xxup jessica . i am never merry when i hear sweet music . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj the reason is your spirits are attentive ; 
▁ xxmaj for do but note a wild and wanton herd , 
▁ xxmaj or race of youthful and unhandled colts , 
▁ xxmaj fetching mad bounds , bellowing and neighing loud , 
▁ xxmaj which is the hot condition of their blood- 
▁ xxmaj if they but hear perchance a trumpet sound , 
▁ xxmaj or any air of music touch their ears , 
▁ xxmaj you shall perceive them make a mutual stand , 
▁ xxmaj their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze 
▁ xxmaj by the sweet power of music . xxmaj therefore the poet 
▁ xxmaj did feign that xxmaj orpheus drew trees , stones , and floods ; 
▁ xxmaj since nought so stockish , hard , and full of rage , 
▁ xxmaj but music for the time doth change his nature . 
▁ xxmaj the man that hath no music in himself , 
▁ xxmaj nor is not mov'd with concord of sweet sounds , 
▁ xxmaj is fit for treasons , stratagems , and spoils ; 
▁ xxmaj the motions of his spirit are dull : as night , 
▁ xxmaj and his affections dark as xxmaj erebus . 
▁ xxmaj let no such man be trusted . xxmaj mark the music . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup portia and xxup nerissa 

▁ xxup portia . xxmaj that light we see is burning in my hall . 
▁ xxmaj how far that little candle throws his beams ! 
▁ xxmaj so shines a good deed in a naughty world . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj when the moon shone , we did not see the candle . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj so doth the greater glory dim the less : 
▁ a substitute shines brightly as a king 
▁ xxmaj until a king be by , and then his state 
▁ xxmaj empties itself , as doth an inland brook 
▁ xxmaj into the main of waters . xxmaj music ! hark ! 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj it is your music , madam , of the house . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj nothing is good , i see , without respect ; 
▁ xxmaj methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj silence bestows that virtue on it , madam . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj the crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark 
▁ xxmaj when neither is attended ; and i think 
▁ ne nightingale , if she should sing by day , 
▁ xxmaj when every goose is cackling , would be thought 
▁ xxmaj no better a musician than the wren . 
▁ xxmaj how many things by season season'd are 
▁ xxmaj to their right praise and true perfection ! 
▁ xxmaj peace , ho ! xxmaj the moon sleeps with xxmaj endymion , 
▁ xxmaj and would not be awak'd . [ music ceases ] 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj that is the voice , 
▁ xxmaj or i am much deceiv'd , of xxmaj portia . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj he knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo , 
▁ xxmaj by the bad voice . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj dear lady , welcome home . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj we have been praying for our husbands ' welfare , 
▁ xxmaj which speed , we hope , the better for our words . 
▁ xxmaj are they return'd ? 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj madam , they are not yet ; 
▁ xxmaj but there is come a messenger before , 
▁ xxmaj to signify their coming . 
▁ xxup portia .. xxmaj go in , xxmaj nerissa ; 
▁ xxmaj give order to my servants that they take 
▁ xxmaj no note at all of our being absent hence ; 
▁ xxmaj nor you , xxmaj lorenzo ; xxmaj jessica , nor you . [ a tucket sounds ] 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj your husband is at hand ; i hear his trumpet . 
▁ xxmaj we are no tell - tales , madam , fear you not . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj this night methinks is but the daylight sick ; 
▁ xxmaj it looks a little paler ; ' tis a day 
▁ xxmaj such as the day is when the sun is hid . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bassanio , xxup antonio , xxup gratiano , and their followers 

▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj we should hold day with the xxmaj antipodes , 
▁ xxmaj if you would walk in absence of the sun . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj let me give light , but let me not be light , 
▁ xxmaj for a light wife doth make a heavy husband , 
▁ xxmaj and never be xxmaj bassanio so for me ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj god sort all ! xxmaj you are welcome home , my lord . 
▁ xxup bassanio . i thank you , madam ; give welcome to my friend . 
▁ xxmaj this is the man , this is xxmaj antonio , 
▁ xxmaj to whom i am so infinitely bound . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you should in all sense be much bound to him , 
▁ xxmaj for , as i hear , he was much bound for you . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj no more than i am well acquitted of . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj sir , you are very welcome to our house . 
▁ xxmaj it must appear in other ways than words , 
▁ xxmaj therefore i scant this breathing courtesy . 
▁ xxup gratiano . [ to xxup nerissa ] xxmaj by yonder moon i swear you do me wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj in faith , i gave it to the judge 's clerk . 
▁ xxmaj would he were gelt that had it , for my part , 
▁ xxmaj since you do take it , love , so much at heart . 
▁ xxup portia . a quarrel , ho , already ! xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj about a hoop of gold , a paltry ring 
▁ xxmaj that she did give me , whose posy was 
▁ xxmaj for all the world like cutler 's poetry 
▁ xxmaj upon a knife , ' love me , and leave me not . ' 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj what talk you of the posy or the value ? 
▁ xxmaj you swore to me , when i did give it you , 
▁ xxmaj that you would wear it till your hour of death , 
▁ xxmaj and that it should lie with you in your grave ; 
▁ xxmaj though not for me , yet for your vehement oaths , 
▁ xxmaj you should have been respective and have kept it . 
▁ xxmaj gave it a judge 's clerk ! xxmaj no , xxmaj god 's my judge , 
▁ xxmaj the clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj he will , an if he live to be a man . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj ay , if a woman live to be a man . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj now by this hand i gave it to a youth , 
▁ a kind of boy , a little scrubbed boy 
▁ xxmaj no higher than thyself , the judge 's clerk ; 
▁ a prating boy that begg'd it as a fee ; 
▁ i could not for my heart deny it him . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj you were to blame , i must be plain with you , 
▁ xxmaj to part so slightly with your wife 's first gift , 
▁ a thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger 
▁ xxmaj and so riveted with faith unto your flesh . 
▁ i gave my love a ring , and made him swear 
▁ xxmaj never to part with it , and here he stands ; 
▁ i dare be sworn for him he would not leave it 
▁ xxmaj nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth 
▁ xxmaj that the world masters . xxmaj now , in faith , xxmaj gratiano , 
▁ xxmaj you give your wife too unkind a cause of grief ; 
▁ xxmaj an ' twere to me , i should be mad at it . 
▁ xxup bassanio . [ aside ] xxmaj why , i were best to cut my left hand off , 
▁ xxmaj and swear i lost the ring defending it . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio gave his ring away 
▁ xxmaj unto the judge that begg'd it , and indeed 
▁ xxmaj deserv'd it too ; and then the boy , his clerk , 
▁ xxmaj that took some pains in writing , he begg'd mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and neither man nor master would take aught 
▁ xxmaj but the two rings . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj what ring gave you , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj not that , i hope , which you receiv'd of me . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj if i could add a lie unto a fault , 
▁ i would deny it ; but you see my finger 
▁ xxmaj hath not the ring upon it ; it is gone . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj even so void is your false heart of truth ; 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i will ne'er come in your bed 
▁ xxmaj until i see the ring . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj nor i in yours 
▁ xxmaj till i again see mine . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj sweet xxmaj portia , 
▁ xxmaj if you did know to whom i gave the ring , 
▁ xxmaj if you did know for whom i gave the ring , 
▁ xxmaj and would conceive for what i gave the ring , 
▁ xxmaj and how unwillingly i left the ring , 
▁ xxmaj when nought would be accepted but the ring , 
▁ xxmaj you would abate the strength of your displeasure . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj if you had known the virtue of the ring , 
▁ xxmaj or half her worthiness that gave the ring , 
▁ xxmaj or your own honour to contain the ring , 
▁ xxmaj you would not then have parted with the ring . 
▁ xxmaj what man is there so much unreasonable , 
▁ xxmaj if you had pleas'd to have defended it 
▁ xxmaj with any terms of zeal , wanted the modesty 
▁ xxmaj to urge the thing held as a ceremony ? 
▁ xxmaj nerissa teaches me what to believe : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll die for't but some woman had the ring . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj no , by my honour , madam , by my soul , 
▁ xxmaj no woman had it , but a civil doctor , 
▁ xxmaj which did refuse three thousand ducats of me , 
▁ xxmaj and begg'd the ring ; the which i did deny him , 
▁ xxmaj and suffer'd him to go displeas'd away- 
▁ xxmaj even he that had held up the very life 
▁ xxmaj of my dear friend . xxmaj what should i say , sweet lady ? 
▁ i was enforc'd to send it after him ; 
▁ i was beset with shame and courtesy ; 
▁ xxmaj my honour would not let ingratitude 
▁ xxmaj so much besmear it . xxmaj pardon me , good lady ; 
▁ xxmaj for by these blessed candles of the night , 
▁ xxmaj had you been there , i think you would have begg'd 
▁ xxmaj the ring of me to give the worthy doctor . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj let not that doctor e'er come near my house ; 
▁ xxmaj since he hath got the jewel that i loved , 
▁ xxmaj and that which you did swear to keep for me , 
▁ i will become as liberal as you ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not deny him anything i have , 
▁ xxmaj no , not my body , nor my husband 's bed . 
▁ xxmaj know him i shall , i am well sure of it . 
▁ xxmaj lie not a night from home ; watch me like xxmaj argus ; 
▁ xxmaj if you do not , if i be left alone , 
▁ xxmaj now , by mine honour which is yet mine own , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have that doctor for mine bedfellow . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj and i his clerk ; therefore be well advis'd 
▁ xxmaj how you do leave me to mine own protection . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj well , do you so , let not me take him then ; 
▁ xxmaj for , if i do , xxmaj i 'll mar the young clerk 's pen . 
▁ xxup antonio . i am th ' unhappy subject of these quarrels . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj sir , grieve not you ; you are welcome not withstanding . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj portia , forgive me this enforced wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the hearing of these many friends 
▁ i swear to thee , even by thine own fair eyes , 
▁ xxmaj wherein i see myself- 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj mark you but that ! 
▁ xxmaj in both my eyes he doubly sees himself , 
▁ xxmaj in each eye one ; swear by your double self , 
▁ xxmaj and there 's an oath of credit . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj nay , but hear me . 
▁ xxmaj pardon this fault , and by my soul i swear 
▁ i never more will break an oath with thee . 
▁ xxup antonio . i once did lend my body for his wealth , 
▁ xxmaj which , but for him that had your husband 's ring , 
▁ xxmaj had quite miscarried ; i dare be bound again , 
▁ xxmaj my soul upon the forfeit , that your lord 
▁ xxmaj will never more break faith advisedly . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj then you shall be his surety . xxmaj give him this , 
▁ xxmaj and bid him keep it better than the other . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj here , xxmaj lord xxmaj bassanio , swear to keep this ring . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj by heaven , it is the same i gave the doctor ! 
▁ xxup portia . i had it of him . xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj bassanio , 
▁ xxmaj for , by this ring , the doctor lay with me . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj and pardon me , my gentle xxmaj gratiano , 
▁ xxmaj for that same scrubbed boy , the doctor 's clerk , 
▁ xxmaj in lieu of this , last night did lie with me . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj why , this is like the mending of highways 
▁ xxmaj in summer , where the ways are fair enough . 
▁ xxmaj what , are we cuckolds ere we have deserv'd it ? 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj speak not so grossly . xxmaj you are all amaz'd . 
▁ xxmaj here is a letter ; read it at your leisure ; 
▁ xxmaj it comes from xxmaj padua , from xxmaj bellario ; 
▁ xxmaj there you shall find that xxmaj portia was the doctor , 
▁ xxmaj nerissa there her clerk . xxmaj lorenzo here 
▁ xxmaj shall witness i set forth as soon as you , 
▁ xxmaj and even but now return'd ; i have not yet 
▁ xxmaj enter'd my house . xxmaj antonio , you are welcome ; 
▁ xxmaj and i have better news in store for you 
▁ xxmaj than you expect . xxmaj unseal this letter soon ; 
▁ xxmaj there you shall find three of your argosies 
▁ xxmaj are richly come to harbour suddenly . 
▁ xxmaj you shall not know by what strange accident 
▁ i chanced on this letter . 
▁ xxup antonio . i am dumb . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj were you the doctor , and i knew you not ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold ? 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj ay , but the clerk that never means to do it , 
▁ xxmaj unless he live until he be a man . 
▁ xxup bassanio . xxmaj sweet doctor , you shall be my bedfellow ; 
▁ xxmaj when i am absent , then lie with my wife . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj sweet lady , you have given me life and living ; 
▁ xxmaj for here i read for certain that my ships 
▁ xxmaj are safely come to road . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj how now , xxmaj lorenzo ! 
▁ xxmaj my clerk hath some good comforts too for you . 
▁ xxup nerissa . xxmaj ay , and xxmaj i 'll give them him without a fee . 
▁ xxmaj there do i give to you and xxmaj jessica , 
▁ xxmaj from the rich xxmaj jew , a special deed of gift , 
▁ xxmaj after his death , of all he dies possess'd of . 
▁ xxup lorenzo . xxmaj fair ladies , you drop manna in the way 
▁ xxmaj of starved people . 
▁ xxup portia . xxmaj it is almost morning , 
▁ xxmaj and yet i am sure you are not satisfied 
▁ xxmaj of these events at full . xxmaj let us go in , 
▁ xxmaj and charge us there upon inter'gatories , 
▁ xxmaj and we will answer all things faithfully . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj let it be so . xxmaj the first inter'gatory 
▁ xxmaj that my xxmaj nerissa shall be sworn on is , 
▁ xxmaj whether till the next night she had rather stay , 
▁ xxmaj or go to bed now , being two hours to day . 
▁ xxmaj but were the day come , i should wish it dark , 
▁ xxmaj till i were couching with the doctor 's clerk . 
▁ xxmaj well , while i live , xxmaj i 'll fear no other thing 
▁ xxmaj so sore as keeping safe xxmaj nerissa 's ring . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1601 

 xxup the xxup merry xxup wives xxup of xxup windsor 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup sir xxup john xxup falstaff 
▁ xxup fenton , a young gentleman 
▁ xxup shallow , a country justice 
▁ xxup slender , cousin to xxmaj shallow 

▁ xxmaj gentlemen of xxmaj windsor 
▁ xxup ford 
▁ xxup page 
▁ xxup william xxup page , a boy , son to xxmaj page 
▁ xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans , a xxmaj welsh parson 
▁ xxup doctor xxup caius , a xxmaj french physician 
▁ xxup host of the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

▁ xxmaj followers of xxmaj falstaff 
▁ xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup pistol 
▁ xxup nym 
▁ xxup robin , page to xxmaj falstaff 
▁ xxup simple , servant to xxmaj slender 
▁ xxup rugby , servant to xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius 

▁ xxup mistress xxup ford 
▁ xxup mistress xxup page 
▁ xxup mistress xxup anne xxup page , her daughter 
▁ xxup mistress xxup quickly , servant to xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius 
▁ xxup servants to xxmaj page , xxmaj ford , etc . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj windsor , and the neighbourhood 


 xxmaj the xxmaj merry xxmaj wives of xxmaj windsor 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj windsor . xxmaj before xxup page 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup justice xxup shallow , xxup slender , and xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh , persuade me not ; i will make a xxmaj star 
▁ xxmaj chamber matter of it ; if he were twenty xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaffs , 
▁ he shall not abuse xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow , esquire . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj in the county of xxmaj gloucester , xxmaj justice of xxmaj peace , and 
▁ xxmaj coram . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ay , cousin xxmaj slender , and xxmaj custalorum . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , and xxmaj ratolorum too ; and a gentleman born , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj parson , who writes himself ' armigero ' in any bill , 
▁ warrant , quittance , or obligation-'armigero . ' 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ay , that i do ; and have done any time these three 
▁ hundred years . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj all his successors , gone before him , hath done't ; 
▁ and all his ancestors , that come after him , may : they may 
▁ give the dozen white luces in their coat . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it is an old coat . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj the dozen white louses do become an old coat well ; 
▁ it agrees well , passant ; it is a familiar beast to man , and 
▁ signifies love . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj the luce is the fresh fish ; the salt fish is an old 
▁ coat . 
▁ xxup slender . i may quarter , coz . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj you may , by marrying . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is marring indeed , if he quarter it . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj not a whit . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj yes , py'r lady ! xxmaj if he has a quarter of your coat , there 
▁ is but three skirts for yourself , in my simple conjectures ; 
▁ but that is all one . xxmaj if xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff have committed 
▁ disparagements unto you , i am of the church , and will be 
▁ glad to do my benevolence , to make atonements and 
▁ compremises between you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj the xxmaj council shall hear it ; it is a riot . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is not meet the xxmaj council hear a riot ; there is no 
▁ fear of xxmaj got in a riot ; the xxmaj council , look you , shall desire 
▁ to hear the fear of xxmaj got , and not to hear a riot ; take your 
▁ vizaments in that . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ha ! o ' my life , if i were young again , the sword 
▁ should end it . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is petter that friends is the sword and end it ; 
▁ and there is also another device in my prain , which 
▁ peradventure prings goot discretions with it . xxmaj there is xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page , which is daughter to xxmaj master xxmaj george xxmaj page , which is 
▁ pretty virginity . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page ? xxmaj she has brown hair , and 
▁ speaks small like a woman . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is that fery person for all the orld , as just as you 
▁ will desire ; and seven hundred pounds of moneys , and 
▁ gold , and silver , is her grandsire upon his death's - bed - got 
▁ deliver to a joyful resurrections!-give , when she is able to 
▁ overtake seventeen years old . xxmaj it were a goot motion if we 
▁ leave our pribbles and prabbles , and desire a marriage 
▁ between xxmaj master xxmaj abraham and xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj ay , and her father is make her a petter penny . 
▁ xxup shallow . i know the young gentlewoman ; she has good 
▁ gifts . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj seven hundred pounds , and possibilities , is goot gifts . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj well , let us see honest xxmaj master xxmaj page . xxmaj is xxmaj falstaff 
▁ there ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj shall i tell you a lie ? i do despise a liar as i do 
▁ despise one that is false ; or as i despise one that is not 
▁ true . xxmaj the knight xxmaj sir xxmaj john is there ; and , i beseech you , be 
▁ ruled by your well - willers . i will peat the door for xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj page . 
▁ [ knocks ] xxmaj what , hoa ! xxmaj got pless your house here ! 
▁ xxup page . [ within ] xxmaj who 's there ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page 

▁ xxup evans . xxmaj here is xxmaj got 's plessing , and your friend , and xxmaj justice 
▁ xxmaj shallow ; and here young xxmaj master xxmaj slender , that peradventures 
▁ shall tell you another tale , if matters grow to your 
▁ likings . 
▁ xxup page . i am glad to see your worships well . i thank you for 
▁ my venison , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj master xxmaj page , i am glad to see you ; much good do 
▁ it your good heart ! i wish'd your venison better ; it was ill 
▁ kill'd . xxmaj how doth good xxmaj mistress xxmaj page?-and i thank you 
▁ always with my heart , la ! with my heart . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj sir , i thank you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj sir , i thank you ; by yea and no , i do . 
▁ xxup page . i am glad to see you , good xxmaj master xxmaj slender . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj how does your fallow greyhound , sir ? i heard say 
▁ he was outrun on xxmaj cotsall . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj it could not be judg'd , sir . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj you 'll not confess , you 'll not confess . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj that he will not . ' tis your fault ; ' tis your fault ; 
▁ ' tis a good dog . 
▁ xxup page . a cur , sir . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj sir , he 's a good dog , and a fair dog . xxmaj can there be 
▁ more said ? xxmaj he is good , and fair . xxmaj is xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff here ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj sir , he is within ; and i would i could do a good office 
▁ between you . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is spoke as a xxmaj christians ought to speak . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj he hath wrong'd me , xxmaj master xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj sir , he doth in some sort confess it . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj if it be confessed , it is not redressed ; is not that 
▁ so , xxmaj master xxmaj page ? xxmaj he hath wrong'd me ; indeed he hath ; at a 
▁ word , he hath , believe me ; xxmaj robert xxmaj shallow , esquire , saith 
▁ he is wronged . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj here comes xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup john xxup falstaff , xxup bardolph , xxup nym , and xxup pistol 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj now , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , you 'll complain of me to 
▁ the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj knight , you have beaten my men , kill'd my deer , 
▁ and broke open my lodge . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj but not kiss'd your keeper 's daughter . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj tut , a pin ! this shall be answer'd . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i will answer it straight : i have done all this . 
▁ xxmaj that is now answer'd . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj the xxmaj council shall know this . 
▁ xxup falstaff . ' twere better for you if it were known in counsel : 
▁ you 'll be laugh'd at . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj pauca verba , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ; goot worts . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj good worts ! good cabbage ! xxmaj slender , i broke your 
▁ head ; what matter have you against me ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj marry , sir , i have matter in my head against you ; 
▁ and against your cony - catching rascals , xxmaj bardolph , xxmaj nym , 
▁ and xxmaj pistol . xxmaj they carried me to the tavern , and made me 
▁ drunk , and afterwards pick'd my pocket . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj you xxmaj banbury cheese ! 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , it is no matter . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj how now , xxmaj mephostophilus ! 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , it is no matter . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj slice , i say ! pauca , pauca ; slice ! xxmaj that 's my humour . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj where 's xxmaj simple , my man ? xxmaj can you tell , cousin ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj peace , i pray you . xxmaj now let us understand . xxmaj there is 
▁ three umpires in this matter , as i understand : that is , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj page , fidelicet xxmaj master xxmaj page ; and there is myself , 
▁ fidelicet myself ; and the three party is , lastly and 
▁ finally , mine host of the xxmaj garter . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj we three to hear it and end it between them . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj fery goot . i will make a prief of it in my note - book ; 
▁ and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with as great 
▁ discreetly as we can . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj pistol ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj he hears with ears . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj the tevil and his tam ! xxmaj what phrase is this , ' he hears 
▁ with ear ' ? xxmaj why , it is affectations . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj pistol , did you pick xxmaj master xxmaj slender 's purse ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , by these gloves , did he - or i would i might 
▁ never come in mine own great chamber again else!-of 
▁ seven groats in mill - sixpences , and two xxmaj edward 
▁ shovel - boards that cost me two shilling and two pence apiece 
▁ of xxmaj yead xxmaj miller , by these gloves . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj is this true , xxmaj pistol ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj no , it is false , if it is a pick - purse . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj ha , thou mountain - foreigner ! xxmaj sir xxmaj john and master 
▁ mine , 
▁ i combat challenge of this latten bilbo . 
▁ xxmaj word of denial in thy labras here ! 
▁ xxmaj word of denial ! xxmaj froth and scum , thou liest . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj by these gloves , then , ' twas he . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj be avis'd , sir , and pass good humours ; i will say 
▁ ' marry trap ' with you , if you run the nuthook 's humour on 
▁ me ; that is the very note of it . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj by this hat , then , he in the red face had it ; for 
▁ though i can not remember what i did when you made me 
▁ drunk , yet i am not altogether an ass . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what say you , xxmaj scarlet and xxmaj john ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj why , sir , for my part , i say the gentleman had 
▁ drunk himself out of his five sentences . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is his five senses ; fie , what the ignorance is ! 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj and being fap , sir , was , as they say , cashier'd ; 
▁ and so conclusions pass'd the careers . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , you spake in xxmaj latin then too ; but ' tis no matter ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll ne'er be drunk whilst i live again , but in honest , 
▁ civil , godly company , for this trick . xxmaj if i be drunk , xxmaj i 'll be 
▁ drunk with those that have the fear of xxmaj god , and not with 
▁ drunken knaves . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj so xxmaj got udge me , that is a virtuous mind . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj you hear all these matters deni'd , gentlemen ; you 
▁ hear it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup anne xxup page with wine ; xxup mistress 
▁ xxup ford and xxup mistress xxup page , following 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj nay , daughter , carry the wine in ; we 'll drink within . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup anne xxup page 
▁ xxup slender . o heaven ! this is xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj how now , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , by my troth , you are very well 
▁ met ; by your leave , good mistress . [ kisses her ] 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj wife , bid these gentlemen welcome . xxmaj come , we have a 
▁ hot venison pasty to dinner ; come , gentlemen , i hope we 
▁ shall drink down all unkindness . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup shallow , xxup slender , and xxup evans 
▁ xxup slender . i had rather than forty shillings i had my xxmaj book of 
▁ xxmaj songs and xxmaj sonnets here . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup simple 

▁ xxmaj how , xxmaj simple ! xxmaj where have you been ? i must wait on 
▁ myself , must xxup i ? xxmaj you have not the xxmaj book of xxmaj riddles about you , 
▁ have you ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj book of xxmaj riddles ! xxmaj why , did you not lend it to xxmaj alice 
▁ xxmaj shortcake upon xxmaj allhallowmas last , a fortnight afore 
▁ xxmaj michaelmas ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj come , coz ; come , coz ; we stay for you . a word 
▁ with you , coz ; marry , this , coz : there is , as ' twere , a 
▁ tender , a kind of tender , made afar off by xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh here . xxmaj do 
▁ you understand me ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , sir , you shall find me reasonable ; if it be so , i 
▁ shall do that that is reason . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj nay , but understand me . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj so i do , sir . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj give ear to his motions : xxmaj master xxmaj slender , i will 
▁ description the matter to you , if you be capacity of it . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj nay , i will do as my cousin xxmaj shallow says ; i pray 
▁ you pardon me ; he 's a justice of peace in his country , 
▁ simple though i stand here . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj but that is not the question . xxmaj the question is 
▁ concerning your marriage . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ay , there 's the point , sir . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj marry is it ; the very point of it ; to xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj why , if it be so , i will marry her upon any 
▁ reasonable demands . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj but can you affection the oman ? xxmaj let us command to 
▁ know that of your mouth or of your lips ; for divers philosophers 
▁ hold that the lips is parcel of the mouth . xxmaj therefore , 
▁ precisely , can you carry your good will to the maid ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj cousin xxmaj abraham xxmaj slender , can you love her ? 
▁ xxup slender . i hope , sir , i will do as it shall become one that 
▁ would do reason . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj nay , xxmaj got 's lords and his ladies ! you must speak possitable , 
▁ if you can carry her your desires towards her . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj that you must . xxmaj will you , upon good dowry , 
▁ marry her ? 
▁ xxup slender . i will do a greater thing than that upon your request , 
▁ cousin , in any reason . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj nay , conceive me , conceive me , sweet coz ; what 
▁ i do is to pleasure you , coz . xxmaj can you love the maid ? 
▁ xxup slender . i will marry her , sir , at your request ; but if there 
▁ be no great love in the beginning , yet heaven may decrease 
▁ it upon better acquaintance , when we are married and 
▁ have more occasion to know one another . i hope upon 
▁ familiarity will grow more contempt . xxmaj but if you say 
▁ ' marry her , ' i will marry her ; that i am freely dissolved , 
▁ and dissolutely . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is a fery discretion answer , save the fall is in the 
▁ ord ' dissolutely ' : the ort is , according to our meaning , 
▁ ' resolutely ' ; his meaning is good . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj ay , i think my cousin meant well . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , or else i would i might be hang'd , la ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup anne xxup page 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj here comes fair xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne . xxmaj would i were 
▁ young for your sake , xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne ! 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj the dinner is on the table ; my father desires your 
▁ worships ' company . 
▁ xxup shallow . i will wait on him , fair xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne ! 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj od 's plessed will ! i will not be absence at the grace . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup shallow and xxup evans 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj will't please your worship to come in , sir ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj no , i thank you , forsooth , heartily ; i am very 
▁ well . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj the dinner attends you , sir . 
▁ xxup slender . i am not a - hungry , i thank you , forsooth . xxmaj go , 
▁ sirrah , for all you are my man , go wait upon my cousin 
▁ xxmaj shallow . [ exit xxup simple ] a justice of peace sometime may 
▁ be beholding to his friend for a man . i keep but three men 
▁ and a boy yet , till my mother be dead . xxmaj but what though ? 
▁ xxmaj yet i live like a poor gentleman born . 
▁ xxup anne . i may not go in without your worship ; they will not