xxbos sit till you come . 
▁ xxup slender . xxup i ' faith , xxmaj i 'll eat nothing ; i thank you as much as 
▁ though i did . 
▁ xxup anne . i pray you , sir , walk in . 
▁ xxup slender . i had rather walk here , i thank you . i bruis'd my 
▁ shin th ' other day with playing at sword and dagger with 
▁ a master of fence - three veneys for a dish of stew'd prunes 
▁ -and , i with my ward defending my head , he hot my shin , 
▁ and , by my troth , i can not abide the smell of hot meat 
▁ since . xxmaj why do your dogs bark so ? xxmaj be there bears i ' th ' 
▁ town ? 
▁ xxup anne . i think there are , sir ; i heard them talk'd of . 
▁ xxup slender . i love the sport well ; but i shall as soon quarrel at 
▁ it as any man in xxmaj england . xxmaj you are afraid , if you see the 
▁ bear loose , are you not ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj ay , indeed , sir . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj that 's meat and drink to me now . i have seen 
▁ xxmaj sackerson loose twenty times , and have taken him by the 
▁ chain ; but i warrant you , the women have so cried and 
▁ shriek'd at it that it pass'd ; but women , indeed , can not 
▁ abide 'em ; they are very ill - favour'd rough things . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup page 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj come , gentle xxmaj master xxmaj slender , come ; we stay for you . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj i 'll eat nothing , i thank you , sir . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj by cock and pie , you shall not choose , sir ! xxmaj come , 
▁ come . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj nay , pray you lead the way . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj come on , sir . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne , yourself shall go first . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj not xxup i , sir ; pray you keep on . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj truly , i will not go first ; truly , la ! i will not do 
▁ you that wrong . 
▁ xxup anne . i pray you , sir . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj i 'll rather be unmannerly than troublesome . xxmaj you 
▁ do yourself wrong indeed , la ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj before xxup page 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans and xxup simple 

▁ xxup evans . xxmaj go your ways , and ask of xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius ' house which 
▁ is the way ; and there dwells one xxmaj mistress xxmaj quickly , which 
▁ is in the manner of his nurse , or his dry nurse , or his cook , 
▁ or his laundry , his washer , and his wringer . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj well , sir . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj nay , it is petter yet . xxmaj give her this letter ; for it is a 
▁ oman that altogether 's acquaintance with xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page ; and the letter is to desire and require her to solicit 
▁ your master 's desires to xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page . i pray you 
▁ be gone . i will make an end of my dinner ; there 's pippins 
▁ and cheese to come . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff , xxup host , xxup bardolph , xxup nym , xxup pistol , and xxup robin 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mine host of the xxmaj garter ! 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj what says my bully rook ? xxmaj speak scholarly and 
▁ wisely . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj truly , mine host , i must turn away some of my 
▁ followers . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj discard , bully xxmaj hercules ; cashier ; let them wag ; trot , 
▁ trot . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i sit at ten pounds a week . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj thou'rt an emperor - caesar , xxmaj keiser , and xxmaj pheazar . i 
▁ will entertain xxmaj bardolph ; he shall draw , he shall tap ; said i 
▁ well , bully xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj do so , good mine host . 
▁ xxup host . i have spoke ; let him follow . [ to xxup bardolph ] xxmaj let me 
▁ see thee froth and lime . i am at a word ; follow . xxmaj exit xxup host 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj bardolph , follow him . a tapster is a good trade ; 
▁ an old cloak makes a new jerkin ; a wither'd serving - man a 
▁ fresh tapster . xxmaj go ; adieu . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj it is a life that i have desir'd ; i will thrive . 
▁ xxup pistol . o base xxmaj hungarian wight ! xxmaj wilt thou the spigot 
▁ wield ? xxmaj exit xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj he was gotten in drink . xxmaj is not the humour conceited ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . i am glad i am so acquit of this tinder - box : his 
▁ thefts were too open ; his filching was like an unskilful 
▁ singer - he kept not time . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj the good humour is to steal at a minute 's rest . 
▁ xxup pistol . ' convey ' the wise it call . ' steal ' foh ! a fico for the 
▁ phrase ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well , sirs , i am almost out at heels . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj why , then , let kibes ensue . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj there is no remedy ; i must cony - catch ; i must 
▁ shift . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj young ravens must have food . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj which of you know xxmaj ford of this town ? 
▁ xxup pistol . i ken the wight ; he is of substance good . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my honest lads , i will tell you what i am about . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj two yards , and more . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no quips now , xxmaj pistol . xxmaj indeed , i am in the waist 
▁ two yards about ; but i am now about no waste ; i am about 
▁ thrift . xxmaj briefly , i do mean to make love to xxmaj ford 's wife ; i 
▁ spy entertainment in her ; she discourses , she carves , she 
▁ gives the leer of invitation ; i can construe the action of her 
▁ familiar style ; and the hardest voice of her behaviour , to be 
▁ xxmaj english'd rightly , is ' i am xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff 's . ' 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj he hath studied her well , and translated her will out 
▁ of honesty into xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj the anchor is deep ; will that humour pass ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj now , the report goes she has all the rule of her 
▁ husband 's purse ; he hath a legion of angels . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj as many devils entertain ; and ' to her , boy , ' say xxup i. 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj the humour rises ; it is good ; humour me the angels . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i have writ me here a letter to her ; and here 
▁ another to xxmaj page 's wife , who even now gave me good eyes 
▁ too , examin'd my parts with most judicious oeillades ; 
▁ sometimes the beam of her view gilded my foot , sometimes my 
▁ portly belly . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj then did the sun on dunghill shine . 
▁ xxup nym . i thank thee for that humour . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxup o , she did so course o'er my exteriors with such 
▁ a greedy intention that the appetite of her eye did seem to 
▁ scorch me up like a burning - glass ! xxmaj here 's another letter to 
▁ her . xxmaj she bears the purse too ; she is a region in xxmaj guiana , all 
▁ gold and bounty . i will be cheaters to them both , and they 
▁ shall be exchequers to me ; they shall be my xxmaj east and xxmaj west 
▁ xxmaj indies , and i will trade to them both . xxmaj go , bear thou this 
▁ letter to xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ; and thou this to xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford . xxmaj we 
▁ will thrive , lads , we will thrive . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj shall i xxmaj sir xxmaj pandarus of xxmaj troy become , 
▁ xxmaj and by my side wear steel ? xxmaj then xxmaj lucifer take all ! 
▁ xxup nym . i will run no base humour . xxmaj here , take the 
▁ humour - letter ; i will keep the haviour of reputation . 
▁ xxup falstaff . [ to xxup robin ] xxmaj hold , sirrah ; bear you these letters 
▁ tightly ; 
▁ xxmaj sail like my pinnace to these golden shores . 
▁ xxmaj rogues , hence , avaunt ! vanish like hailstones , go ; 
▁ xxmaj trudge , plod away i ' th ' hoof ; seek shelter , pack ! 
▁ xxmaj falstaff will learn the humour of the age ; 
▁ xxmaj french thrift , you rogues ; myself , and skirted page . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup falstaff and xxup robin 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj let vultures gripe thy guts ! for gourd and fullam 
▁ holds , 
▁ xxmaj and high and low beguiles the rich and poor ; 
▁ xxmaj tester xxmaj i 'll have in pouch when thou shalt lack , 
▁ xxmaj base xxmaj phrygian xxmaj turk ! 
▁ xxup nym . i have operations in my head which be humours of 
▁ revenge . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj wilt thou revenge ? 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj by welkin and her star ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj with wit or steel ? 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj with both the humours , xxup i. 
▁ i will discuss the humour of this love to xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj and i to xxmaj ford shall eke unfold 
▁ xxmaj how xxmaj falstaff , varlet vile , 
▁ xxmaj his dove will prove , his gold will hold , 
▁ xxmaj and his soft couch defile . 
▁ xxup nym . xxmaj my humour shall not cool ; i will incense xxmaj page to deal 
▁ with poison ; i will possess him with yellowness ; for the 
▁ revolt of mine is dangerous . xxmaj that is my true humour . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj thou art the xxmaj mars of malcontents ; i second thee ; 
▁ troop on . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxup doctor xxup caius 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup quickly , xxup simple , and xxup rugby 

▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj what , xxmaj john xxmaj rugby ! i pray thee go to the casement 
▁ and see if you can see my master , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor 
▁ xxmaj caius , coming . xxmaj if he do , i ' faith , and find anybody in the 
▁ house , here will be an old abusing of xxmaj god 's patience and 
▁ the xxmaj king 's xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj i 'll go watch . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj go ; and we 'll have a posset for't soon at night , in 
▁ faith , at the latter end of a sea - coal fire . [ exit xxup rugby ] xxmaj an 
▁ honest , willing , kind fellow , as ever servant shall come in 
▁ house withal ; and , i warrant you , no tell - tale nor no 
▁ breed - bate ; his worst fault is that he is given to prayer ; he is 
▁ something peevish that way ; but nobody but has his fault ; 
▁ but let that pass . xxmaj peter xxmaj simple you say your name is ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj ay , for fault of a better . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj and xxmaj master xxmaj slender 's your master ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj ay , forsooth . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj does he not wear a great round beard , like a 
▁ glover 's paring - knife ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj no , forsooth ; he hath but a little whey face , with a 
▁ little yellow beard , a xxmaj cain - colour'd beard . 
▁ xxup quickly . a softly - sprighted man , is he not ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj ay , forsooth ; but he is as tall a man of his hands as 
▁ any is between this and his head ; he hath fought with a 
▁ warrener . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj how say you ? xxup o , i should remember him . xxmaj does 
▁ he not hold up his head , as it were , and strut in his gait ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj yes , indeed , does he . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj well , heaven send xxmaj anne xxmaj page no worse fortune ! 
▁ xxmaj tell xxmaj master xxmaj parson xxmaj evans i will do what i can for your 
▁ master . xxmaj anne is a good girl , and i wish- 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup rugby 

▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj out , alas ! here comes my master . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj we shall all be shent . xxmaj run in here , good young 
▁ man ; go into this closet . [ shuts xxup simple in the closet ] xxmaj he 
▁ will not stay long . xxmaj what , xxmaj john xxmaj rugby ! xxmaj john ! what , xxmaj john , 
▁ i say ! xxmaj go , xxmaj john , go inquire for my master ; i doubt he be 
▁ not well that he comes not home . [ singing ] 
▁ xxmaj and down , down , adown - a , etc . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup doctor xxup caius 

▁ xxup caius . xxmaj vat is you sing ? i do not like des toys . xxmaj pray you , go 
▁ and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert - a box , a green - a 
▁ box . xxmaj do intend vat i speak ? a green - a box . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj ay , forsooth , xxmaj i 'll fetch it you . [ aside ] i am glad 
▁ he went not in himself ; if he had found the young man , 
▁ he would have been horn - mad . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj fe , fe , fe fe ! ma foi , il fait fort chaud . xxmaj je m'en vais a 
▁ la cour - la grande affaire . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj is it this , sir ? 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj oui ; mette le au mon pocket : depeche , quickly . xxmaj vere 
▁ is dat knave , xxmaj rugby ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj what , xxmaj john xxmaj rugby ? xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj you are xxmaj john xxmaj rugby , and you are xxmaj jack xxmaj rugby . 
▁ xxmaj come , take - a your rapier , and come after my heel to the 
▁ court . 
▁ xxup rugby . ' tis ready , sir , here in the porch . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by my trot , i tarry too long . xxmaj od 's me ! xxmaj qu'ai j'oublie ? 
▁ xxmaj dere is some simples in my closet dat i vill not for the 
▁ varld i shall leave behind . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj ay me , he 'll find the young man there , and be 
▁ mad ! 
▁ xxup caius . o diable , diable ! vat is in my closet ? xxmaj villainy ! larron ! 
▁ [ pulling xxup simple out ] xxmaj rugby , my rapier ! 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj good master , be content . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj wherefore shall i be content - a ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj the young man is an honest man . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj what shall de honest man do in my closet ? xxmaj dere is 
▁ no honest man dat shall come in my closet . 
▁ xxup quickly . i beseech you , be not so phlegmatic ; hear the 
▁ truth of it . xxmaj he came of an errand to me from xxmaj parson xxmaj hugh . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj vell ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj ay , forsooth , to desire her to- 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj peace , i pray you . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj peace - a your tongue . xxmaj speak - a your tale . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj to desire this honest gentlewoman , your maid , to 
▁ speak a good word to xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page for my master , 
▁ in the way of marriage . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj this is all , indeed , la ! but xxmaj i 'll ne'er put my finger 
▁ in the fire , and need not . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh send - a you ? xxmaj rugby , baillez me some paper . 
▁ xxmaj tarry you a little - a - while . [ writes ] 
▁ xxup quickly . [ aside to xxup simple ] i am glad he is so quiet ; if he 
▁ had been throughly moved , you should have heard him 
▁ so loud and so melancholy . xxmaj but notwithstanding , man , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ do you your master what good i can ; and the very yea and 
▁ the no is , the xxmaj french doctor , my master - i may call him 
▁ my master , look you , for i keep his house ; and i wash , 
▁ wring , brew , bake , scour , dress meat and drink , make the 
▁ beds , and do all myself- 
▁ xxup simple . [ aside to xxup quickly ] ' tis a great charge to come 
▁ under one body 's hand . 
▁ xxup quickly . [ aside to xxup simple ] xxmaj are you avis'd o ' that ? xxmaj you 
▁ shall find it a great charge ; and to be up early and down 
▁ late ; but notwithstanding - to tell you in your ear , i would 
▁ have no words of it - my master himself is in love with 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page ; but notwithstanding that , i know 
▁ xxmaj anne 's mind - that 's neither here nor there . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj you jack'nape ; give - a this letter to xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh ; by gar , 
▁ it is a shallenge ; i will cut his troat in de park ; and i will 
▁ teach a scurvy jack - a - nape priest to meddle or make . xxmaj you 
▁ may be gone ; it is not good you tarry here . xxmaj by gar , i will 
▁ cut all his two stones ; by gar , he shall not have a stone 
▁ to throw at his dog . xxmaj exit xxup simple 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj alas , he speaks but for his friend . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj it is no matter - a ver dat . xxmaj do not you tell - a me dat i 
▁ shall have xxmaj anne xxmaj page for myself ? xxmaj by gar , i vill kill de xxmaj jack 
▁ priest ; and i have appointed mine host of de xxmaj jarteer to 
▁ measure our weapon . xxmaj by gar , i will myself have xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj sir , the maid loves you , and all shall be well . xxmaj we 
▁ must give folks leave to prate . xxmaj what the good - year ! 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj rugby , come to the court with me . xxmaj by gar , if i have 
▁ not xxmaj anne xxmaj page , i shall turn your head out of my door . 
▁ xxmaj follow my heels , xxmaj rugby . xxmaj exeunt xxup caius and xxup rugby 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj you shall have - an fool's - head of your own . xxmaj no , 
▁ i know xxmaj anne 's mind for that ; never a woman in xxmaj windsor 
▁ knows more of xxmaj anne 's mind than i do ; nor can do more 
▁ than i do with her , i thank heaven . 
▁ xxup fenton . [ within ] xxmaj who 's within there ? ho ! 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj who 's there , i trow ? xxmaj come near the house , i pray 
▁ you . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup fenton 

▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj how now , good woman , how dost thou ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj the better that it pleases your good worship to 
▁ ask . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj what news ? xxmaj how does pretty xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj in truth , sir , and she is pretty , and honest , and 
▁ gentle ; and one that is your friend , i can tell you that by 
▁ the way ; i praise heaven for it . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj shall i do any good , think'st thou ? xxmaj shall i not lose 
▁ my suit ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj troth , sir , all is in xxmaj his hands above ; but 
▁ notwithstanding , xxmaj master xxmaj fenton , xxmaj i 'll be sworn on a book 
▁ she loves you . xxmaj have not your worship a wart above your eye ? 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj yes , marry , have xxup i ; what of that ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj well , thereby hangs a tale ; good faith , it is such 
▁ another xxmaj nan ; but , i detest , an honest maid as ever broke 
▁ bread . xxmaj we had an hour 's talk of that wart ; i shall never 
▁ laugh but in that maid 's company ! xxmaj but , indeed , she is 
▁ given too much to allicholy and musing ; but for you - well , 
▁ go to . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj well , i shall see her to - day . xxmaj hold , there 's money 
▁ for thee ; let me have thy voice in my behalf . xxmaj if thou seest 
▁ her before me , commend me . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj will xxup i ? xxup i ' faith , that we will ; and i will tell your 
▁ worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence ; 
▁ and of other wooers . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj well , farewell ; i am in great haste now . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj farewell to your worship . [ exit xxup fenton ] xxmaj truly , 
▁ an honest gentleman ; but xxmaj anne loves him not ; for i know 
▁ xxmaj anne 's mind as well as another does . xxmaj out upon ' t , what 
▁ have i forgot ? xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj before xxup page 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup page , with a letter 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj what ! have i scap'd love - letters in the holiday - time 
▁ of my beauty , and am i now a subject for them ? xxmaj let 
▁ me see . [ reads ] 
▁ ' ask me no reason why i love you ; for though xxmaj love use 
▁ xxmaj reason for his precisian , he admits him not for his counsellor . 
▁ xxmaj you are not young , no more am xxup i ; go to , then , there 's 
▁ sympathy . xxmaj you are merry , so am xxup i ; ha ! ha ! then there 's 
▁ more sympathy . xxmaj you love sack , and so do xxup i ; would you 
▁ desire better sympathy ? xxmaj let it suffice thee , xxmaj mistress xxmaj page 
▁ at the least , if the love of soldier can suffice - that i love 
▁ thee . i will not say , xxmaj pity me : ' tis not a soldier - like phrase ; 
▁ but i say , xxmaj love me . xxmaj by me , 
▁ xxmaj thine own true knight , 
▁ xxmaj by day or night , 
▁ xxmaj or any kind of light , 
▁ xxmaj with all his might , 
▁ xxmaj for thee to fight , 
▁ xxup john xxup falstaff . ' 
▁ xxmaj what a xxmaj herod of xxmaj jewry is this ! o wicked , wicked world ! 
▁ xxmaj one that is well - nigh worn to pieces with age to show 
▁ himself a young gallant ! xxmaj what an unweighed behaviour 
▁ hath this xxmaj flemish drunkard pick'd - with the devil 's name ! 
▁ -out of my conversation , that he dares in this manner 
▁ assay me ? xxmaj why , he hath not been thrice in my company ! 
▁ xxmaj what should i say to him ? i was then frugal of my mirth . 
▁ xxmaj heaven forgive me ! xxmaj why , xxmaj i 'll exhibit a bill in the parliament 
▁ for the putting down of men . xxmaj how shall i be 
▁ reveng'd on him ? for reveng'd i will be , as sure as his guts 
▁ are made of puddings . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup ford 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ! trust me , i was going to your 
▁ house . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj and , trust me , i was coming to you . xxmaj you look 
▁ very ill . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll ne'er believe that ; i have to show to 
▁ the contrary . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj faith , but you do , in my mind . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj well , i do , then ; yet , i say , i could show you to 
▁ the contrary . o xxmaj mistress xxmaj page , give me some counsel . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj what 's the matter , woman ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . o woman , if it were not for one trifling respect , 
▁ i could come to such honour ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj hang the trifle , woman ; take the honour . xxmaj what 
▁ is it ? xxmaj dispense with trifles ; what is it ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj if i would but go to hell for an eternal moment 
▁ or so , i could be knighted . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj what ? xxmaj thou liest . xxmaj sir xxmaj alice xxmaj ford ! xxmaj these knights 
▁ will hack ; and so thou shouldst not alter the article of thy 
▁ gentry . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj we burn daylight . xxmaj here , read , read ; perceive 
▁ how i might be knighted . i shall think the worse of fat 
▁ men as long as i have an eye to make difference of men 's 
▁ liking . xxmaj and yet he would not swear ; prais'd women 's 
▁ modesty , and gave such orderly and well - behaved reproof 
▁ to all uncomeliness that i would have sworn his disposition 
▁ would have gone to the truth of his words ; but they do no 
▁ more adhere and keep place together than the xxmaj hundredth 
▁ xxmaj psalm to the tune of ' greensleeves . ' xxmaj what tempest , i trow , 
▁ threw this whale , with so many tuns of oil in his belly , 
▁ ashore at xxmaj windsor ? xxmaj how shall i be revenged on him ? i 
▁ think the best way were to entertain him with hope , till 
▁ the wicked fire of lust have melted him in his own grease . 
▁ xxmaj did you ever hear the like ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj letter for letter , but that the name of xxmaj page and 
▁ xxmaj ford differs . xxmaj to thy great comfort in this mystery of ill 
▁ opinions , here 's the twin - brother of thy letter ; but let thine 
▁ inherit first , for , i protest , mine never shall . i warrant he 
▁ hath a thousand of these letters , writ with blank space for 
▁ different names - sure , more!-and these are of the second 
▁ edition . xxmaj he will print them , out of doubt ; for he cares not 
▁ what he puts into the press when he would put us two . i 
▁ had rather be a giantess and lie under xxmaj mount xxmaj pelion . xxmaj well , 
▁ i will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste 
▁ man . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , this is the very same ; the very hand , the 
▁ very words . xxmaj what doth he think of us ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj nay , i know not ; it makes me almost ready to 
▁ wrangle with mine own honesty . xxmaj i 'll entertain myself like 
▁ one that i am not acquainted withal ; for , sure , unless he 
▁ know some strain in me that i know not myself , he would 
▁ never have boarded me in this fury . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . ' boarding ' call you it ? xxmaj i 'll be sure to keep him 
▁ above deck . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj so will xxup i ; if he come under my hatches , xxmaj i 'll never 
▁ to sea again . xxmaj let 's be reveng'd on him ; let 's appoint him a 
▁ meeting , give him a show of comfort in his suit , and lead 
▁ him on with a fine - baited delay , till he hath pawn'd his 
▁ horses to mine host of the xxmaj garter . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj nay , i will consent to act any villainy against 
▁ him that may not sully the chariness of our honesty . o 
▁ that my husband saw this letter ! xxmaj it would give eternal food 
▁ to his jealousy . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj why , look where he comes ; and my good man 
▁ too ; he 's as far from jealousy as i am from giving him 
▁ cause ; and that , i hope , is an unmeasurable distance . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj you are the happier woman . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj let 's consult together against this greasy knight . 
▁ xxmaj come hither . [ they retire ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ford with xxup pistol , and xxup page with xxmaj nym 

▁ xxup ford . xxmaj well , i hope it be not so . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj hope is a curtal dog in some affairs . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john affects thy wife . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj why , sir , my wife is not young . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj he woos both high and low , both rich and poor , 
▁ xxmaj both young and old , one with another , xxmaj ford ; 
▁ xxmaj he loves the gallimaufry . xxmaj ford , perpend . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj love my wife ! 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj with liver burning hot . xxmaj prevent , or go thou , 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj sir xxmaj actaeon he , with xxmaj ringwood at thy heels . 
▁ xxup o , odious is the name ! 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj what name , sir ? 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj the horn , i say . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj take heed , have open eye , for thieves do foot by night ; 
▁ xxmaj take heed , ere summer comes , or cuckoo birds do sing . 
▁ xxmaj away , xxmaj sir xxmaj corporal xxmaj nym . 
▁ xxmaj believe it , xxmaj page ; he speaks sense . xxmaj exit xxup pistol 
▁ xxup ford . [ aside ] i will be patient ; i will find out this . 
▁ xxup nym . [ to xxup page ] xxmaj and this is true ; i like not the humour of 
▁ lying . xxmaj he hath wronged me in some humours ; i should 
▁ have borne the humour'd letter to her ; but i have a sword , 
▁ and it shall bite upon my necessity . xxmaj he loves your wife ; 
▁ there 's the short and the long . 
▁ xxmaj my name is xxmaj corporal xxmaj nym ; i speak , and i avouch ; 
▁ ' tis true . xxmaj my name is xxmaj nym , and xxmaj falstaff loves your wife . 
▁ xxmaj adieu ! i love not the humour of bread and cheese ; and 
▁ there 's the humour of it . xxmaj adieu . xxmaj exit xxmaj nym 
▁ xxup page . ' the humour of it , ' quoth ' a ! xxmaj here 's a fellow frights 
▁ xxmaj english out of his wits . 
▁ xxup ford . i will seek out xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxup page . i never heard such a drawling , affecting rogue . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj if i do find it - well . 
▁ xxup page . i will not believe such a xxmaj cataian though the priest o ' 
▁ th ' town commended him for a true man . 
▁ xxup ford . ' twas a good sensible fellow . xxmaj well . 

▁ xxup mistress xxup page and xxup mistress xxup ford come forward 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj how now , xxmaj meg ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj whither go you , xxmaj george ? xxmaj hark you . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj how now , sweet xxmaj frank , why art thou melancholy ? 
▁ xxup ford . i melancholy ! i am not melancholy . xxmaj get you home ; 
▁ go . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj faith , thou hast some crotchets in thy head now . 
▁ xxmaj will you go , xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup quickly 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj have with you . xxmaj you 'll come to dinner , xxmaj george ? 
▁ [ aside to xxup mrs . xxup ford ] xxmaj look who comes yonder ; she shall 
▁ be our messenger to this paltry knight . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . [ aside to xxup mrs . xxup page ] xxmaj trust me , i thought on 
▁ her ; she 'll fit it . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj you are come to see my daughter xxmaj anne ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj ay , forsooth ; and , i pray , how does good xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj go in with us and see ; we have an hour 's talk 
▁ with you . xxmaj exeunt xxup mistress xxup page , xxup mistress xxup ford , and 
▁ xxup mistress xxup quickly 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj how now , xxmaj master xxmaj ford ! 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj you heard what this knave told me , did you not ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj yes ; and you heard what the other told me ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj do you think there is truth in them ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj hang 'em , slaves ! i do not think the knight would offer it ; 
▁ but these that accuse him in his intent towards our 
▁ wives are a yoke of his discarded men ; very rogues , now 
▁ they be out of service . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj were they his men ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj marry , were they . 
▁ xxup ford . i like it never the better for that . xxmaj does he lie at the 
▁ xxmaj garter ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj ay , marry , does he . xxmaj if he should intend this voyage 
▁ toward my wife , i would turn her loose to him ; and what 
▁ he gets more of her than sharp words , let it lie on my head . 
▁ xxup ford . i do not misdoubt my wife ; but i would be loath to 
▁ turn them together . a man may be too confident . i would 
▁ have nothing lie on my head . i can not be thus satisfied . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup host 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj look where my ranting host of the xxmaj garter comes . 
▁ xxmaj there is either liquor in his pate or money in his purse 
▁ when he looks so merrily . xxmaj how now , mine host ! 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj how now , bully rook ! xxmaj thou'rt a gentleman . [ to 
▁ xxup shallow following ] xxmaj cavaleiro xxmaj justice , i say . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup shallow 

▁ xxup shallow . i follow , mine host , i follow . xxmaj good even and 
▁ twenty , good xxmaj master xxmaj page ! xxmaj master xxmaj page , will you go with 
▁ us ? xxmaj we have sport in hand . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj tell him , xxmaj cavaleiro xxmaj justice ; tell him , bully rook . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj sir , there is a fray to be fought between xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh 
▁ the xxmaj welsh priest and xxmaj caius the xxmaj french doctor . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj good mine host o ' th ' xxmaj garter , a word with you . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj what say'st thou , my bully rook ? [ they go aside ] 
▁ xxup shallow . [ to xxup page ] xxmaj will you go with us to behold it ? xxmaj my 
▁ merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons ; and , 
▁ i think , hath appointed them contrary places ; for , believe 
▁ me , i hear the parson is no jester . xxmaj hark , i will tell you 
▁ what our sport shall be . [ they converse apart ] 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj hast thou no suit against my knight , my guest - cavaleiro . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj none , i protest ; but xxmaj i 'll give you a pottle of burnt 
▁ sack to give me recourse to him , and tell him my name is 
▁ xxmaj brook - only for a jest . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj my hand , bully ; thou shalt have egress and regress- 
▁ said i well?-and thy name shall be xxmaj brook . xxmaj it is a merry 
▁ knight . xxmaj will you go , xxmaj mynheers ? 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj have with you , mine host . 
▁ xxup page . i have heard the xxmaj frenchman hath good skill in his 
▁ rapier . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj tut , sir , i could have told you more . xxmaj in these 
▁ times you stand on distance , your passes , stoccadoes , and 
▁ i know not what . ' tis the heart , xxmaj master xxmaj page ; ' tis here , 
▁ ' tis here . i have seen the time with my long sword i would 
▁ have made you four tall fellows skip like rats . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj here , boys , here , here ! xxmaj shall we wag ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj have with you . i had rather hear them scold than 
▁ fight . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup ford 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj though xxmaj page be a secure fool , and stands so firmly on 
▁ his wife 's frailty , yet i can not put off my opinion so 
▁ easily . xxmaj she was in his company at xxmaj page 's house , and what 
▁ they made there i know not . xxmaj well , i will look further into 
▁ ' t , and i have a disguise to sound xxmaj falstaff . xxmaj if i find her 
▁ honest , i lose not my labour ; if she be otherwise , ' tis labour 
▁ well bestowed . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 a room in the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff and xxup pistol 

▁ xxup falstaff . i will not lend thee a penny . 
▁ xxup pistol . i will retort the sum in equipage . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj not a penny . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj why , then the world 's mine oyster . xxmaj which i with 
▁ sword will open . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj not a penny . i have been content , sir , you should 
▁ lay my countenance to pawn . i have grated upon my good 
▁ friends for three reprieves for you and your coach - fellow , 
▁ xxmaj nym ; or else you had look'd through the grate , like a 
▁ geminy of baboons . i am damn'd in hell for swearing to 
▁ gentlemen my friends you were good soldiers and tall fellows ; 
▁ and when xxmaj mistress xxmaj bridget lost the handle of her fan , 
▁ i took ' t upon mine honour thou hadst it not . 
▁ xxup pistol . xxmaj didst not thou share ? xxmaj hadst thou not fifteen pence ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj reason , you rogue , reason . xxmaj think'st thou xxmaj i 'll 
▁ endanger my soul gratis ? xxmaj at a word , hang no more about me , 
▁ i am no gibbet for you . xxmaj go - a short knife and a throng!- 
▁ to your manor of xxmaj pickt - hatch ; go . xxmaj you 'll not bear a letter 
▁ for me , you rogue ! xxmaj you stand upon your honour ! xxmaj why , 
▁ thou unconfinable baseness , it is as much as i can do to 
▁ keep the terms of my honour precise . xxup i , xxup i , i myself 
▁ sometimes , leaving the fear of xxmaj god on the left hand , and hiding 
▁ mine honour in my necessity , am fain to shuffle , to hedge , 
▁ and to lurch ; and yet you , rogue , will ensconce your rags , 
▁ your cat - a - mountain looks , your red - lattice phrases , and 
▁ your bold - beating oaths , under the shelter of your honour ! 
▁ xxmaj you will not do it , you ! 
▁ xxup pistol . i do relent ; what would thou more of man ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup robin 

▁ xxup robin . xxmaj sir , here 's a woman would speak with you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let her approach . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup quickly 
▁
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj give your worship good morrow . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj good morrow , good wife . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj not so , an't please your worship . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj good maid , then . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj i 'll be sworn ; 
▁ xxmaj as my mother was , the first hour i was born . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i do believe the swearer . xxmaj what with me ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj shall i vouchsafe your worship a word or two ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj two thousand , fair woman ; and xxmaj i 'll vouchsafe 
▁ thee the hearing . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj there is one xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , sir - i pray , come a little 
▁ nearer this ways . i myself dwell with xxmaj master xxmaj doctor 
▁ xxmaj caius . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well , on : xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , you say- 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj your worship says very true . i pray your worship 
▁ come a little nearer this ways . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i warrant thee nobody hears - mine own people , 
▁ mine own people . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj are they so ? xxmaj god bless them , and make them his 
▁ servants ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well ; xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , what of her ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj why , sir , she 's a good creature . xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord , your 
▁ worship 's a wanton ! xxmaj well , heaven forgive you , and all of 
▁ us , i pray . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford ; come , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford- 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj marry , this is the short and the long of it : you 
▁ have brought her into such a canaries as ' tis wonderful . 
▁ xxmaj the best courtier of them all , when the court lay at xxmaj windsor , 
▁ could never have brought her to such a canary . xxmaj yet 
▁ there has been knights , and lords , and gentlemen , with 
▁ their coaches ; i warrant you , coach after coach , letter after 
▁ letter , gift after gift ; smelling so sweetly , all musk , and so 
▁ rushling , i warrant you , in silk and gold ; and in such alligant 
▁ terms ; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the 
▁ fairest , that would have won any woman 's heart ; and i 
▁ warrant you , they could never get an eye - wink of her . 
▁ i had myself twenty angels given me this morning ; but i 
▁ defy all angels , in any such sort , as they say , but in the 
▁ way of honesty ; and , i warrant you , they could never get 
▁ her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all ; 
▁ and yet there has been earls , nay , which is more , 
▁ pensioners ; but , i warrant you , all is one with her . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj but what says she to me ? xxmaj be brief , my good she- 
▁ xxmaj mercury . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj marry , she hath receiv'd your letter ; for the 
▁ which she thanks you a thousand times ; and she gives you 
▁ to notify that her husband will be absence from his house 
▁ between ten and eleven . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj ten and eleven ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj ay , forsooth ; and then you may come and see 
▁ the picture , she says , that you wot of . xxmaj master xxmaj ford , her 
▁ husband , will be from home . xxmaj alas , the sweet woman leads 
▁ an ill life with him ! xxmaj he 's a very jealousy man ; she leads a 
▁ very frampold life with him , good heart . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj ten and eleven . xxmaj woman , commend me to her ; i 
▁ will not fail her . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj why , you say well . xxmaj but i have another messenger 
▁ to your worship . xxmaj mistress xxmaj page hath her hearty commendations 
▁ to you too ; and let me tell you in your ear , she 's as 
▁ fartuous a civil modest wife , and one , i tell you , that will 
▁ not miss you morning nor evening prayer , as any is in 
▁ xxmaj windsor , whoe'er be the other ; and she bade me tell your 
▁ worship that her husband is seldom from home , but she 
▁ hopes there will come a time . i never knew a woman so 
▁ dote upon a man : surely i think you have charms , la ! xxmaj yes , 
▁ in truth . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj not xxup i , i assure thee ; setting the attraction of my 
▁ good parts aside , i have no other charms . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj blessing on your heart for ' t ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj but , i pray thee , tell me this : has xxmaj ford 's wife and 
▁ xxmaj page 's wife acquainted each other how they love me ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj that were a jest indeed ! xxmaj they have not so little 
▁ grace , i hope - that were a trick indeed ! xxmaj but xxmaj mistress xxmaj page 
▁ would desire you to send her your little page of all loves . 
▁ xxmaj her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page ; 
▁ and truly xxmaj master xxmaj page is an honest man . xxmaj never a wife in 
▁ xxmaj windsor leads a better life than she does ; do what she will , 
▁ say what she will , take all , pay all , go to bed when she 
▁ list , rise when she list , all is as she will ; and truly she 
▁ deserves it ; for if there be a kind woman in xxmaj windsor , she 
▁ is one . xxmaj you must send her your page ; no remedy . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj why , i will . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj nay , but do so then ; and , look you , he may come 
▁ and go between you both ; and in any case have a 
▁ nay - word , that you may know one another 's mind , and the boy 
▁ never need to understand any thing ; for ' tis not good that 
▁ children should know any wickedness . xxmaj old folks , you 
▁ know , have discretion , as they say , and know the world . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj fare thee well ; commend me to them both . 
▁ xxmaj there 's my purse ; i am yet thy debtor . xxmaj boy , go along with 
▁ this woman . [ exeunt xxup quickly and xxup robin ] xxmaj this news 
▁ distracts me . 
▁ xxup pistol . [ aside ] xxmaj this punk is one of xxmaj cupid 's carriers ; 
▁ xxmaj clap on more sails ; pursue ; up with your fights ; 
▁ xxmaj give fire ; she is my prize , or ocean whelm them all ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj say'st thou so , old xxmaj jack ; go thy ways ; xxmaj i 'll make 
▁ more of thy old body than i have done . xxmaj will they yet look 
▁ after thee ? xxmaj wilt thou , after the expense of so much money , 
▁ be now a gainer ? xxmaj good body , i thank thee . xxmaj let them say 
▁ ' tis grossly done ; so it be fairly done , no matter . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , there 's one xxmaj master xxmaj brook below would 
▁ fain speak with you , and be acquainted with you ; and hath 
▁ sent your worship a moming 's draught of sack . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj brook is his name ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj ay , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj call him in . [ exit xxup bardolph ] xxmaj such xxmaj brooks are 
▁ welcome to me , that o'erflows such liquor . xxmaj ah , ha ! xxmaj mistress 
▁ xxmaj ford and xxmaj mistress xxmaj page , have i encompass'd you ? xxmaj go to ; 
▁ via ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup bardolph , with xxup ford disguised 

▁ xxup ford . xxmaj bless you , sir ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj and you , sir ! xxmaj would you speak with me ? 
▁ xxup ford . i make bold to press with so little preparation upon 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj you 're welcome . xxmaj what 's your will ? xxmaj give us leave , 
▁ drawer . xxmaj exit xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj sir , i am a gentleman that have spent much ; my name 
▁ is xxmaj brook . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj brook , i desire more acquaintance 
▁ of you . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj good xxmaj sir xxmaj john , i sue for yours - not to charge you ; for i 
▁ must let you understand i think myself in better plight for 
▁ a lender than you are ; the which hath something 
▁ embold'ned me to this unseason'd intrusion ; for they say , if 
▁ money go before , all ways do lie open . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj money is a good soldier , sir , and will on . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj troth , and i have a bag of money here troubles me ; if 
▁ you will help to bear it , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , take all , or half , for easing 
▁ me of the carriage . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj sir , i know not how i may deserve to be your 
▁ porter . 
▁ xxup ford . i will tell you , sir , if you will give me the hearing . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj speak , good xxmaj master xxmaj brook ; i shall be glad to be 
▁ your servant . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj sir , i hear you are a scholar - i will be brief with you 
▁ -and you have been a man long known to me , though i 
▁ had never so good means as desire to make myself acquainted 
▁ with you . i shall discover a thing to you , wherein 
▁ i must very much lay open mine own imperfection ; but , 
▁ good xxmaj sir xxmaj john , as you have one eye upon my follies , as you 
▁ hear them unfolded , turn another into the register of your 
▁ own , that i may pass with a reproof the easier , sith you 
▁ yourself know how easy is it to be such an offender . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj very well , sir ; proceed . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj there is a gentlewoman in this town , her husband 's 
▁ name is xxmaj ford . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well , sir . 
▁ xxup ford . i have long lov'd her , and , i protest to you , bestowed 
▁ much on her ; followed her with a doting observance ; 
▁ engross'd opportunities to meet her ; fee'd every slight occasion 
▁ that could but niggardly give me sight of her ; not 
▁ only bought many presents to give her , but have given 
▁ largely to many to know what she would have given ; 
▁ briefly , i have pursu'd her as love hath pursued me ; which 
▁ hath been on the wing of all occasions . xxmaj but whatsoever i 
▁ have merited , either in my mind or in my means , meed , i 
▁ am sure , i have received none , unless experience be a jewel ; 
▁ that i have purchased at an infinite rate , and that hath 
▁ taught me to say this : 
▁ ' love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues ; 
▁ xxmaj pursuing that that flies , and flying what pursues . ' 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj have you receiv'd no promise of satisfaction at 
▁ her hands ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj never . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj have you importun'd her to such a purpose ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj never . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj of what quality was your love , then ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj like a fair house built on another man 's ground ; so 
▁ that i have lost my edifice by mistaking the place where 
▁ erected it . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj to what purpose have you unfolded this to me ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj when i have told you that , i have told you all . xxmaj some 
▁ say that though she appear honest to me , yet in other 
▁ places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd 
▁ construction made of her . xxmaj now , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , here is the heart 
▁ of my purpose : you are a gentleman of excellent 
▁ breeding , admirable discourse , of great admittance , authentic in 
▁ your place and person , generally allow'd for your many 
▁ war - like , courtlike , and learned preparations . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxup o , sir ! 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj believe it , for you know it . xxmaj there is money ; spend it , 
▁ spend it ; spend more ; spend all i have ; only give me so 
▁ much of your time in exchange of it as to lay an amiable 
▁ siege to the honesty of this xxmaj ford 's wife ; use your art of 
▁ wooing , win her to consent to you ; if any man may , you 
▁ may as soon as any . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj would it apply well to the vehemency of your 
▁ affection , that i should win what you would enjoy ? 
▁ xxmaj methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously . 
▁ xxup ford . xxup o , understand my drift . xxmaj she dwells so securely on the 
▁ excellency of her honour that the folly of my soul dares 
▁ not present itself ; she is too bright to be look'd against . 
▁ xxmaj now , could i come to her with any detection in my hand , 
▁ my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves ; 
▁ i could drive her then from the ward of her purity , 
▁ her reputation , her marriage vow , and a thousand other her 
▁ defences , which now are too too strongly embattl'd against 
▁ me . xxmaj what say you to't , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj master xxmaj brook , i will first make bold with your 
▁ money ; next , give me your hand ; and last , as i am a gentleman , 
▁ you shall , if you will , enjoy xxmaj ford 's wife . 
▁ xxup ford . o good sir ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . i say you shall . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj want no money , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ; you shall want none . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj want no xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , xxmaj master xxmaj brook ; you shall 
▁ want none . i shall be with her , i may tell you , by her own 
▁ appointment ; even as you came in to me her assistant , or 
▁ go - between , parted from me ; i say i shall be with her between 
▁ ten and eleven ; for at that time the jealous rascally 
▁ knave , her husband , will be forth . xxmaj come you to me at 
▁ night ; you shall know how i speed . 
▁ xxup ford . i am blest in your acquaintance . xxmaj do you know xxmaj ford , 
▁ xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj hang him , poor cuckoldly knave ! i know him 
▁ not ; yet i wrong him to call him poor ; they say the 
▁ jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money ; for the which 
▁ his wife seems to me well - favour'd . i will use her as the 
▁ key of the cuckoldly rogue 's coffer ; and there 's my harvest - home . 
▁ xxup ford . i would you knew xxmaj ford , sir , that you might avoid him 
▁ if you saw him . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj hang him , mechanical salt - butter rogue ! i will 
▁ stare him out of his wits ; i will awe him with my cudgel ; 
▁ it shall hang like a meteor o'er the cuckold 's horns . xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj brook , thou shalt know i will predominate over the 
▁ peasant , and thou shalt lie with his wife . xxmaj come to me soon at 
▁ night . xxmaj ford 's a knave , and i will aggravate his style ; thou , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj brook , shalt know him for knave and cuckold . 
▁ xxmaj come to me soon at night . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj what a damn'd xxmaj epicurean rascal is this ! xxmaj my heart is 
▁ ready to crack with impatience . xxmaj who says this is improvident 
▁ jealousy ? xxmaj my wife hath sent to him ; the hour is fix'd ; 
▁ the match is made . xxmaj would any man have thought this ? xxmaj see 
▁ the hell of having a false woman ! xxmaj my bed shall be abus'd , 
▁ my coffers ransack'd , my reputation gnawn at ; and i shall 
▁ not only receive this villainous wrong , but stand under the 
▁ adoption of abominable terms , and by him that does me 
▁ this wrong . xxmaj terms ! names ! xxmaj amaimon sounds well ; xxmaj lucifer , 
▁ well ; xxmaj barbason , well ; yet they are devils ' additions , the names 
▁ of fiends . xxmaj but cuckold ! xxmaj wittol ! xxmaj cuckold ! the devil himself 
▁ hath not such a name . xxmaj page is an ass , a secure ass ; he will trust 
▁ his wife ; he will not be jealous ; i will rather trust a xxmaj fleming 
▁ with my butter , xxmaj parson xxmaj hugh the xxmaj welshman with my 
▁ cheese , an xxmaj irishman with my aqua - vitae bottle , or a thief to 
▁ walk my ambling gelding , than my wife with herself . xxmaj then 
▁ she plots , then she ruminates , then she devises ; and what 
▁ they think in their hearts they may effect , they will break 
▁ their hearts but they will effect . xxmaj god be prais'd for my 
▁ jealousy ! xxmaj eleven o'clock the hour . i will prevent this , detect 
▁ my wife , be reveng'd on xxmaj falstaff , and laugh at xxmaj page . 
▁ i will about it ; better three hours too soon than a minute 
▁ too late . xxmaj fie , fie , fie ! cuckold ! cuckold ! cuckold ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 a field near xxmaj windsor 

 xxmaj enter xxup caius and xxup rugby 

▁ xxup caius . xxmaj jack xxmaj rugby ! 
▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj vat is de clock , xxmaj jack ? 
▁ xxup rugby . ' tis past the hour , sir , that xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh promis'd to 
▁ meet . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , he has save his soul dat he is no come ; he has 
▁ pray his xxmaj pible well dat he is no come ; by gar , xxmaj jack xxmaj rugby , 
▁ he is dead already , if he be come . 
▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj he is wise , sir ; he knew your worship would kill 
▁ him if he came . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , de herring is no dead so as i vill kill him . xxmaj take 
▁ your rapier , xxmaj jack ; i vill tell you how i vill kill him . 
▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj alas , sir , i can not fence ! 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj villainy , take your rapier . 
▁ xxup rugby . xxmaj forbear ; here 's company . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup host , xxup shallow , xxup slender , and xxup page 

▁ xxup host . xxmaj bless thee , bully doctor ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj save you , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj now , good xxmaj master xxmaj doctor ! 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj give you good morrow , sir . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj vat be all you , one , two , tree , four , come for ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj to see thee fight , to see thee foin , to see thee traverse ; 
▁ to see thee here , to see thee there ; to see thee pass thy 
▁ punto , thy stock , thy reverse , thy distance , thy montant . 
▁ xxmaj is he dead , my xxmaj ethiopian ? xxmaj is he dead , my xxmaj francisco ? xxmaj ha , 
▁ bully ! xxmaj what says my xxmaj aesculapius ? my xxmaj galen ? my heart 
▁ of elder ? xxmaj ha ! is he dead , bully stale ? xxmaj is he dead ? 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , he is de coward xxmaj jack priest of de world ; he is 
▁ not show his face . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj thou art a castalion - king - urinal . xxmaj hector of xxmaj greece , 
▁ my boy ! 
▁ xxup caius . i pray you , bear witness that me have stay six or 
▁ seven , two tree hours for him , and he is no come . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj he is the wiser man , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor : he is a curer 
▁ of souls , and you a curer of bodies ; if you should fight , 
▁ you go against the hair of your professions . xxmaj is it not true , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj page ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , you have yourself been a great fighter , 
▁ though now a man of peace . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj bodykins , xxmaj master xxmaj page , though i now be old , and 
▁ of the peace , if i see a sword out , my finger itches to make 
▁ one . xxmaj though we are justices , and doctors , and churchmen , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj page , we have some salt of our youth in us ; we are 
▁ the sons of women , xxmaj master xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup page . ' tis true , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it will be found so , xxmaj master xxmaj page . xxmaj master xxmaj doctor 
▁ xxup caius , i come to fetch you home . i am sworn of the peace ; 
▁ you have show'd yourself a wise physician , and xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh 
▁ hath shown himself a wise and patient churchman . xxmaj you 
▁ must go with me , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj pardon , xxmaj guest xxmaj justice . a word , xxmaj mounseur xxmaj mockwater . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj mock - vater ! xxmaj vat is dat ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj mockwater , in our xxmaj english tongue , is valour , bully . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , then i have as much mockvater as de xxmaj englishman . 
▁ xxmaj scurvy jack - dog priest ! xxmaj by gar , me vill cut his ears . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj he will clapper - claw thee tightly , bully . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj clapper - de - claw ! xxmaj vat is dat ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj that is , he will make thee amends . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , me do look he shall clapper - de - claw me ; for , 
▁ by gar , me vill have it . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj and i will provoke him to't , or let him wag . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj me tank you for dat . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj and , moreover , bully - but first : [ aside to the others ] 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj guest , and xxmaj master xxmaj page , and eke xxmaj cavaleiro xxmaj slender , 
▁ go you through the town to xxmaj frogmore . 
▁ xxup page . [ aside ] xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh is there , is he ? 
▁ xxup host . [ aside ] xxmaj he is there . xxmaj see what humour he is in ; and 
▁ i will bring the doctor about by the fields . xxmaj will it do well ? 
▁ xxup shallow . [ aside ] xxmaj we will do it . 
▁ xxup page , xxup shallow , and xxup slender . xxmaj adieu , good xxmaj master xxmaj doctor . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup page , xxup shallow , and xxup slender 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , me vill kill de priest ; for he speak for a jack- 
▁ an - ape to xxmaj anne xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj let him die . xxmaj sheathe thy impatience ; throw cold water 
▁ on thy choler ; go about the fields with me through xxmaj frogmore ; 
▁ i will bring thee where xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne xxmaj page is , at a a 
▁ farm - house , a - feasting ; and thou shalt woo her . xxmaj cried 
▁ game ! xxmaj said i well ? 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , me dank you vor dat ; by gar , i love you ; and 
▁ i shall procure - a you de good guest , de earl , de knight , de 
▁ lords , de gentlemen , my patients . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj for the which i will be thy adversary toward xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page . xxmaj said i well ? 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , ' tis good ; vell said . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj let us wag , then . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj come at my heels , xxmaj jack xxmaj rugby . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i xxup scene 1 .