xxbos a field near xxmaj frogmore 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans and xxup simple 

▁ xxup evans . i pray you now , good xxmaj master xxmaj slender 's serving - man , 
▁ and friend xxmaj simple by your name , which way have you 
▁ look'd for xxmaj master xxmaj caius , that calls himself xxmaj doctor of 
▁ xxmaj physic ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj marry , sir , the pittie - ward , the park - ward ; every 
▁ way ; old xxmaj windsor way , and every way but the town way . 
▁ xxup evans . i most fehemently desire you you will also look that 
▁ way . 
▁ xxup simple . i will , xxmaj sir . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj pless my soul , how full of chollors i am , and trempling 
▁ of mind ! i shall be glad if he have deceived me . xxmaj how 
▁ melancholies i am ! i will knog his urinals about his knave 's 
▁ costard when i have goot opportunities for the ork . xxmaj pless 
▁ my soul ! [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj to shallow rivers , to whose falls 
▁ xxmaj melodious birds sings madrigals ; 
▁ xxmaj there will we make our peds of roses , 
▁ xxmaj and a thousand fragrant posies . 
▁ xxmaj to shallow- 
▁ xxmaj mercy on me ! i have a great dispositions to cry . [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj melodious birds sing madrigals- 
▁ xxmaj whenas i sat in xxmaj pabylon- 
▁ xxmaj and a thousand vagram posies . 
▁ xxmaj to shallow , etc . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup simple 

▁ xxup simple . xxmaj yonder he is , coming this way , xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj he 's welcome . [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj to shallow rivers , to whose falls- 
▁ xxmaj heaven prosper the right ! xxmaj what weapons is he ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj no weapons , sir . xxmaj there comes my master , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj shallow , and another gentleman , from xxmaj frogmore , over the 
▁ stile , this way . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj pray you give me my gown ; or else keep it in your 
▁ arms . [ takes out a book ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page , xxup shallow , and xxup slender 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj how now , xxmaj master xxmaj parson ! xxmaj good morrow , good 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh . xxmaj keep a gamester from the dice , and a good student 
▁ from his book , and it is wonderful . 
▁ xxup slender . [ aside ] xxmaj ah , sweet xxmaj anne xxmaj page ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj save you , good xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh ! 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj pless you from his mercy sake , all of you ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj what , the sword and the word ! xxmaj do you study 
▁ them both , xxmaj master xxmaj parson ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj and youthful still , in your doublet and hose , this raw 
▁ rheumatic day ! 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj there is reasons and causes for it . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj we are come to you to do a good office , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj parson . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj fery well ; what is it ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj yonder is a most reverend gentleman , who , belike having 
▁ received wrong by some person , is at most odds with 
▁ his own gravity and patience that ever you saw . 
▁ xxup shallow . i have lived fourscore years and upward ; i never 
▁ heard a man of his place , gravity , and learning , so wide of 
▁ his own respect . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj what is he ? 
▁ xxup page . i think you know him : xxmaj master xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius , the 
▁ renowned xxmaj french physician . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj got 's will and his passion of my heart ! i had as lief 
▁ you would tell me of a mess of porridge . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj he has no more knowledge in xxmaj hibocrates and 
▁ xxmaj galen , and he is a knave besides - a cowardly knave as you 
▁ would desires to be acquainted withal . 
▁ xxup page . i warrant you , he 's the man should fight with him . 
▁ xxup slender . [ aside ] o sweet xxmaj anne xxmaj page ! 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj it appears so , by his weapons . xxmaj keep them asunder ; 
▁ here comes xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup host , xxup caius , and xxup rugby 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj nay , good xxmaj master xxmaj parson , keep in your weapon . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj so do you , good xxmaj master xxmaj doctor . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj disarm them , and let them question ; let them keep 
▁ their limbs whole and hack our xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup caius . i pray you , let - a me speak a word with your ear . 
▁ xxmaj verefore will you not meet - a me ? 
▁ xxup evans . [ aside to xxup caius ] xxmaj pray you use your patience ; in 
▁ good time . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , you are de coward , de xxmaj jack dog , xxmaj john ape . 
▁ xxup evans . [ aside to xxup caius ] xxmaj pray you , let us not be 
▁ laughing - stocks to other men 's humours ; i desire you in 
▁ friendship , and i will one way or other make you amends . 
▁ [ aloud ] i will knog your urinals about your knave 's cogscomb 
▁ for missing your meetings and appointments . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj diable ! xxmaj jack xxmaj rugby - mine xxmaj host de xxmaj jarteer - have i 
▁ not stay for him to kill him ? xxmaj have i not , at de place i did 
▁ appoint ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj as i am a xxmaj christians soul , now , look you , this is the 
▁ place appointed . xxmaj i 'll be judgment by mine host of the 
▁ xxmaj garter . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj peace , i say , xxmaj gallia and xxmaj gaul , xxmaj french and xxmaj welsh , 
▁ soul - curer and body - curer . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj ay , dat is very good ! excellent ! 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj peace , i say . xxmaj hear mine host of the xxmaj garter . xxmaj am i 
▁ politic ? am i subtle ? am i a xxmaj machiavel ? xxmaj shall i lose my 
▁ doctor ? xxmaj no ; he gives me the potions and the motions . xxmaj shall i 
▁ lose my parson , my priest , my xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh ? xxmaj no ; he gives me 
▁ the proverbs and the noverbs . xxmaj give me thy hand , terrestrial ; 
▁ so . xxmaj give me thy hand , celestial ; so . xxmaj boys of art , i have 
▁ deceiv'd you both ; i have directed you to wrong places ; 
▁ your hearts are mighty , your skins are whole , and let burnt 
▁ sack be the issue . xxmaj come , lay their swords to pawn . xxmaj follow 
▁ me , lads of peace ; follow , follow , follow . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj trust me , a mad host . xxmaj follow , gentlemen , follow . 
▁ xxup slender . [ aside ] o sweet xxmaj anne xxmaj page ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup caius and xxup evans 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj ha , do i perceive dat ? xxmaj have you make - a de sot of us , 
▁ ha , ha ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj this is well ; he has made us his vlouting - stog . i 
▁ desire you that we may be friends ; and let us knog our prains 
▁ together to be revenge on this same scall , scurvy , cogging 
▁ companion , the host of the xxmaj garter . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , with all my heart . xxmaj he promise to bring me 
▁ where is xxmaj anne xxmaj page ; by gar , he deceive me too . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj well , i will smite his noddles . xxmaj pray you follow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj the street in xxmaj windsor 

 xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup page and xxup robin 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj nay , keep your way , little gallant ; you were 
▁ wo nt to be a follower , but now you are a leader . xxmaj whether 
▁ had you rather lead mine eyes , or eye your master 's heels ? 
▁ xxup robin . i had rather , forsooth , go before you like a man than 
▁ follow him like a dwarf . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxup o , you are a flattering boy ; now i see you 'll be a 
▁ courtier . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ford 

▁ xxup ford . xxmaj well met , xxmaj mistress xxmaj page . xxmaj whither go you ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj truly , sir , to see your wife . xxmaj is she at home ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj ay ; and as idle as she may hang together , for want of 
▁ company . i think , if your husbands were dead , you two 
▁ would marry . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj be sure of that - two other husbands . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj where had you this pretty weathercock ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . i can not tell what the dickens his name is my 
▁ husband had him of . xxmaj what do you call your knight 's 
▁ name , sirrah ? 
▁ xxup robin . xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj he , he ; i can never hit on 's name . xxmaj there is such 
▁ a league between my good man and he ! xxmaj is your wife at 
▁ home indeed ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj indeed she is . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj by your leave , sir . i am sick till i see her . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup mrs . xxup page and xxup robin 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj has xxmaj page any brains ? xxmaj hath he any eyes ? xxmaj hath he any 
▁ thinking ? xxmaj sure , they sleep ; he hath no use of them . xxmaj why , 
▁ this boy will carry a letter twenty mile as easy as a cannon 
▁ will shoot pointblank twelve score . xxmaj he pieces out his wife 's 
▁ inclination ; he gives her folly motion and advantage ; and 
▁ now she 's going to my wife , and xxmaj falstaff 's boy with her . a 
▁ man may hear this show'r sing in the wind . xxmaj and xxmaj falstaff 's 
▁ boy with her ! xxmaj good plots ! xxmaj they are laid ; and our revolted 
▁ wives share damnation together . xxmaj well ; i will take him , 
▁ then torture my wife , pluck the borrowed veil of modesty 
▁ from the so seeming xxmaj mistress xxmaj page , divulge xxmaj page himself 
▁ for a secure and wilful xxmaj actaeon ; and to these violent proceedings 
▁ all my neighbours shall cry aim . [ clock strikes ] 
▁ xxmaj the clock gives me my cue , and my assurance bids me 
▁ search ; there i shall find xxmaj falstaff . i shall be rather prais'd 
▁ for this than mock'd ; for it is as positive as the earth is firm 
▁ that xxmaj falstaff is there . i will go . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page , xxup shallow , xxup slender , xxup host , xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans , 
▁ xxup caius , and xxup rugby 

▁ xxup shallow , xxup page , & c. xxmaj well met , xxmaj master xxmaj ford . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj trust me , a good knot ; i have good cheer at home , 
▁ and i pray you all go with me . 
▁ xxup shallow . i must excuse myself , xxmaj master xxmaj ford . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj and so must xxup i , sir ; we have appointed to dine with 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne , and i would not break with her for more 
▁ money than xxmaj i 'll speak of . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj we have linger'd about a match between xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page and my cousin xxmaj slender , and this day we shall have 
▁ our answer . 
▁ xxup slender . i hope i have your good will , father xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj you have , xxmaj master xxmaj slender ; i stand wholly for you . xxmaj but 
▁ my wife , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , is for you altogether . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj ay , be - gar ; and de maid is love - a me ; my nursh - a 
▁ xxmaj quickly tell me so mush . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj what say you to young xxmaj master xxmaj fenton ? xxmaj he capers , 
▁ he dances , he has eyes of youth , he writes verses , he speaks 
▁ holiday , he smells xxmaj april and xxmaj may ; he will carry ' t , he will 
▁ carry ' t ; ' tis in his buttons ; he will carry ' t. 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj not by my consent , i promise you . xxmaj the gentleman is 
▁ of no having : he kept company with the wild xxmaj prince and 
▁ xxmaj poins ; he is of too high a region , he knows too much . xxmaj no , 
▁ he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes with the finger of 
▁ my substance ; if he take her , let him take her simply ; the 
▁ wealth i have waits on my consent , and my consent goes 
▁ not that way . 
▁ xxup ford . i beseech you , heartily , some of you go home with me 
▁ to dinner : besides your cheer , you shall have sport ; i will 
▁ show you a monster . xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , you shall go ; so shall 
▁ you , xxmaj master xxmaj page ; and you , xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj well , fare you well ; we shall have the freer 
▁ wooing at xxmaj master xxmaj page 's . xxmaj exeunt xxup shallow and xxup slender 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj go home , xxmaj john xxmaj rugby ; i come anon . xxmaj exit xxup rugby 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj farewell , my hearts ; i will to my honest knight 
▁ xxmaj falstaff , and drink canary with him . xxmaj exit xxup host 
▁ xxup ford . [ aside ] i think i shall drink in pipe - wine first with 
▁ him . xxmaj i 'll make him dance . xxmaj will you go , gentles ? 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj have with you to see this monster . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxup ford 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup ford and xxup mistress xxup page 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what , xxmaj john ! what , xxmaj robert ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj quickly , quickly ! xxmaj is the buck - basket- 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i warrant . xxmaj what , xxmaj robin , i say ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup servants with a basket 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj come , come , come . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj here , set it down . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj give your men the charge ; we must be brief . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj marry , as i told you before , xxmaj john and xxmaj robert , be 
▁ ready here hard by in the brew - house ; and when i suddenly 
▁ call you , come forth , and , without any pause or 
▁ staggering , take this basket on your shoulders . xxmaj that done , 
▁ trudge with it in all haste , and carry it among the whitsters 
▁ in xxmaj datchet xxmaj mead , and there empty it in the muddy ditch 
▁ close by the xxmaj thames side . 
▁ xxmaj mrs . xxup page . xxmaj you will do it ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i ha ' told them over and over ; they lack no 
▁ direction . xxmaj be gone , and come when you are call'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup servants 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj here comes little xxmaj robin . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup robin 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj how now , my eyas - musket , what news with 
▁ you ? 
▁ xxup robin . xxmaj my xxmaj master xxmaj sir xxmaj john is come in at your back - door , 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , and requests your company . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj you little jack - a - lent , have you been true to us ? 
▁ xxup robin . xxmaj ay , xxmaj i 'll be sworn . xxmaj my master knows not of your 
▁ being here , and hath threat'ned to put me into everlasting 
▁ liberty , if i tell you of it ; for he swears he 'll turn me away . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj thou ' rt a good boy ; this secrecy of thine shall 
▁ be a tailor to thee , and shall make thee a new doublet and 
▁ hose . xxmaj i 'll go hide me . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj do so . xxmaj go tell thy master i am alone . [ exit 
▁ xxup robin ] xxmaj mistress xxmaj page , remember you your cue . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . i warrant thee ; if i do not act it , hiss me . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup mrs . xxup page 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj go to , then ; we 'll use this unwholesome 
▁ humidity , this gross wat'ry pumpion ; we 'll teach him to 
▁ know turtles from jays . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup falstaff 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj have i caught thee , my heavenly jewel ? 
▁ xxmaj why , now let me die , for i have liv'd long enough ; this is 
▁ the period of my ambition . o this blessed hour ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . o sweet xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , i can not cog , i can not prate , 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford . xxmaj now shall i sin in my wish ; i would thy 
▁ husband were dead ; xxmaj i 'll speak it before the best lord , i 
▁ would make thee my lady . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i your lady , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ? xxmaj alas , i should be a pitiful 
▁ lady . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj let the court of xxmaj france show me such another . i 
▁ see how thine eye would emulate the diamond ; thou hast 
▁ the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the 
▁ ship - tire , the tire - valiant , or any tire of xxmaj venetian admittance . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . a plain kerchief , xxmaj sir xxmaj john ; my brows become 
▁ nothing else , nor that well neither . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , thou art a tyrant to say so ; thou 
▁ wouldst make an absolute courtier , and the firm fixture of 
▁ thy foot would give an excellent motion to thy gait in a 
▁ semi - circled farthingale . i see what thou wert , if xxmaj fortune 
▁ thy foe were , not xxmaj nature , thy friend . xxmaj come , thou canst not 
▁ hide it . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj believe me , there 's no such thing in me . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what made me love thee ? xxmaj let that persuade thee 
▁ there 's something extra - ordinary in thee . xxmaj come , i can not 
▁ cog , and say thou art this and that , like a many of these 
▁ lisping hawthorn - buds that come like women in men 's 
▁ apparel , and smell like xxmaj bucklersbury in simple time ; i 
▁ can not ; but i love thee , none but thee ; and thou deserv'st it . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj do not betray me , sir ; i fear you love xxmaj mistress 
▁ xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj thou mightst as well say i love to walk by the 
▁ xxmaj counter - gate , which is as hateful to me as the reek of a 
▁ lime - kiln . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj well , heaven knows how i love you ; and you 
▁ shall one day find it . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj keep in that mind ; xxmaj i 'll deserve it . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj nay , i must tell you , so you do ; or else i could 
▁ not be in that mind . 
▁ xxup robin . [ within ] xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford ! here 's 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj page at the door , sweating and blowing and looking 
▁ wildly , and would needs speak with you presently . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj she shall not see me ; i will ensconce me behind 
▁ the arras . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj pray you , do so ; she 's a very tattling woman . 
▁ [ falstaff hides himself ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup mistress xxup page and xxup robin 

▁ xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj how now ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . o xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , what have you done ? xxmaj you 're 
▁ sham'd , y'are overthrown , y'are undone for ever . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what 's the matter , good xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . o well - a - day , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , having an honest 
▁ man to your husband , to give him such cause of suspicion ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what cause of suspicion ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj what cause of suspicion ? xxmaj out upon you , how 
▁ am i mistook in you ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , alas , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj your husband 's coming hither , woman , with all 
▁ the officers in xxmaj windsor , to search for a gentleman that he 
▁ says is here now in the house , by your consent , to take an 
▁ ill advantage of his absence . xxmaj you are undone . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . ' tis not so , i hope . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj pray heaven it be not so that you have such a 
▁ man here ; but ' tis most certain your husband 's coming , 
▁ with half xxmaj windsor at his heels , to search for such a one . i 
▁ come before to tell you . xxmaj if you know yourself clear , why , 
▁ i am glad of it ; but if you have a friend here , convey , 
▁ convey him out . xxmaj be not amaz'd ; call all your senses to you ; 
▁ defend your reputation , or bid farewell to your good life 
▁ for ever . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what shall i do ? xxmaj there is a gentleman , my dear 
▁ friend ; and i fear not mine own shame as much as his peril . 
▁ i had rather than a thousand pound he were out of the 
▁ house . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj for shame , never stand ' you had rather ' and ' you 
▁ had rather ' ! xxmaj your husband 's here at hand ; bethink you of 
▁ some conveyance ; in the house you can not hide him . xxup o , 
▁ how have you deceiv'd me ! xxmaj look , here is a basket ; if he be 
▁ of any reasonable stature , he may creep in here ; and throw 
▁ foul linen upon him , as if it were going to bucking , or - it is 
▁ whiting - time - send him by your two men to xxmaj datchet 
▁ xxmaj mead . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj he 's too big to go in there . xxmaj what shall i do ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . [ coming forward ] xxmaj let me see ' t , let me see ' t. xxup o , 
▁ let me see ' t ! xxmaj i 'll in , xxmaj i 'll in ; follow your friend 's counsel ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll in . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj what , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff ! [ aside to xxup falstaff ] 
▁ xxmaj are these your letters , knight ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . [ aside to xxup mrs . xxup page ] i love thee and none but 
▁ thee ; help me away.-let me creep in here ; xxmaj i 'll never- 
▁ [ gets into the basket ; they cover him with foul linen ] 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj help to cover your master , boy . xxmaj call your men , 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford . xxmaj you dissembling knight ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what , xxmaj john ! xxmaj robert ! xxmaj john ! xxmaj exit xxup robin 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servants 

▁ xxmaj go , take up these clothes here , quickly ; where 's the 
▁ cowl - staff ? xxmaj look how you drumble . xxmaj carry them to the laundress 
▁ in xxmaj datchet xxmaj mead ; quickly , come . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ford , xxup page , xxup caius , and xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup ford . xxmaj pray you come near . xxmaj if i suspect without cause , why 
▁ then make sport at me , then let me be your jest ; i deserve 
▁ it . xxmaj how now , whither bear you this ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj to the laundress , forsooth . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , what have you to do whither they bear it ? 
▁ xxmaj you were best meddle with buck - washing . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj buck ? i would i could wash myself of the buck ! 
▁ xxmaj buck , buck , buck ! ay , buck ! i warrant you , buck ; and of 
▁ the season too , it shall appear . [ exeunt xxup servants with 
▁ basket ] xxmaj gentlemen , i have dream'd to - night ; xxmaj i 'll tell you my 
▁ dream . xxmaj here , here , here be my keys ; ascend my chambers , 
▁ search , seek , find out . xxmaj i 'll warrant we 'll unkennel the fox . 
▁ xxmaj let me stop this way first . [ locking the door ] xxmaj so , now 
▁ uncape . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj ford , be contented ; you wrong yourself 
▁ too much . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj true , xxmaj master xxmaj page . xxmaj up , gentlemen , you shall see sport 
▁ anon ; follow me , gentlemen . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj this is fery fantastical humours and jealousies . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , ' tis no the fashion of xxmaj france ; it is not jealous 
▁ in xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj nay , follow him , gentlemen ; see the issue of his 
▁ search . xxmaj exeunt xxup evans , xxup page , and xxup caius 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj is there not a double excellency in this ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i know not which pleases me better , that my 
▁ husband is deceived , or xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj what a taking was he in when your husband 
▁ ask'd who was in the basket ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i am half afraid he will have need of washing ; so 
▁ throwing him into the water will do him a benefit . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj hang him , dishonest rascal ! i would all of the 
▁ same strain were in the same distress . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i think my husband hath some special suspicion 
▁ of xxmaj falstaff 's being here , for i never saw him so gross in his 
▁ jealousy till now . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . i xxmaj will lay a plot to try that , and we will yet have 
▁ more tricks with xxmaj falstaff . xxmaj his dissolute disease will scarce 
▁ obey this medicine . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj shall we send that foolish carrion , xxmaj mistress 
▁ xxmaj quickly , to him , and excuse his throwing into the water , 
▁ and give him another hope , to betray him to another 
▁ punishment ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj we will do it ; let him be sent for to - morrow 
▁ eight o'clock , to have amends . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ford , xxup page , xxup caius , and xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup ford . i can not find him ; may be the knave bragg'd of that 
▁ he could not compass . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . [ aside to xxup mrs . xxup ford ] xxmaj heard you that ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj you use me well , xxmaj master xxmaj ford , do you ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj ay , i do so . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj heaven make you better than your thoughts ! 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj you do yourself mighty wrong , xxmaj master xxmaj ford . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj ay , ay ; i must bear it . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj if there be any pody in the house , and in the 
▁ chambers , and in the coffers , and in the presses , heaven forgive 
▁ my sins at the day of judgment ! 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj be gar , nor i too ; there is no bodies . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj fie , fie , xxmaj master xxmaj ford , are you not asham'd ? xxmaj what 
▁ spirit , what devil suggests this imagination ? i would not ha ' 
▁ your distemper in this kind for the wealth of xxmaj windsor 
▁ xxmaj castle . 
▁ xxup ford . ' tis my fault , xxmaj master xxmaj page ; i suffer for it . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj you suffer for a pad conscience . xxmaj your wife is as 
▁ honest a omans as i will desires among five thousand , and five 
▁ hundred too . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj by gar , i see ' tis an honest woman . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj well , i promis'd you a dinner . xxmaj come , come , walk in 
▁ the xxmaj park . i pray you pardon me ; i will hereafter make 
▁ known to you why i have done this . xxmaj come , wife , come , 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ; i pray you pardon me ; pray heartly , 
▁ pardon me . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj let 's go in , gentlemen ; but , trust me , we 'll mock him . 
▁ i do invite you to - morrow morning to my house to breakfast ; 
▁ after , we 'll a - birding together ; i have a fine hawk for 
▁ the bush . xxmaj shall it be so ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj any thing . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj if there is one , i shall make two in the company . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj if there be one or two , i shall make - a the turd . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj pray you go , xxmaj master xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup evans . i pray you now , remembrance to - morrow on the 
▁ lousy knave , mine host . 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj dat is good ; by gar , with all my heart . 
▁ xxup evans . a lousy knave , to have his gibes and his mockeries ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj before xxup page 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup fenton and xxup anne xxup page 

▁ xxup fenton . i see i can not get thy father 's love ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore no more turn me to him , sweet xxmaj nan . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj alas , how then ? 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj why , thou must be thyself . 
▁ xxmaj he doth object i am too great of birth ; 
▁ xxmaj and that , my state being gall'd with my expense , 
▁ i seek to heal it only by his wealth . 
▁ xxmaj besides these , other bars he lays before me , 
▁ xxmaj my riots past , my wild societies ; 
▁ xxmaj and tells me ' tis a thing impossible 
▁ i should love thee but as a property . 
▁ xxup anne .. xxmaj may be he tells you true . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj no , heaven so speed me in my time to come ! 
▁ xxmaj albeit i will confess thy father 's wealth 
▁ xxmaj was the first motive that i woo'd thee , xxmaj anne ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , wooing thee , i found thee of more value 
▁ xxmaj than stamps in gold , or sums in sealed bags ; 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis the very riches of thyself 
▁ xxmaj that now i aim at . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj gentle xxmaj master xxmaj fenton , 
▁ xxmaj yet seek my father 's love ; still seek it , sir . 
▁ xxmaj if opportunity and humblest suit 
▁ xxmaj can not attain it , why then - hark you hither . 
▁ [ they converse apart ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup shallow , xxup slender , and xxup mistress xxup quickly 

▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj break their talk , xxmaj mistress xxmaj quickly ; my kinsman 
▁ shall speak for himself . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj i 'll make a shaft or a bolt on ' t ; ' slid , ' tis but 
▁ venturing . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj be not dismay'd . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj no , she shall not dismay me . i care not for that , 
▁ but that i am afeard . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj hark ye , xxmaj master xxmaj slender would speak a word 
▁ with you . 
▁ xxup anne . i come to him . [ aside ] xxmaj this is my father 's choice . 
▁ xxup o , what a world of vile ill - favour'd faults 
▁ xxmaj looks handsome in three hundred pounds a year ! 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj and how does good xxmaj master xxmaj fenton ? xxmaj pray you , a 
▁ word with you . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj she 's coming ; to her , coz . o boy , thou hadst a 
▁ father ! 
▁ xxup slender . i had a father , xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne ; my uncle can tell 
▁ you good jests of him . xxmaj pray you , uncle , tell xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne 
▁ the jest how my father stole two geese out of a pen , good 
▁ uncle . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne , my cousin loves you . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , that i do ; as well as i love any woman in 
▁ xxmaj gloucestershire . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj he will maintain you like a gentlewoman . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , that i will come cut and longtail , under the 
▁ degree of a squire . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj he will make you a hundred and fifty pounds 
▁ jointure . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj shallow , let him woo for himself . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj marry , i thank you for it ; i thank you for that 
▁ good comfort . xxmaj she calls you , coz ; xxmaj i 'll leave you . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj now , xxmaj master xxmaj slender- 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj now , good xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne- 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj my xxmaj will ! ' od 's heartlings , that 's a pretty jest 
▁ indeed ! i ne'er made my will yet , i thank heaven ; i am not 
▁ such a sickly creature , i give heaven praise . 
▁ xxup anne . i mean , xxmaj master xxmaj slender , what would you with me ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj truly , for mine own part i would little or nothing 
▁ with you . xxmaj your father and my uncle hath made motions ; 
▁ if it be my luck , so ; if not , happy man be his dole ! xxmaj they 
▁ can tell you how things go better than i can . xxmaj you may ask 
▁ your father ; here he comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page and xxup mistress xxup page 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj now , xxmaj master xxmaj slender ! xxmaj love him , daughter xxmaj anne- 
▁ xxmaj why , how now , what does xxmaj master xxmaj fenton here ? 
▁ xxmaj you wrong me , sir , thus still to haunt my house . 
▁ i told you , sir , my daughter is dispos'd of . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj nay , xxmaj master xxmaj page , be not impatient . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj fenton , come not to my child . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj she is no match for you . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj sir , will you hear me ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj no , good xxmaj master xxmaj fenton . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj master xxmaj shallow ; come , son xxmaj slender ; in . 
▁ xxmaj knowing my mind , you wrong me , xxmaj master xxmaj fenton . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup page , xxup shallow , and xxup slender 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj speak to xxmaj mistress xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj good xxmaj mistress xxmaj page , for that i love your daughter 
▁ xxmaj in such a righteous fashion as i do , 
▁ xxmaj perforce , against all checks , rebukes , and manners , 
▁ i must advance the colours of my love , 
▁ xxmaj and not retire . xxmaj let me have your good will . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj good mother , do not marry me to yond fool . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . i mean it not ; i seek you a better husband . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj that 's my master , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj alas , i had rather be set quick i ' th ' earth . 
▁ xxmaj and bowl'd to death with turnips . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj come , trouble not yourself . xxmaj good xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj fenton , 
▁ i will not be your friend , nor enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj my daughter will i question how she loves you , 
▁ xxmaj and as i find her , so am i affected ; 
▁ xxmaj till then , farewell , sir ; she must needs go in ; 
▁ xxmaj her father will be angry . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj farewell , gentle mistress ; farewell , xxmaj nan . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup mrs . xxup page and xxup anne 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj this is my doing now : ' nay , ' said i ' will you cast 
▁ away your child on a fool , and a physician ? xxmaj look on 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj fenton . ' xxmaj this is my doing . 
▁ xxup fenton . i thank thee ; and i pray thee , once to - night 
▁ xxmaj give my sweet xxmaj nan this ring . xxmaj there 's for thy pains . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj now xxmaj heaven send thee good fortune ! [ exit 
▁ xxup fenton ] a kind heart he hath ; a woman would run through 
▁ fire and water for such a kind heart . xxmaj but yet i would my 
▁ master had xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne ; or i would xxmaj master xxmaj slender had 
▁ her ; or , in sooth , i would xxmaj master xxmaj fenton had her ; i will 
▁ do what i can for them all three , for so i have promis'd , 
▁ and xxmaj i 'll be as good as my word ; but speciously for xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj fenton . xxmaj well , i must of another errand to xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff 
▁ from my two mistresses . xxmaj what a beast am i to slack it ! 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff and xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj bardolph , i say ! 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj here , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj go fetch me a quart of sack ; put a toast in ' t. 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup bardolph 
▁ xxmaj have i liv'd to be carried in a basket , like a barrow of 
▁ butcher 's offal , and to be thrown in the xxmaj thames ? xxmaj well , if 
▁ i be serv'd such another trick , xxmaj i 'll have my brains ta'en out 
▁ and butter'd , and give them to a dog for a new - year 's gift . 
▁ xxmaj the rogues slighted me into the river with as little remorse 
▁ as they would have drown'd a blind bitch 's puppies , fifteen 
▁ i ' th ' litter ; and you may know by my size that i have 
▁ a kind of alacrity in sinking ; if the bottom were as deep as 
▁ hell i should down . i had been drown'd but that the shore 
▁ was shelvy and shallow - a death that i abhor ; for the water 
▁ swells a man ; and what a thing should i have been when 
▁ had been swell'd ! i should have been a mountain of 
▁ mummy . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup bardolph , with sack 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj here 's xxmaj mistress xxmaj quickly , sir , to speak with you 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come , let me pour in some sack to the xxmaj thames 
▁ water ; for my belly 's as cold as if i had swallow'd 
▁ snowballs for pills to cool the reins . xxmaj call her in . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj come in , woman . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup quickly 

▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj by your leave ; i cry you mercy . xxmaj give your 
▁ worship good morrow . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj take away these chalices . xxmaj go , brew me a pottle 
▁ of sack finely . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj with eggs , sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj simple of itself ; xxmaj i 'll no pullet - sperm in my 
▁ brewage . [ exit xxup bardolph ] xxmaj how now ! 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj marry , sir , i come to your worship from xxmaj mistress 
▁ xxmaj ford . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford ! i have had ford enough ; i was 
▁ thrown into the ford ; i have my belly full of ford . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj alas the day , good heart , that was not her fault ! 
▁ xxmaj she does so take on with her men ; they mistook their 
▁ erection . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj so did i mine , to build upon a foolish woman 's 
▁ promise . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj well , she laments , sir , for it , that it would yearn 
▁ your heart to see it . xxmaj her husband goes this morning 
▁ a - birding ; she desires you once more to come to her between 
▁ eight and nine ; i must carry her word quickly . xxmaj she 'll make 
▁ you amends , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well , i xxmaj will visit her . xxmaj tell her so ; and bid her 
▁ think what a man is . xxmaj let her consider his frailty , and then 
▁ judge of my merit . 
▁ xxup quickly . i will tell her . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj do so . xxmaj between nine and ten , say'st thou ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj eight and nine , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well , be gone ; i will not miss her . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj peace be with you , sir . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup falstaff . i marvel i hear not of xxmaj master xxmaj brook ; he sent me 
▁ word to stay within . i like his money well . xxup o , here he 
▁ comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ford disguised 

▁ xxup ford . xxmaj bless you , sir ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj now , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , you come to know what 
▁ hath pass'd between me and xxmaj ford 's wife ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj that , indeed , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , is my business . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj master xxmaj brook , i will not lie to you ; i was at her 
▁ house the hour she appointed me . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj and sped you , sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj very ill - favouredly , xxmaj master xxmaj brook . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj how so , sir ; did she change her determination ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no . xxmaj master xxmaj brook ; but the peaking cornuto her 
▁ husband , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , dwelling in a continual ' larum of 
▁ jealousy , comes me in the instant of our , encounter , after 
▁ we had embrac'd , kiss'd , protested , and , as it were , spoke 
▁ the prologue of our comedy ; and at his heels a rabble of his 
▁ companions , thither provoked and instigated by his 
▁ distemper , and , forsooth , to search his house for his wife 's 
▁ love . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj what , while you were there ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj while i was there . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj and did he search for you , and could not find you ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj you shall hear . xxmaj as good luck would have it , comes 
▁ in one xxmaj mistress xxmaj page , gives intelligence of xxmaj ford 's approach ; 
▁ and , in her invention and xxmaj ford 's wife 's distraction , they 
▁ convey'd me into a buck - basket . 
▁ xxup ford . a buck - basket ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj by the xxmaj lord , a buck - basket ! xxmaj ramm'd me in with 
▁ foul shirts and smocks , socks , foul stockings , greasy 
▁ napkins , that , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , there was the rankest compound 
▁ of villainous smell that ever offended nostril . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj and how long lay you there ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj nay , you shall hear , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , what i have 
▁ suffer'd to bring this woman to evil for your good . xxmaj being 
▁ thus cramm'd in the basket , a couple of xxmaj ford 's knaves , his 
▁ hinds , were call'd forth by their mistress to carry me in 
▁ the name of foul clothes to xxmaj datchet xxmaj lane ; they took me on 
▁ their shoulders ; met the jealous knave their master in the 
▁ door ; who ask'd them once or twice what they had in their 
▁ basket . i quak'd for fear lest the lunatic knave would have 
▁ search'd it ; but xxmaj fate , ordaining he should be a cuckold , 
▁ held his hand . xxmaj well , on went he for a search , and away 
▁ went i for foul clothes . xxmaj but mark the sequel , xxmaj master 
▁ brook - i suffered the pangs of three several deaths : first , 
▁ an intolerable fright to be detected with a jealous rotten 
▁ bell - wether ; next , to be compass'd like a good bilbo in the 
▁ circumference of a peck , hilt to point , heel to head ; and 
▁ then , to be stopp'd in , like a strong distillation , with 
▁ stinking clothes that fretted in their own grease . xxmaj think of that 
▁ -a man of my kidney . xxmaj think of that - that am as subject to 
▁ heat as butter ; a man of continual dissolution and thaw . xxmaj it 
▁ was a miracle to scape suffocation . xxmaj and in the height of 
▁ this bath , when i was more than half - stew'd in grease , like 
▁ a xxmaj dutch dish , to be thrown into the xxmaj thames , and cool'd , 
▁ glowing hot , in that surge , like a horse - shoe ; think of that 
▁ -hissing hot . xxmaj think of that , xxmaj master xxmaj brook . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj in good sadness , sir , i am sorry that for my sake you 
▁ have suffer'd all this . xxmaj my suit , then , is desperate ; 
▁ you 'll undertake her no more . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj master xxmaj brook , i will be thrown into xxmaj etna , as i 
▁ have been into xxmaj thames , ere i will leave her thus . xxmaj her 
▁ husband is this morning gone a - birding ; i have received from 
▁ her another embassy of meeting ; ' twixt eight and nine is 
▁ the hour , xxmaj master xxmaj brook . 
▁ xxup ford . ' tis past eight already , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj is it ? i xxmaj will then address me to my appointment . 
▁ xxmaj come to me at your convenient leisure , and you shall 
▁ know how i speed ; and the conclusion shall be crowned 
▁ with your enjoying her . xxmaj adieu . xxmaj you shall have her , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj brook ; xxmaj master xxmaj brook , you shall cuckold xxmaj ford . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj hum ! ha ! xxmaj is this a vision ? xxmaj is this a dream ? xxmaj do i sleep ? 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj ford , awake ; awake , xxmaj master xxmaj ford . xxmaj there 's a hole 
▁ made in your best coat , xxmaj master xxmaj ford . xxmaj this ' tis to be 
▁ married ; this ' tis to have linen and buck - baskets ! xxmaj well , i will 
▁ proclaim myself what i am ; i will now take the lecher ; he 
▁ is at my house . xxmaj he can not scape me ; ' tis impossible he 
▁ should ; he can not creep into a halfpenny purse nor into 
▁ a pepper box . xxmaj but , lest the devil that guides him should aid 
▁ him , i will search impossible places . xxmaj though what i am i 
▁ can not avoid , yet to be what i would not shall not make 
▁ me tame . xxmaj if i have horns to make one mad , let the proverb 
▁ go with me - i'll be horn mad . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 

 xxmaj windsor . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup page , xxup mistress xxup quickly , and xxup william 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj is he at xxmaj master xxmaj ford 's already , think'st thou ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj sure he is by this ; or will be presently ; but truly 
▁ he is very courageous mad about his throwing into the 
▁ water . xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford desires you to come suddenly . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj i 'll be with her by and by ; xxmaj i 'll but bring my 
▁ young man here to school . xxmaj look where his master comes ; 
▁ ' tis a playing day , i see . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh , no school to - day ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj no ; xxmaj master xxmaj slender is let the boys leave to play . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj blessing of his heart ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh , my husband says my son profits 
▁ nothing in the world at his book ; i pray you ask him some 
▁ questions in his accidence . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj william ; hold up your head ; come . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj come on , sirrah ; hold up your head ; answer your 
▁ master ; be not afraid . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj william , how many numbers is in nouns ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj two . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj truly , i thought there had been one number 
▁ more , because they say ' od 's nouns . ' 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj peace your tattlings . xxmaj what is ' fair , ' xxmaj william ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj pulcher . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj polecats ! xxmaj there are fairer things than polecats , 
▁ sure . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj you are a very simplicity oman ; i pray you , peace . 
▁ xxmaj what is ' lapis , ' xxmaj william ? 
▁ xxup william . a stone . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj and what is ' a stone , ' xxmaj william ? 
▁ xxup william . a pebble . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj no , it is ' lapis ' ; i pray you remember in your prain . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj lapis . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj that is a good xxmaj william . xxmaj what is he , xxmaj william , that 
▁ does lend articles ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj articles are borrowed of the pronoun , and be 
▁ thus declined : xxmaj singulariter , nominativo ; hic , haec , hoc . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj nominativo , hig , hag , hog ; pray you , mark : genitivo , 
▁ hujus . xxmaj well , what is your accusative case ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj accusativo , hinc . 
▁ xxup evans . i pray you , have your remembrance , child . 
▁ xxmaj accusativo , hung , hang , hog . 
▁ xxup quickly . ' hang - hog ' is xxmaj latin for bacon , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj leave your prabbles , oman . xxmaj what is the focative 
▁ case , xxmaj william ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj o - vocativo , xxup o. 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj remember , xxmaj william : focative is caret . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj and that 's a good root . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj oman , forbear . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj peace . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj what is your genitive case plural , xxmaj william ? 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj genitive case ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj genitive : horum , harum , horum . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj vengeance of xxmaj jenny 's case ; fie on her ! xxmaj never 
▁ name her , child , if she be a whore . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj for shame , oman . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxup you do ill to teach the child such words . xxmaj he 
▁ teaches him to hick and to hack , which they 'll do fast 
▁ enough of themselves ; and to call ' horum ' ; fie upon you ! 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj oman , art thou lunatics ? xxmaj hast thou no understandings 
▁ for thy cases , and the numbers of the genders ? xxmaj thou 
▁ art as foolish xxmaj christian creatures as i would desires . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj prithee hold thy peace . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj show me now , xxmaj william , some declensions of your 
▁ pronouns . 
▁ xxup william . xxmaj forsooth , i have forgot . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj it is qui , quae , quod ; if you forget your qui 's , your 
▁ quae 's , and your quod 's , you must be preeches . xxmaj go your 
▁ ways and play ; go . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj he is a better scholar than i thought he was . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj he is a good sprag memory . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj mistress xxmaj page . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj adieu , good xxmaj sir xxmaj hugh . xxmaj exit xxup sir xxup hugh 
▁ xxmaj get you home , boy . xxmaj come , we stay too long . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxup ford 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff and xxup mistress xxup ford 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , your sorrow hath eaten up my 
▁ sufferance . i see you are obsequious in your love , and i 
▁ profess requital to a hair 's breadth ; not only , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , in 
▁ the simple office of love , but in all the accoutrement , 
▁ complement , and ceremony of it . xxmaj but are you sure of your 
▁ husband now ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj he 's a - birding , sweet xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . [ within ] xxmaj what hoa , gossip xxmaj ford , what hoa ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj step into th ' chamber , xxmaj sir xxmaj john . xxmaj exit xxup falstaff 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup page 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj how now , sweetheart , who 's at home besides 
▁ yourself ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , none but mine own people . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj indeed ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj no , certainly . [ aside to her ] xxmaj speak louder . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj truly , i am so glad you have nobody here . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj why , woman , your husband is in his old lunes 
▁ again . xxmaj he so takes on yonder with my husband ; so rails 
▁ against all married mankind ; so curses an xxmaj eve 's daughters , 
▁ of what complexion soever ; and so buffets himself on the 
▁ forehead , crying ' peer - out , peer - out ! ' that any madness i 
▁ ever yet beheld seem'd but tameness , civility , and patience , 
▁ to this his distemper he is in now . i am glad the fat knight 
▁ is not here . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , does he talk of him ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj of none but him ; and swears he was carried out , 
▁ the last time he search'd for him , in a basket ; protests to 
▁ my husband he is now here ; and hath drawn him and the 
▁ rest of their company from their sport , to make another 
▁ experiment of his suspicion . xxmaj but i am glad the knight is not 
▁ here ; now he shall see his own foolery . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj how near is he , xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj hard by , at street end ; he will be here anon . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i am undone : the knight is here . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj why , then , you are utterly sham'd , and he 's but 
▁ a dead man . xxmaj what a woman are you ! xxmaj away with him , 
▁ away with him ; better shame than murder . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj which way should he go ? xxmaj how should i bestow 
▁ him ? xxmaj shall i put him into the basket again ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup falstaff 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll come no more i ' th ' basket . xxmaj may i not go 
▁ out ere he come ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj alas , three of xxmaj master xxmaj ford 's brothers watch the 
▁ door with pistols , that none shall issue out ; otherwise you 
▁ might slip away ere he came . xxmaj but what make you here ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what shall i do ? xxmaj i 'll creep up into the chimney . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj there they always use to discharge their 
▁ birding - pieces . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj creep into the kiln - hole . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj where is it ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj he will seek there , on my word . xxmaj neither press , 
▁ coffer , chest , trunk , well , vault , but he hath an abstract for 
▁ the remembrance of such places , and goes to them by his 
▁ note . xxmaj there is no hiding you in the house . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj i 'll go out then . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj if you go out in your own semblance , you die , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john . xxmaj unless you go out disguis'd . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj how might we disguise him ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj alas the day , i know not ! xxmaj there is no woman 's 
▁ gown big enough for him ; otherwise he might put on a 
▁ hat , a muffler , and a kerchief , and so escape . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj good hearts , devise something ; any extremity 
▁ rather than a mischief . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj my xxmaj maid 's aunt , the fat woman of xxmaj brainford , has 
▁ a gown above . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj on my word , it will serve him ; she 's as big as he 
▁ is ; and there 's her thrumm'd hat , and her muffler too . xxmaj run 
▁ up , xxmaj sir xxmaj john . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj go , go , sweet xxmaj sir xxmaj john . xxmaj mistress xxmaj page and i will 
▁ look some linen for your head . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj quick , quick ; we 'll come dress you straight . xxmaj put 
▁ on the gown the while . xxmaj exit xxup falstaff 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . i would my husband would meet him in this 
▁ shape ; he can not abide the old woman of xxmaj brainford ; he 
▁ swears she 's a witch , forbade her my house , and hath 
▁ threat'ned to beat her . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj heaven guide him to thy husband 's cudgel ; and 
▁ the devil guide his cudgel afterwards ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj but is my husband coming ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj ay , in good sadness is he ; and talks of the basket 
▁ too , howsoever he hath had intelligence . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj we 'll try that ; for xxmaj i 'll appoint my men to carry 
▁ the basket again , to meet him at the door with it as they 
▁ did last time . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj nay , but he 'll be here presently ; let 's go dress 
▁ him like the witch of xxmaj brainford . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj i 'll first direct my men what they shall do with 
▁ the basket . xxmaj go up ; xxmaj i 'll bring linen for him straight . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj hang him , dishonest varlet ! we can not misuse 
▁ him enough . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll leave a proof , by that which we will do , 
▁ xxmaj wives may be merry and yet honest too . 
▁ xxmaj we do not act that often jest and laugh ; 
▁ ' tis old but true : xxmaj still swine eats all the draff . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup mistress xxup ford , with two xxup servants 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj go , sirs , take the basket again on your shoulders ; 
▁ your master is hard at door ; if he bid you set it down , obey 
▁ him ; quickly , dispatch . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj come , come , take it up . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj pray heaven it be not full of knight again . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . i hope not ; i had lief as bear so much lead . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ford , xxup page , xxup shallow , xxup caius , and xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup ford . xxmaj ay , but if it prove true , xxmaj master xxmaj page , have you any 
▁ way then to unfool me again ? xxmaj set down the basket , villain ! 
▁ xxmaj somebody call my wife . xxmaj youth in a basket ! o you panderly 
▁ rascals , there 's a knot , a ging , a pack , a conspiracy 
▁ against me . xxmaj now shall the devil be sham'd . xxmaj what , wife , i 
▁ say ! xxmaj come , come forth ; behold what honest clothes you 
▁ send forth to bleaching . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj why , this passes , xxmaj master xxmaj ford ; you are not to go loose