xxbos any longer ; you must be pinion'd . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj why , this is lunatics . xxmaj this is mad as a mad dog . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj indeed , xxmaj master xxmaj ford , this is not well , indeed . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj so say i too , sir . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup mistress xxup ford 

▁ xxmaj come hither , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford ; xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , the honest 
▁ woman , the modest wife , the virtuous creature , that hath 
▁ the jealous fool to her husband ! i suspect without cause , 
▁ xxmaj mistress , do xxup i ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj heaven be my witness , you do , if you suspect 
▁ me in any dishonesty . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj well said , brazen - face ; hold it out . xxmaj come forth , sirrah . 
▁ [ pulling clothes out of the basket ] 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj this passes ! 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj are you not asham'd ? xxmaj let the clothes alone . 
▁ xxup ford . i shall find you anon . 
▁ xxup evans . ' tis unreasonable . xxmaj will you take up your wife 's 
▁ clothes ? xxmaj come away . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj empty the basket , i say . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , man , why ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj master xxmaj page , as i am a man , there was one convey'd 
▁ out of my house yesterday in this basket . xxmaj why may not 
▁ he be there again ? xxmaj in my house i am sure he is ; my 
▁ intelligence is true ; my jealousy is reasonable . 
▁ xxmaj pluck me out all the linen . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj if you find a man there , he shall die a flea 's 
▁ death . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj here 's no man . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj by my fidelity , this is not well , xxmaj master xxmaj ford ; this 
▁ wrongs you . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj master xxmaj ford , you must pray , and not follow the 
▁ imaginations of your own heart ; this is jealousies . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj well , he 's not here i seek for . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj no , nor nowhere else but in your brain . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj help to search my house this one time . xxmaj if i find not 
▁ what i seek , show no colour for my extremity ; let me for 
▁ ever be your table sport ; let them say of me ' as jealous as 
▁ xxmaj ford , that search'd a hollow walnut for his wife 's leman . ' 
▁ xxmaj satisfy me once more ; once more search with me . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what , hoa , xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ! xxmaj come you and the old 
▁ woman down ; my husband will come into the chamber . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj old woman ? what old woman 's that ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj why , it is my maid 's aunt of xxmaj brainford . 
▁ xxup ford . a witch , a quean , an old cozening quean ! xxmaj have i not 
▁ forbid her my house ? xxmaj she comes of errands , does she ? xxmaj we 
▁ are simple men ; we do not know what 's brought to pass 
▁ under the profession of fortune - telling . xxmaj she works by 
▁ charms , by spells , by th ' figure , and such daub'ry as this 
▁ is , beyond our element . xxmaj we know nothing . xxmaj come down , you 
▁ witch , you hag you ; come down , i say . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj nay , good sweet husband ! xxmaj good gentlemen , let 
▁ him not strike the old woman . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup falstaff in woman 's clothes , and xxup mistress xxup page 
▁
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj come , xxmaj mother xxmaj prat ; come . give me your hand . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj i 'll prat her . [ beating him ] xxmaj out of my door , you 
▁ witch , you hag , you . baggage , you polecat , you ronyon ! 
▁ xxmaj out , out ! xxmaj i 'll conjure you , xxmaj i 'll fortune - tell you . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup falstaff 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj are you not asham'd ? i think you have kill'd the 
▁ poor woman . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj nay , he will do it . ' tis a goodly credit for you . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj hang her , witch ! 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj by yea and no , i think the oman is a witch indeed ; i 
▁ like not when a oman has a great peard ; i spy a great peard 
▁ under his muffler . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj will you follow , gentlemen ? i beseech you follow ; 
▁ see but the issue of my jealousy ; if i cry out thus upon no 
▁ trail , never trust me when i open again . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj let 's obey his humour a little further . xxmaj come , 
▁ gentlemen . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup mrs . xxup ford and xxup mrs . xxup page 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj trust me , he beat him most pitifully . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj nay , by th ' mass , that he did not ; he beat him 
▁ most unpitifully methought . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj i 'll have the cudgel hallow'd and hung o'er the 
▁ altar ; it hath done meritorious service . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj what think you ? xxmaj may we , with the warrant of 
▁ womanhood and the witness of a good conscience , pursue 
▁ him with any further revenge ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj the spirit of wantonness is sure scar'd out of 
▁ him ; if the devil have him not in fee - simple , with fine and 
▁ recovery , he will never , i think , in the way of waste , 
▁ attempt us again . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj shall we tell our husbands how we have serv'd 
▁ him ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj yes , by all means ; if it be but to scrape the 
▁ figures out of your husband 's brains . xxmaj if they can find in their 
▁ hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight shall be any further 
▁ afflicted , we two will still be the ministers . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj i 'll warrant they 'll have him publicly sham'd ; 
▁ and methinks there would be no period to the jest , should 
▁ he not be publicly sham'd . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj come , to the forge with it then ; shape it . i 
▁ would not have things cool . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup host and xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj sir , the xxmaj germans desire to have three of your 
▁ horses ; the xxmaj duke himself will be to - morrow at court , and 
▁ they are going to meet him . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj what duke should that be comes so secretly ? i hear 
▁ not of him in the court . xxmaj let me speak with the gentlemen ; 
▁ they speak xxmaj english ? 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj ay , sir ; xxmaj i 'll call them to you . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj they shall have my horses , but xxmaj i 'll make them pay ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll sauce them ; they have had my house a week at 
▁ command ; i have turn'd away my other guests . xxmaj they must 
▁ come off ; xxmaj i 'll sauce them . xxmaj come . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 

 xxup ford 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup page , xxup ford , xxup mistress xxup page , xxup mistress xxup ford , and xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup evans . ' tis one of the best discretions of a oman as ever 
▁ did look upon . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj and did he send you both these letters at an instant ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj within a quarter of an hour . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj pardon me , wife . xxmaj henceforth , do what thou wilt ; 
▁ i rather will suspect the sun with cold 
▁ xxmaj than thee with wantonness . xxmaj now doth thy honour stand , 
▁ xxmaj in him that was of late an heretic , 
▁ xxmaj as firm as faith . 
▁ xxup page . ' tis well , ' tis well ; no more . 
▁ xxmaj be not as extreme in submission as in offence ; 
▁ xxmaj but let our plot go forward . xxmaj let our wives 
▁ xxmaj yet once again , to make us public sport , 
▁ xxmaj appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow , 
▁ xxmaj where we may take him and disgrace him for it . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj there is no better way than that they spoke of . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj how ? xxmaj to send him word they 'll meet him in the xxmaj park 
▁ at midnight ? xxmaj fie , fie ! he 'll never come ! 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj you say he has been thrown in the rivers ; and has 
▁ been grievously peaten as an old oman ; methinks there 
▁ should be terrors in him , that he should not come ; 
▁ methinks his flesh is punish'd ; he shall have no desires . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj so think i too . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj devise but how you 'll use him when he comes , 
▁ xxmaj and let us two devise to bring him thither . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj there is an old tale goes that xxmaj heme the xxmaj hunter , 
▁ xxmaj sometime a keeper here in xxmaj windsor xxmaj forest , 
▁ xxmaj doth all the winter - time , at still midnight , 
▁ xxmaj walk round about an oak , with great ragg'd horns ; 
▁ xxmaj and there he blasts the tree , and takes the cattle , 
▁ xxmaj and makes milch - kine yield blood , and shakes a chain 
▁ xxmaj in a most hideous and dreadful manner . 
▁ xxmaj you have heard of such a spirit , and well you know 
▁ xxmaj the superstitious idle - headed eld 
▁ xxmaj receiv'd , and did deliver to our age , 
▁ xxmaj this tale of xxmaj heme the xxmaj hunter for a truth . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj why yet there want not many that do fear 
▁ xxmaj in deep of night to walk by this xxmaj herne 's oak . 
▁ xxmaj but what of this ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj marry , this is our device- 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj falstaff at that oak shall meet with us , 
▁ xxmaj disguis'd , like xxmaj heme , with huge horns on his head . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj well , let it not be doubted but he 'll come , 
▁ xxmaj and in this shape . xxmaj when you have brought him thither , 
▁ xxmaj what shall be done with him ? xxmaj what is your plot ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj that likewise have we thought upon , and 
▁ thus : 
▁ xxmaj nan xxmaj page my daughter , and my little son , 
▁ xxmaj and three or four more of their growth , we 'll dress 
▁ xxmaj like urchins , ouphes , and fairies , green and white , 
▁ xxmaj with rounds of waxen tapers on their heads , 
▁ xxmaj and rattles in their hands ; upon a sudden , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj falstaff , she , and xxup i , are newly met , 
▁ xxmaj let them from forth a sawpit rush at once 
▁ xxmaj with some diffused song ; upon their sight 
▁ xxmaj we two in great amazedness will fly . 
▁ xxmaj then let them all encircle him about , 
▁ xxmaj and fairy - like , to pinch the unclean knight ; 
▁ xxmaj and ask him why , that hour of fairy revel , 
▁ xxmaj in their so sacred paths he dares to tread 
▁ xxmaj in shape profane . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj and till he tell the truth , 
▁ xxmaj let the supposed fairies pinch him sound , 
▁ xxmaj and burn him with their tapers . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj the truth being known , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll all present ourselves ; dis - horn the spirit , 
▁ xxmaj and mock him home to xxmaj windsor . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj the children must 
▁ xxmaj be practis'd well to this or they 'll nev'r do ' t. 
▁ xxup evans . i will teach the children their behaviours ; and i will 
▁ be like a jack - an - apes also , to burn the knight with my 
▁ taber . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj that will be excellent . xxmaj i 'll go buy them vizards . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj my xxmaj nan shall be the xxmaj queen of all the xxmaj fairies , 
▁ xxmaj finely attired in a robe of white . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj that silk will i go buy . [ aside ] xxmaj and in that time 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj master xxmaj slender steal my xxmaj nan away , 
▁ xxmaj and marry her at eton.-go , send to xxmaj falstaff straight . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll to him again , in name of xxmaj brook ; 
▁ xxmaj he 'll tell me all his purpose . xxmaj sure , he 'll come . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj fear not you that . xxmaj go get us properties 
▁ xxmaj and tricking for our fairies . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj let us about it . xxmaj it is admirable pleasures , and fery 
▁ honest knaveries . xxmaj exeunt xxup page , xxup ford , and xxup evans 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj go , xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford . 
▁ xxmaj send xxmaj quickly to xxmaj sir xxmaj john to know his mind . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup mrs . xxup ford 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj doctor ; he hath my good will , 
▁ xxmaj and none but he , to marry with xxmaj nan xxmaj page . 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj slender , though well landed , is an idiot ; 
▁ xxmaj and he my husband best of all affects . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj doctor is well money'd , and his friends 
▁ xxmaj potent at court ; he , none but he , shall have her , 
▁ xxmaj though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup host and xxup simple 

▁ xxup host . xxmaj what wouldst thou have , boor ? xxmaj what , thick - skin ? 
▁ xxmaj speak , breathe , discuss ; brief , short , quick , snap . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj marry , sir , i come to speak with xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff 
▁ from xxmaj master xxmaj slender . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj there 's his chamber , his house , his castle , his 
▁ standing - bed and truckle - bed ; ' tis painted about with the 
▁ story of the xxmaj prodigal , fresh and new . xxmaj go , knock and can ; he 'll 
▁ speak like an xxmaj anthropophaginian unto thee . xxmaj knock , i say . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj there 's an old woman , a fat woman , gone up into 
▁ his chamber ; xxmaj i 'll be so bold as stay , sir , till she come down ; 
▁ i come to speak with her , indeed . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj ha ! a fat woman ? xxmaj the knight may be robb'd . xxmaj i 'll call . 
▁ xxmaj bully knight ! xxmaj bully xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! xxmaj speak from thy lungs 
▁ military . xxmaj art thou there ? xxmaj it is thine host , thine xxmaj ephesian , calls . 
▁ xxup falstaff . [ above ] xxmaj how now , mine host ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj here 's a bohemian - tartar tarries the coming down of 
▁ thy fat woman . xxmaj let her descend , bully , let her descend ; 
▁ my chambers are honourible . xxmaj fie , privacy , fie ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup falstaff 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj there was , mine host , an old fat woman even 
▁ now with , me ; but she 's gone . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj pray you , sir , was't not the wise woman of 
▁ xxmaj brainford ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj ay , marry was it , mussel - shell . xxmaj what would you 
▁ with her ? 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj my master , sir , my xxmaj master xxmaj slender , sent to her , 
▁ seeing her go thorough the streets , to know , sir , whether one 
▁ xxmaj nym , sir , that beguil'd him of a chain , had the chain or no . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i spake with the old woman about it . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj and what says she , i pray , sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff xxmaj marry , she says that the very same man that 
▁ beguil'd xxmaj master xxmaj slender of his chain cozen'd him of it . 
▁ xxup simple . i would i could have spoken with the woman 
▁ herself ; i had other things to have spoken with her too , 
▁ from him . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what are they ? xxmaj let us know . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj ay , come ; quick . 
▁ xxup simple . i may not conceal them , sir . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj conceal them , or thou diest . 
▁ xxup simple .. xxmaj why , sir , they were nothing but about xxmaj mistress 
▁ xxmaj anne xxmaj page : to know if it were my master 's fortune to 
▁ have her or no . 
▁ xxup falstaff . ' tis , ' tis his fortune . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj what sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj to have her , or no . xxmaj go ; say the woman told me 
▁ so . 
▁ xxup simple . xxmaj may i be bold to say so , sir ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj ay , sir , like who more bold ? 
▁ xxup simple . , i thank your worship ; i shall make my master glad 
▁ with these tidings . xxmaj exit xxup simple 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj thou art clerkly , thou art clerkly , xxmaj sir xxmaj john . xxmaj was 
▁ there a wise woman with thee ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj ay , that there was , mine host ; one that hath 
▁ taught me more wit than ever i learn'd before in my life ; 
▁ and i paid nothing for it neither , but was paid for my 
▁ learning . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bardolph 

▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj out , alas , sir , cozenage , mere cozenage ! 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj where be my horses ? xxmaj speak well of them , varletto . 
▁ xxup bardolph . xxmaj run away with the cozeners ; for so soon as i 
▁ came beyond xxmaj eton , they threw me off from behind one of 
▁ them , in a slough of mire ; and set spurs and away , like 
▁ three xxmaj german devils , three xxmaj doctor xxmaj faustuses . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj they are gone but to meet the xxmaj duke , villain ; do not 
▁ say they be fled . xxmaj germans are honest men . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup evans . xxmaj where is mine host ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj what is the matter , sir ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj have a care of your entertainments . xxmaj there is a friend 
▁ of mine come to town tells me there is three 
▁ cozen - germans that has cozen'd all the hosts of xxmaj readins , 
▁ of xxmaj maidenhead , of xxmaj colebrook , of horses and money . i tell you for 
▁ good will , look you ; you are wise , and full of gibes and 
▁ vlouting - stogs , and ' tis not convenient you should be 
▁ cozened . xxmaj fare you well . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup doctor xxup caius 

▁ xxup caius . xxmaj vere is mine host de xxmaj jarteer ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj here , xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , in perplexity and doubtful 
▁ dilemma . 
▁ xxup caius . i can not tell vat is dat ; but it is tell - a me dat you 
▁ make grand preparation for a xxmaj duke de xxmaj jamany . xxmaj by my 
▁ trot , dere is no duke that the court is know to come ; i 
▁ tell you for good will . xxmaj adieu . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj hue and cry , villain , go ! xxmaj assist me , knight ; i am 
▁ undone . xxmaj fly , run , hue and cry , villain ; i am undone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup host and xxup bardolph 
▁ xxup falstaff . i would all the world might be cozen'd , for i have 
▁ been cozen'd and beaten too . xxmaj if it should come to the car 
▁ of the court how i have been transformed , and how my 
▁ transformation hath been wash'd and cudgell'd , they 
▁ would melt me out of my fat , drop by drop , and liquor 
▁ fishermen 's boots with me ; i warrant they would whip me 
▁ with their fine wits till i were as crestfall'n as a dried pear . 
▁ i never prosper'd since i forswore myself at primero . xxmaj well , 
▁ if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers , 
▁ would repent . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup quickly 

▁ xxmaj now ! whence come you ? 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj from the two parties , forsooth . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj the devil take one party and his dam the other ! 
▁ xxmaj and so they shall be both bestowed . i have suffer'd more 
▁ for their sakes , more than the villainous inconstancy of 
▁ man 's disposition is able to bear . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj and have not they suffer'd ? xxmaj yes , i warrant ; 
▁ speciously one of them ; xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford , good heart , is beaten 
▁ black and blue , that you can not see a white spot about her . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what tell'st thou me of black and blue ? i was 
▁ beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow ; and 
▁ was like to be apprehended for the witch of xxmaj brainford . xxmaj but 
▁ that my admirable dexterity of wit , my counterfeiting the 
▁ action of an old woman , deliver'd me , the knave constable 
▁ had set me i ' th ' stocks , i ' th ' common stocks , for a witch . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj sir , let me speak with you in your chamber ; you 
▁ shall hear how things go , and , i warrant , to your content . 
▁ xxmaj here is a letter will say somewhat . xxmaj good hearts , what ado 
▁ here is to bring you together ! xxmaj sure , one of you does not 
▁ serve heaven well , that you are so cross'd . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj come up into my chamber . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 6 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup fenton and xxup host 

▁ xxup host . xxmaj master xxmaj fenton , talk not to me ; my mind is heavy ; i 
▁ will give over all . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj yet hear me speak . xxmaj assist me in my purpose , 
▁ xxmaj and , as i am a gentleman , xxmaj i 'll give the 
▁ a hundred pound in gold more than your loss . 
▁ xxup host . i will hear you , xxmaj master xxmaj fenton ; and i will , at the least , 
▁ keep your counsel . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj from time to time i have acquainted you 
▁ xxmaj with the dear love i bear to fair xxmaj anne xxmaj page ; 
▁ xxmaj who , mutually , hath answer'd my affection , 
▁ xxmaj so far forth as herself might be her chooser , 
▁ xxmaj even to my wish . i have a letter from her 
▁ xxmaj of such contents as you will wonder at ; 
▁ xxmaj the mirth whereof so larded with my matter 
▁ xxmaj that neither , singly , can be manifested 
▁ xxmaj without the show of both . xxmaj fat xxmaj falstaff 
▁ xxmaj hath a great scene . xxmaj the image of the jest 
▁ xxmaj i 'll show you here at large . xxmaj hark , good mine host : 
▁ xxmaj to - night at xxmaj heme 's oak , just ' twixt twelve and one , 
▁ xxmaj must my sweet xxmaj nan present the xxmaj fairy xxmaj queen- 
▁ xxmaj the purpose why is here - in which disguise , 
▁ xxmaj while other jests are something rank on foot , 
▁ xxmaj her father hath commanded her to slip 
▁ xxmaj away with xxmaj slender , and with him at xxmaj eton 
▁ xxmaj immediately to marry ; she hath consented . 
▁ xxmaj now , sir , 
▁ xxmaj her mother , even strong against that match 
▁ xxmaj and firm for xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius , hath appointed 
▁ xxmaj that he shall likewise shuffle her away 
▁ xxmaj while other sports are tasking of their minds , 
▁ xxmaj and at the dean'ry , where a priest attends , 
▁ xxmaj straight marry her . xxmaj to this her mother 's plot 
▁ xxmaj she seemingly obedient likewise hath 
▁ xxmaj made promise to the doctor . xxmaj now thus it rests : 
▁ xxmaj her father means she shall be all in white ; 
▁ xxmaj and in that habit , when xxmaj slender sees his time 
▁ xxmaj to take her by the hand and bid her go , 
▁ xxmaj she shall go with him ; her mother hath intended 
▁ xxmaj the better to denote her to the doctor- 
▁ xxmaj for they must all be mask'd and vizarded- 
▁ xxmaj that quaint in green she shall be loose enrob'd , 
▁ xxmaj with ribands pendent , flaring 'bout her head ; 
▁ xxmaj and when the doctor spies his vantage ripe , 
▁ xxmaj to pinch her by the hand , and , on that token , 
▁ xxmaj the maid hath given consent to go with him . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj which means she to deceive , father or mother ? 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj both , my good host , to go along with me . 
▁ xxmaj and here it rests - that you 'll procure the vicar 
▁ xxmaj to stay for me at church , ' twixt twelve and one , 
▁ xxmaj and in the lawful name of marrying , 
▁ xxmaj to give our hearts united ceremony . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj well , husband your device ; xxmaj i 'll to the vicar . 
▁ xxmaj bring you the maid , you shall not lack a priest . 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj so shall i evermore be bound to thee ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , xxmaj i 'll make a present recompense . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj the xxmaj garter xxmaj inn 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff and xxup mistress xxup quickly 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj prithee , no more prattling ; go . xxmaj i 'll , hold . xxmaj this is 
▁ the third time ; i hope good luck lies in odd numbers . 
▁ xxmaj away , go ; they say there is divinity in odd numbers , either 
▁ in nativity , chance , or death . xxmaj away . 
▁ xxup quickly . xxmaj i 'll provide you a chain , and xxmaj i 'll do what i can to 
▁ get you a pair of horns . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj away , i say ; time wears ; hold up your head , and 
▁ mince . xxmaj exit xxup mrs . xxup quickly 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ford disguised 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj master xxmaj brook . xxmaj master xxmaj brook , the matter will 
▁ be known tonight or never . xxmaj be you in the xxmaj park about 
▁ midnight , at xxmaj herne 's oak , and you shall see wonders . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj went you not to her yesterday , sir , as you told me 
▁ you had appointed ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . i went to her , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , as you see , like a 
▁ poor old man ; but i came from her , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , like a 
▁ poor old woman . xxmaj that same knave xxmaj ford , her husband , hath 
▁ the finest mad devil of jealousy in him , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , that 
▁ ever govern'd frenzy . i will tell you - he beat me grievously 
▁ in the shape of a woman ; for in the shape of man , xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj brook , i fear not xxmaj goliath with a weaver 's beam ; because 
▁ i know also life is a shuttle . i am in haste ; go along with 
▁ me ; xxmaj i 'll . tell you all , xxmaj master xxmaj brook . xxmaj since i pluck'd geese , 
▁ play'd truant , and whipp'd top , i knew not what ' twas to 
▁ be beaten till lately . xxmaj follow me . xxmaj i 'll tell you strange things 
▁ of this knave - ford , on whom to - night i will be revenged , 
▁ and i will deliver his wife into your hand . xxmaj follow . xxmaj strange 
▁ things in hand , xxmaj master xxmaj brook ! xxmaj follow . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj windsor xxmaj park 

 xxmaj enter xxup page , xxup shallow , and xxup slender 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj come , come ; we 'll couch i ' th ' xxmaj castle ditch till we 
▁ see the light of our fairies . xxmaj remember , son xxmaj slender , my daughter . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj ay , forsooth ; i have spoke with her , and we have 
▁ a nay - word how to know one another . i come to her in 
▁ white and cry ' mum ' ; she cries ' budget , ' and by that we 
▁ know one another . 
▁ xxup shallow . xxmaj that 's good too ; but what needs either your mum 
▁ or her budget ? xxmaj the white will decipher her well enough . 
▁ xxmaj it hath struck ten o'clock . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj the night is dark ; light and spirits will become it well . 
▁ xxmaj heaven prosper our sport ! xxmaj no man means evil but the 
▁ devil , and we shall know him by his horns . xxmaj let 's away ; 
▁ follow me . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 a street leading to the xxmaj park 

 xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup page , xxup mistress xxup ford , and xxup doctor xxup caius 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , my daughter is in green ; when 
▁ you see your time , take her by the hand , away with her to 
▁ the deanery , and dispatch it quickly . xxmaj go before into the 
▁ xxmaj park ; we two must go together . 
▁ xxup caius . i know vat i have to do ; adieu . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj fare you well , sir . [ exit xxup caius ] xxmaj my husband 
▁ will not rejoice so much at the abuse of xxmaj falstaff as he will 
▁ chafe at the doctor 's marrying my daughter ; but ' tis no 
▁ matter ; better a little chiding than a great deal of 
▁ heartbreak . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj where is xxmaj nan now , and her troop of fairies , and 
▁ the xxmaj welsh devil , xxmaj hugh ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj they are all couch'd in a pit hard by xxmaj heme 's 
▁ oak , with obscur'd lights ; which , at the very instant of 
▁ xxmaj falstaff 's and our meeting , they will at once display to the 
▁ night . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj that can not choose but amaze him . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj if he be not amaz'd , he will be mock'd ; if he be 
▁ amaz'd , he will every way be mock'd . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj we 'll betray him finely . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj against such lewdsters and their lechery , 
▁ xxmaj those that betray them do no treachery . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj the hour draws on . xxmaj to the oak , to the oak ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj windsor xxmaj park 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans like a satyr , with xxup others as fairies 

▁ xxup evans . xxmaj trib , trib , fairies ; come ; and remember your parts . 
▁ xxmaj be pold , i pray you ; follow me into the pit ; and when i 
▁ give the watch - ords , do as i pid you . xxmaj come , come ; trib , 
▁ trib . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj another part of the xxmaj park 

 xxmaj enter xxup falstaff disguised as xxup herne 

▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj the xxmaj windsor bell hath struck twelve ; the minute 
▁ draws on . xxmaj now the hot - blooded gods assist me ! 
▁ xxmaj remember , xxmaj jove , thou wast a bull for thy xxmaj europa ; love set on thy 
▁ horns . o powerful love ! that in some respects makes a 
▁ beast a man ; in some other a man a beast . xxmaj you were also , 
▁ xxmaj jupiter , a swan , for the love of xxmaj leda . o omnipotent love ! 
▁ how near the god drew to the complexion of a goose ! a 
▁ fault done first in the form of a beast - o xxmaj jove , a beastly 
▁ fault!-and then another fault in the semblance of a fowl- 
▁ think on't , xxmaj jove , a foul fault ! xxmaj when gods have hot backs 
▁ what shall poor men do ? xxmaj for me , i am here a xxmaj windsor 
▁ stag ; and the fattest , i think , i ' th ' forest . xxmaj send me a cool 
▁ rut - time , xxmaj jove , or who can blame me to piss my tallow ? 
▁ xxmaj who comes here ? my doe ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mistress xxup ford and xxup mistress xxup page 

▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj sir xxmaj john ! xxmaj art thou there , my deer , my male deer . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj my doe with the black scut ! xxmaj let the sky rain 
▁ potatoes ; let it thunder to the tune of xxmaj greensleeves , hail 
▁ kissing - comfits , and snow eringoes ; let there come a tempest 
▁ of provocation , i will shelter me here . [ embracing her ] 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj mistress xxmaj page is come with me , sweetheart . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj divide me like a brib'd buck , each a haunch ; i 
▁ will keep my sides to myself , my shoulders for the fellow 
▁ of this walk , and my horns i bequeath your husbands . xxmaj am 
▁ i a woodman , ha ? xxmaj speak i like xxmaj heme the xxmaj hunter ? xxmaj why , 
▁ now is xxmaj cupid a child of conscience ; he makes restitution . 
▁ xxmaj as i am a true spirit , welcome ! [ a noise of horns ] 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj alas , what noise ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj heaven forgive our sins ! 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj what should this be ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . } xxmaj away , away . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . } xxmaj away , away . [ they run off ] 
▁ xxup falstaff . i think the devil will not have me damn'd , lest the 
▁ oil that 's in me should set hell on fire ; he would never else 
▁ cross me thus . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans like a satyr , xxup anne xxup page as 
▁ a fairy , and xxup others as the xxmaj fairy xxmaj queen , fairies , and 
▁ xxmaj hobgoblin ; all with tapers 

▁ xxup fairy xxup queen . xxmaj fairies , black , grey , green , and white , 
▁ xxmaj you moonshine revellers , and shades of night , 
▁ xxmaj you orphan heirs of fixed destiny , 
▁ xxmaj attend your office and your quality . 
▁ xxmaj crier xxmaj hobgoblin , make the fairy oyes . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj elves , list your names ; silence , you airy toys . 
▁ xxmaj cricket , to xxmaj windsor chimneys shalt thou leap ; 
▁ xxmaj where fires thou find'st unrak'd , and hearths unswept , 
▁ xxmaj there pinch the maids as blue as bilberry ; 
▁ xxmaj our radiant xxmaj queen hates sluts and sluttery . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj they are fairies ; he that speaks to them shall die . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll wink and couch ; no man their works must eye . 
▁ [ lies down upon his face ] 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj where 's xxmaj pede ? xxmaj go you , and where you find a maid 
▁ xxmaj that , ere she sleep , has thrice her prayers said , 
▁ xxmaj raise up the organs of her fantasy 
▁ xxmaj sleep she as sound as careless infancy ; 
▁ xxmaj but those as sleep and think not on their sins , 
▁ xxmaj pinch them , arms , legs , backs , shoulders , sides , and shins . 
▁ xxup fairy xxup queen . xxmaj about , about ; 
▁ xxmaj search xxmaj windsor castle , elves , within and out ; 
▁ xxmaj strew good luck , ouphes , on every sacred room , 
▁ xxmaj that it may stand till the perpetual doom 
▁ xxmaj in state as wholesome as in state ' tis fit , 
▁ xxmaj worthy the owner and the owner it . 
▁ xxmaj the several chairs of order look you scour 
▁ xxmaj with juice of balm and every precious flower ; 
▁ xxmaj each fair instalment , coat , and sev'ral crest , 
▁ xxmaj with loyal blazon , evermore be blest ! 
▁ xxmaj and nightly , meadow - fairies , look you sing , 
▁ xxmaj like to the xxmaj garter 's compass , in a ring ; 
▁ xxmaj th ' expressure that it bears , green let it be , 
▁ xxmaj more fertile - fresh than all the field to see ; 
▁ xxmaj and ' honi soit qui mal y pense ' write 
▁ xxmaj in em'rald tufts , flow'rs purple , blue and white ; 
▁ xxmaj like sapphire , pearl , and rich embroidery , 
▁ xxmaj buckled below fair knighthood 's bending knee . 
▁ xxmaj fairies use flow'rs for their charactery . 
▁ xxmaj away , disperse ; but till ' tis one o'clock , 
▁ xxmaj our dance of custom round about the oak 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj herne the xxmaj hunter let us not forget . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj pray you , lock hand in hand ; yourselves in order set ; 
▁ xxmaj and twenty glow - worms shall our lanterns be , 
▁ xxmaj to guide our measure round about the tree . 
▁ xxmaj but , stay . i smell a man of middle earth . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj heavens defend me from that xxmaj welsh fairy , lest he 
▁ transform me to a piece of cheese ! 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj vile worm , thou wast o'erlook'd even in thy birth . 
▁ xxup fairy xxup queen . xxmaj with trial - fire touch me his finger - end ; 
▁ xxmaj if he be chaste , the flame will back descend , 
▁ xxmaj and turn him to no pain ; but if he start , 
▁ xxmaj it is the flesh of a corrupted heart . 
▁ xxup puck . a trial , come . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj come , will this wood take fire ? 
▁ [ they put the tapers to his fingers , and he starts ] 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj oh , oh , oh ! 
▁ xxup fairy xxup queen . xxmaj corrupt , corrupt , and tainted in desire ! 
▁ xxmaj about him , fairies ; sing a scornful rhyme ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as you trip , still pinch him to your time . 
▁ xxup the xxup song . 
▁ xxmaj fie on sinful fantasy ! 
▁ xxmaj fie on lust and luxury ! 
▁ xxmaj lust is but a bloody fire , 
▁ xxmaj kindled with unchaste desire , 
▁ xxmaj fed in heart , whose flames aspire , 
▁ xxmaj as thoughts do blow them , higher and higher . 
▁ xxmaj pinch him , fairies , mutually ; 
▁ xxmaj pinch him for his villainy ; 
▁ xxmaj pinch him and burn him and turn him about , 
▁ xxmaj till candles and star - light and moonshine be out . 

▁ xxmaj during this song they pinch xxup falstaff . xxup doctor 
▁ xxup caius comes one way , and steals away a fairy in 
▁ green ; xxup slender another way , and takes off a fairy in 
▁ white ; and xxup fenton steals away xxup anne xxup page . a noise 
▁ of hunting is heard within . xxmaj all the fairies run away . 
▁ xxup falstaff pulls off his buck 's head , and rises 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page , xxup ford , xxup mistress xxup page , xxup mistress xxup ford , and 
▁ xxup sir xxup hugh xxup evans 

▁ xxup page . xxmaj nay , do not fly ; i think we have watch'd you now . 
▁ xxmaj will none but xxmaj heme the xxmaj hunter serve your turn ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . i pray you , come , hold up the jest no higher . 
▁ xxmaj now , good xxmaj sir xxmaj john , how like you xxmaj windsor wives ? 
▁ xxmaj see you these , husband ? xxmaj do not these fair yokes 
▁ xxmaj become the forest better than the town ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj now , sir , who 's a cuckold now ? xxmaj master xxmaj brook , 
▁ xxmaj falstaff 's a knave , a cuckoldly knave ; here are his horns , 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj brook ; and , xxmaj master xxmaj brook , he hath enjoyed nothing of 
▁ xxmaj ford 's but his buck - basket , his cudgel , and twenty pounds 
▁ of money , which must be paid to xxmaj master xxmaj brook ; his horses 
▁ are arrested for it , xxmaj master xxmaj brook . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup ford . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , we have had ill luck ; we could never 
▁ meet . i will never take you for my love again ; but i will 
▁ always count you my deer . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i do begin to perceive that i am made an ass . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj ay , and an ox too ; both the proofs are extant . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj and these are not fairies ? i was three or four 
▁ times in the thought they were not fairies ; and yet the 
▁ guiltiness of my mind , the sudden surprise of my powers , 
▁ drove the grossness of the foppery into a receiv'd belief , 
▁ in despite of the teeth of all rhyme and reason , that they 
▁ were fairies . xxmaj see now how wit may be made a jack - a - lent 
▁ when ' tis upon ill employment . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj falstaff , serve xxmaj got , and leave your desires , 
▁ and fairies will not pinse you . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj well said , fairy xxmaj hugh . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj and leave you your jealousies too , i pray you . 
▁ xxup ford . i will never mistrust my wife again , till thou art able 
▁ to woo her in good xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj have i laid my brain in the sun , and dried it , that 
▁ it wants matter to prevent so gross , o'er - reaching as this ? 
▁ xxmaj am i ridden with a xxmaj welsh goat too ? xxmaj shall i have a cox - comb 
▁ of frieze ? ' tis time i were chok'd with a piece of 
▁ toasted cheese . 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj seese is not good to give putter ; your belly is all 
▁ putter . 
▁ xxup falstaff . ' seese ' and ' putter ' ! xxmaj have i liv'd to stand at the 
▁ taunt of one that makes fritters of xxmaj english ? xxmaj this is enough 
▁ to be the decay of lust and late - walking through the realm . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj why , xxmaj sir xxmaj john , do you think , though we would 
▁ have thrust virtue out of our hearts by the head and 
▁ shoulders , and have given ourselves without scruple to hell , 
▁ that ever the devil could have made you our delight ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj what , a hodge - pudding ? a bag of flax ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . a puff'd man ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj old , cold , wither'd , and of intolerable entrails ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj and one that is as slanderous as xxmaj satan ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj and as poor as xxmaj job ? 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj and as wicked as his wife ? 
▁ xxup evans . xxmaj and given to fornications , and to taverns , and sack , 
▁ and wine , and metheglins , and to drinkings , and swearings , 
▁ and starings , pribbles and prabbles ? 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj well , i am your theme ; you have the start of me ; 
▁ i am dejected ; i am not able to answer the xxmaj welsh flannel ; 
▁ ignorance itself is a plummet o'er me ; use me as you will . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj marry , sir , we 'll bring you to xxmaj windsor , to one xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj brook , that you have cozen'd of money , to whom you 
▁ should have been a pander . xxmaj over and above that you have 
▁ suffer'd , i think to repay that money will be a biting 
▁ affliction . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj yet be cheerful , knight ; thou shalt eat a posset 
▁ tonight at my house , where i will desire thee to laugh at my 
▁ wife , that now laughs at thee . xxmaj tell her xxmaj master xxmaj slender hath 
▁ married her daughter . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . [ aside ] xxmaj doctors doubt that ; if xxmaj anne xxmaj page be 
▁ my daughter , she is , by this , xxmaj doctor xxmaj caius ' wife . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup slender 

▁ xxup slender . xxmaj whoa , ho , ho , father xxmaj page ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj son , how now ! how now , son ! xxmaj have you dispatch'd ' ? 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj dispatch'd ! xxmaj i 'll make the best in xxmaj gloucestershire 
▁ know on't ; would i were hang'd , la , else ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj of what , son ? 
▁ xxup slender . i came yonder at xxmaj eton to marry xxmaj mistress xxmaj anne 
▁ xxmaj page , and she 's a great lubberly boy . xxmaj if it had not been i ' 
▁ th ' church , i would have swing'd him , or he should have 
▁ swing'd me . xxmaj if i did not think it had been xxmaj anne xxmaj page , 
▁ would i might never stir!-and ' tis a postmaster 's boy . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj upon my life , then , you took the wrong . 
▁ xxup slender . xxmaj what need you tell me that ? i think so , when i 
▁ took a boy for a girl . xxmaj if i had been married to him , for all 
▁ he was in woman 's apparel , i would not have had him . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj why , this is your own folly . xxmaj did not i tell you how 
▁ you should know my daughter by her garments ? 
▁ xxup slender . i went to her in white and cried ' mum ' and she 
▁ cried ' budget ' as xxmaj anne and i had appointed ; and yet it was 
▁ not xxmaj anne , but a postmaster 's boy . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj good xxmaj george , be not angry . i knew of your 
▁ purpose ; turn'd my daughter into green ; and , indeed , she 
▁ is now with the xxmaj doctor at the dean'ry , and there married . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup caius 

▁ xxup caius . xxmaj vere is xxmaj mistress xxmaj page ? xxmaj by gar , i am cozened ; i ha ' 
▁ married un garcon , a boy ; un paysan , by gar , a boy ; it is 
▁ not xxmaj anne xxmaj page ; by gar , i am cozened . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj why , did you take her in green ? 
▁ xxup caius . xxmaj ay , be gar , and ' tis a boy ; be gar , xxmaj i 'll raise all 
▁ xxmaj windsor . xxmaj exit xxup caius 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj this is strange . xxmaj who hath got the right xxmaj anne ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj my heart misgives me ; here comes xxmaj master xxmaj fenton . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup fenton and xxup anne xxup page 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj master xxmaj fenton ! 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj pardon , good father . xxmaj good my mother , pardon . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj now , xxmaj mistress , how chance you went not with xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj slender ? 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj why went you not with xxmaj master xxmaj doctor , maid ? 
▁ xxup fenton . xxmaj you do amaze her . xxmaj hear the truth of it . 
▁ xxmaj you would have married her most shamefully , 
▁ xxmaj where there was no proportion held in love . 
▁ xxmaj the truth is , she and xxup i , long since contracted , 
▁ xxmaj are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us . 
▁ xxmaj th ' offence is holy that she hath committed ; 
▁ xxmaj and this deceit loses the name of craft , 
▁ xxmaj of disobedience , or unduteous title , 
▁ xxmaj since therein she doth evitate and shun 
▁ a thousand irreligious cursed hours , 
▁ xxmaj which forced marriage would have brought upon her . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj stand not amaz'd ; here is no remedy . 
▁ xxmaj in love , the heavens themselves do guide the state ; 
▁ xxmaj money buys lands , and wives are sold by fate . 
▁ xxup falstaff . i am glad , though you have ta'en a special stand 
▁ to strike at me , that your arrow hath glanc'd . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj well , what remedy ? xxmaj fenton , heaven give thee joy ! 
▁ xxmaj what can not be eschew'd must be embrac'd . 
▁ xxup falstaff . xxmaj when night - dogs run , all sorts of deer are chas'd . 
▁ xxup mrs . xxup page . xxmaj well , i will muse no further . xxmaj master xxmaj fenton , 
▁ xxmaj heaven give you many , many merry days ! 
▁ xxmaj good husband , let us every one go home , 
▁ xxmaj and laugh this sport o'er by a country fire ; 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john and all . 
▁ xxup ford . xxmaj let it be so . xxmaj sir xxmaj john , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj master xxmaj brook you yet shall hold your word ; 
▁ xxmaj for he , to - night , shall lie with xxmaj mistress xxmaj ford . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1596 

 a xxup midsummer xxup night 's xxup dream 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup theseus , xxmaj duke of xxmaj athens 
▁ xxup egeus , father to xxmaj hermia 
▁ xxup lysander , in love with xxmaj hermia 
▁ xxup demetrius , in love with xxmaj hermia 
▁ xxup philostrate , xxmaj master of the xxmaj revels to xxmaj theseus 
▁ xxup quince , a carpenter 
▁ xxup snug , a joiner 
▁ xxup bottom , a weaver 
▁ xxup flute , a bellows - mender 
▁ xxup snout , a tinker 
▁ xxup starveling , a tailor 

▁ xxup hippolyta , xxmaj queen of the xxmaj amazons , bethrothed to xxmaj theseus 
▁ xxup hermia , daughter to xxmaj egeus , in love with xxmaj lysander 
▁ xxup helena , in love with xxmaj demetrius 

▁ xxup oberon , xxmaj king of the xxmaj fairies 
▁ xxup titania , xxmaj queen of the xxmaj fairies 
▁ xxup puck , or xxup robin xxup goodfellow 
▁ xxup peaseblossom , fairy 
▁ xxup cobweb , fairy 
▁ xxup moth , fairy 
▁ xxup mustardseed , fairy 

▁ xxup prologue , xxup pyramus , xxup thisby , xxup wall , xxup moonshine , xxup lion are presented by : 
▁ xxup quince , xxup bottom , xxup flute , xxup snout , xxup starveling , xxup and xxup snug 

▁ xxmaj other xxmaj fairies attending their xxmaj king and xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj attendants on xxmaj theseus and xxmaj hippolyta 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj athens and a wood near it 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj athens . xxmaj the palace of xxup theseus 

 xxmaj enter xxup theseus , xxup hippolyta , xxup philostrate , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj now , fair xxmaj hippolyta , our nuptial hour 
▁ xxmaj draws on apace ; four happy days bring in 
▁ xxmaj another moon ; but , xxup o , methinks , how slow 
▁ xxmaj this old moon wanes ! xxmaj she lingers my desires , 
▁ xxmaj like to a step - dame or a dowager , 
▁ xxmaj long withering out a young man 's revenue . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj four days will quickly steep themselves in night ; 
▁ xxmaj four nights will quickly dream away the time ; 
▁ xxmaj and then the moon , like to a silver bow 
▁ xxmaj new - bent in heaven , shall behold the night 
▁ xxmaj of our solemnities . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj go , xxmaj philostrate , 
▁ xxmaj stir up the xxmaj athenian youth to merriments ; 
▁ xxmaj awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth ; 
▁ xxmaj turn melancholy forth to funerals ; 
▁ xxmaj the pale companion is not for our pomp . xxmaj exit xxup philostrate 
▁ xxmaj hippolyta , i woo'd thee with my sword , 
▁ xxmaj and won thy love doing thee injuries ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will we d thee in another key , 
▁ xxmaj with pomp , with triumph , and with revelling . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup egeus , and his daughter xxup hermia , xxup lysander , 
▁ and xxup demetrius 

▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj happy be xxmaj theseus , our renowned xxmaj duke ! 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj thanks , good xxmaj egeus ; what 's the news with thee ? 
▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj full of vexation come xxup i , with complaint 
▁ xxmaj against my child , my daughter xxmaj hermia . 
▁ xxmaj stand forth , xxmaj demetrius . xxmaj my noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj this man hath my consent to marry her . 
▁ xxmaj stand forth , xxmaj lysander . xxmaj and , my gracious xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj this man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child . 
▁ xxmaj thou , thou , xxmaj lysander , thou hast given her rhymes , 
▁ xxmaj and interchang'd love - tokens with my child ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast by moonlight at her window sung , 
▁ xxmaj with feigning voice , verses of feigning love , 
▁ xxmaj and stol'n the impression of her fantasy 
▁ xxmaj with bracelets of thy hair , rings , gawds , conceits , 
▁ xxmaj knacks , trifles , nosegays , sweetmeats- messengers 
▁ xxmaj of strong prevailment in unhardened youth ; 
▁ xxmaj with cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter 's heart ; 
▁ xxmaj turn'd her obedience , which is due to me , 
▁ xxmaj to stubborn harshness . xxmaj and , my gracious xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj be it so she will not here before your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj consent to marry with xxmaj demetrius , 
▁ i beg the ancient privilege of xxmaj athens : 
▁ xxmaj as she is mine i may dispose of her ; 
▁ xxmaj which shall be either to this gentleman 
▁ xxmaj or to her death , according to our law 
▁ xxmaj immediately provided in that case . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj what say you , xxmaj hermia ? xxmaj be advis'd , fair maid . 
▁ xxmaj to you your father should be as a god ; 
▁ xxmaj one that compos'd your beauties ; yea , and one 
▁ xxmaj to whom you are but as a form in wax , 
▁ xxmaj by him imprinted , and within his power 
▁ xxmaj to leave the figure , or disfigure it . 
▁ xxmaj demetrius is a worthy gentleman . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj so is xxmaj lysander . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj in himself he is ; 
▁ xxmaj but , in this kind , wanting your father 's voice , 
▁ xxmaj the other must be held the worthier . 
▁ xxup hermia . i would my father look'd but with my eyes . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj rather your eyes must with his judgment look . 
▁ xxup hermia . i do entreat your xxmaj grace to pardon me . 
▁ i know not by what power i am made bold , 
▁ xxmaj nor how it may concern my modesty 
▁ xxmaj in such a presence here to plead my thoughts ; 
▁ xxmaj but i beseech your xxmaj grace that i may know 
▁ xxmaj the worst that may befall me in this case , 
▁ xxmaj if i refuse to we d xxmaj demetrius . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj either to die the death , or to abjure 
▁ xxmaj for ever the society of men . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , fair xxmaj hermia , question your desires , 
▁ xxmaj know of your youth , examine well your blood , 
▁ xxmaj whether , if you yield not to your father 's choice , 
▁ xxmaj you can endure the livery of a nun , 
▁ xxmaj for aye to be shady cloister mew'd , 
▁ xxmaj to live a barren sister all your life , 
▁ xxmaj chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon . 
▁ xxmaj thrice - blessed they that master so their blood 
▁ xxmaj to undergo such maiden pilgrimage ; 
▁ xxmaj but earthlier happy is the rose distill'd 
▁ xxmaj than that which withering on the virgin thorn 
▁ xxmaj grows , lives , and dies , in single blessedness . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj so will i grow , so live , so die , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj ere i will yield my virgin patent up 
▁ xxmaj unto his lordship , whose unwished yoke 
▁ xxmaj my soul consents not to give sovereignty . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj take time to pause ; and by the next new moon- 
▁ xxmaj the sealing - day betwixt my love and me 
▁ xxmaj for everlasting bond of fellowship- 
▁ xxmaj upon that day either prepare to die 
▁ xxmaj for disobedience to your father 's will , 
▁ xxmaj or else to we d xxmaj demetrius , as he would , 
▁ xxmaj or on xxmaj diana 's altar to protest 
▁ xxmaj for aye austerity and single life . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj relent , sweet xxmaj hermia ; and , xxmaj lysander , yield 
▁ xxmaj thy crazed title to my certain right . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj you have her father 's love , xxmaj demetrius ; 
▁ xxmaj let me have xxmaj hermia 's ; do you marry him . 
▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj scornful xxmaj lysander , true , he hath my love ;