xxbos xxmaj and what is mine my love shall render him ; 
▁ xxmaj and she is mine ; and all my right of her 
▁ i do estate unto xxmaj demetrius . 
▁ xxup lysander . i am , my lord , as well deriv'd as he , 
▁ xxmaj as well possess'd ; my love is more than his ; 
▁ xxmaj my fortunes every way as fairly rank'd , 
▁ xxmaj if not with vantage , as xxmaj demetrius ' ; 
▁ xxmaj and , which is more than all these boasts can be , 
▁ i am belov'd of beauteous xxmaj hermia . 
▁ xxmaj why should not i then prosecute my right ? 
▁ xxmaj demetrius , xxmaj i 'll avouch it to his head , 
▁ xxmaj made love to xxmaj nedar 's daughter , xxmaj helena , 
▁ xxmaj and won her soul ; and she , sweet lady , dotes , 
▁ xxmaj devoutly dotes , dotes in idolatry , 
▁ xxmaj upon this spotted and inconstant man . 
▁ xxup theseus . i must confess that i have heard so much , 
▁ xxmaj and with xxmaj demetrius thought to have spoke thereof ; 
▁ xxmaj but , being over - full of self - affairs , 
▁ xxmaj my mind did lose it . xxmaj but , xxmaj demetrius , come ; 
▁ xxmaj and come , xxmaj egeus ; you shall go with me ; 
▁ i have some private schooling for you both . 
▁ xxmaj for you , fair xxmaj hermia , look you arm yourself 
▁ xxmaj to fit your fancies to your father 's will , 
▁ xxmaj or else the law of xxmaj athens yields you up- 
▁ xxmaj which by no means we may extenuate- 
▁ xxmaj to death , or to a vow of single life . 
▁ xxmaj come , my xxmaj hippolyta ; what cheer , my love ? 
▁ xxmaj demetrius , and xxmaj egeus , go along ; 
▁ i must employ you in some business 
▁ xxmaj against our nuptial , and confer with you 
▁ xxmaj of something nearly that concerns yourselves . 
▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj with duty and desire we follow you . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup lysander and xxup hermia 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj how now , my love ! xxmaj why is your cheek so pale ? 
▁ xxmaj how chance the roses there do fade so fast ? 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj belike for want of rain , which i could well 
▁ xxmaj beteem them from the tempest of my eyes . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj ay me ! for aught that i could ever read , 
▁ xxmaj could ever hear by tale or history , 
▁ xxmaj the course of true love never did run smooth ; 
▁ xxmaj but either it was different in blood- 
▁ xxup hermia . o cross ! too high to be enthrall'd to low . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj or else misgraffed in respect of years- 
▁ xxup hermia . o spite ! too old to be engag'd to young . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj or else it stood upon the choice of friends- 
▁ xxup hermia . o hell ! to choose love by another 's eyes . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj or , if there were a sympathy in choice , 
▁ xxmaj war , death , or sickness , did lay siege to it , 
▁ xxmaj making it momentary as a sound , 
▁ xxmaj swift as a shadow , short as any dream , 
▁ xxmaj brief as the lightning in the collied night 
▁ xxmaj that , in a spleen , unfolds both heaven and earth , 
▁ xxmaj and ere a man hath power to say ' behold ! ' 
▁ xxmaj the jaws of darkness do devour it up ; 
▁ xxmaj so quick bright things come to confusion . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj if then true lovers have ever cross'd , 
▁ xxmaj it stands as an edict in destiny . 
▁ xxmaj then let us teach our trial patience , 
▁ xxmaj because it is a customary cross , 
▁ xxmaj as due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs , 
▁ xxmaj wishes and tears , poor xxmaj fancy 's followers . 
▁ xxup lysander . a good persuasion ; therefore , hear me , xxmaj hermia . 
▁ i have a widow aunt , a dowager 
▁ xxmaj of great revenue , and she hath no child- 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj athens is her house remote seven leagues- 
▁ xxmaj and she respects me as her only son . 
▁ xxmaj there , gentle xxmaj hermia , may i marry thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and to that place the sharp xxmaj athenian law 
▁ xxmaj can not pursue us . xxmaj if thou lovest me then , 
▁ xxmaj steal forth thy father 's house to - morrow night ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the wood , a league without the town , 
▁ xxmaj where i did meet thee once with xxmaj helena 
▁ xxmaj to do observance to a morn of xxmaj may , 
▁ xxmaj there will i stay for thee . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj my good xxmaj lysander ! 
▁ i swear to thee by xxmaj cupid 's strongest bow , 
▁ xxmaj by his best arrow , with the golden head , 
▁ xxmaj by the simplicity of xxmaj venus ' doves , 
▁ xxmaj by that which knitteth souls and prospers loves , 
▁ xxmaj and by that fire which burn'd the xxmaj carthage xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj when the false xxmaj troyan under sail was seen , 
▁ xxmaj by all the vows that ever men have broke , 
▁ xxmaj in number more than ever women spoke , 
▁ xxmaj in that same place thou hast appointed me , 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow truly will i meet with thee . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj keep promise , love . xxmaj look , here comes xxmaj helena . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup helena 

▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj god speed fair xxmaj helena ! xxmaj whither away ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj call you me fair ? xxmaj that fair again unsay . 
▁ xxmaj demetrius loves your fair . o happy fair ! 
▁ xxmaj your eyes are lode - stars and your tongue 's sweet air 
▁ xxmaj more tuneable than lark to shepherd 's ear , 
▁ xxmaj when wheat is green , when hawthorn buds appear . 
▁ xxmaj sickness is catching ; xxup o , were favour so , 
▁ xxmaj yours would i catch , fair xxmaj hermia , ere i go ! 
▁ xxmaj my ear should catch your voice , my eye your eye , 
▁ xxmaj my tongue should catch your tongue 's sweet melody . 
▁ xxmaj were the world mine , xxmaj demetrius being bated , 
▁ xxmaj the rest xxmaj i 'd give to be to you translated . 
▁ xxup o , teach me how you look , and with what art 
▁ xxmaj you sway the motion of xxmaj demetrius ' heart ! 
▁ xxup hermia . i frown upon him , yet he loves me still . 
▁ xxup helena . o that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill ! 
▁ xxup hermia . i give him curses , yet he gives me love . 
▁ xxup helena . o that my prayers could such affection move ! 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj the more i hate , the more he follows me . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj the more i love , the more he hateth me . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj his folly , xxmaj helena , is no fault of mine . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj none , but your beauty ; would that fault were mine ! 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj take comfort : he no more shall see my face ; 
▁ xxmaj lysander and myself will fly this place . 
▁ xxmaj before the time i did xxmaj lysander see , 
▁ xxmaj seem'd xxmaj athens as a paradise to me . 
▁ xxup o , then , what graces in my love do dwell , 
▁ xxmaj that he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell ! 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj helen , to you our minds we will unfold : 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow night , when xxmaj phoebe doth behold 
▁ xxmaj her silver visage in the wat'ry glass , 
▁ xxmaj decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass , 
▁ a time that lovers ' flights doth still conceal , 
▁ xxmaj through xxmaj athens ' gates have we devis'd to steal . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj and in the wood where often you and i 
▁ xxmaj upon faint primrose beds were wo nt to lie , 
▁ xxmaj emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet , 
▁ xxmaj there my xxmaj lysander and myself shall meet ; 
▁ xxmaj and thence from xxmaj athens turn away our eyes , 
▁ xxmaj to seek new friends and stranger companies . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , sweet playfellow ; pray thou for us , 
▁ xxmaj and good luck grant thee thy xxmaj demetrius ! 
▁ xxmaj keep word , xxmaj lysander ; we must starve our sight 
▁ xxmaj from lovers ' food till morrow deep midnight . 
▁ xxup lysander . i will , my xxmaj hermia . [ exit xxup hermia ] xxmaj helena , adieu ; 
▁ xxmaj as you on him , xxmaj demetrius dote on you . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj how happy some o'er other some can be ! 
▁ xxmaj through xxmaj athens i am thought as fair as she . 
▁ xxmaj but what of that ? xxmaj demetrius thinks not so ; 
▁ xxmaj he will not know what all but he do know . 
▁ xxmaj and as he errs , doting on xxmaj hermia 's eyes , 
▁ xxmaj so xxup i , admiring of his qualities . 
▁ xxmaj things base and vile , holding no quantity , 
▁ xxmaj love can transpose to form and dignity . 
▁ xxmaj love looks not with the eyes , but with the mind ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore is wing'd xxmaj cupid painted blind . 
▁ xxmaj nor hath xxmaj love 's mind of any judgment taste ; 
▁ xxmaj wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore is xxmaj love said to be a child , 
▁ xxmaj because in choice he is so oft beguil'd . 
▁ xxmaj as waggish boys in game themselves forswear , 
▁ xxmaj so the boy xxmaj love is perjur'd everywhere ; 
▁ xxmaj for ere xxmaj demetrius look'd on xxmaj hermia 's eyne , 
▁ xxmaj he hail'd down oaths that he was only mine ; 
▁ xxmaj and when this hail some heat from xxmaj hermia felt , 
▁ xxmaj so he dissolv'd , and show'rs of oaths did melt . 
▁ i will go tell him of fair xxmaj hermia 's flight ; 
▁ xxmaj then to the wood will he to - morrow night 
▁ xxmaj pursue her ; and for this intelligence 
▁ xxmaj if i have thanks , it is a dear expense . 
▁ xxmaj but herein mean i to enrich my pain , 
▁ xxmaj to have his sight thither and back again . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj athens . xxup quince 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup quince , xxup snug , xxup bottom xxup flute , xxup snout , and xxup starveling 

▁ xxup quince . xxmaj is all our company here ? 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj you were best to call them generally , man by man , according 
▁ to the scrip . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj here is the scroll of every man 's name which is thought 
▁ fit , through all xxmaj athens , to play in our interlude before the xxmaj duke 
▁ and the xxmaj duchess on his wedding - day at night . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj first , good xxmaj peter xxmaj quince , say what the play treats on ; then 
▁ read the names of the actors ; and so grow to a point . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj marry , our play is ' the most xxmaj lamentable xxmaj comedy and most 
▁ xxmaj cruel xxmaj death of xxmaj pyramus and xxmaj thisby . ' 
▁ xxup bottom . a very good piece of work , i assure you , and a merry . xxmaj now , 
▁ good xxmaj peter xxmaj quince , call forth your actors by the scroll . xxmaj masters , 
▁ spread yourselves . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj answer , as i call you . xxmaj nick xxmaj bottom , the weaver . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj ready . xxmaj name what part i am for , and proceed . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj you , xxmaj nick xxmaj bottom , are set down for xxmaj pyramus . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj what is xxmaj pyramus ? a lover , or a tyrant ? 
▁ xxup quince . a lover , that kills himself most gallant for love . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj that will ask some tears in the true performing of it . xxmaj if i 
▁ do it , let the audience look to their eyes ; i will move storms ; i 
▁ will condole in some measure . xxmaj to the rest- yet my chief humour is 
▁ for a tyrant . i could play xxmaj ercles rarely , or a part to tear a cat 
▁ in , to make all split . 

▁ ' the raging rocks 
▁ xxmaj and shivering shocks 
▁ xxmaj shall break the locks 
▁ xxmaj of prison gates ; 

▁ xxmaj and xxmaj phibbus ' car 
▁ xxmaj shall shine from far , 
▁ xxmaj and make and mar 
▁ xxmaj the foolish xxmaj fates . ' 

▁ xxmaj this was lofty . xxmaj now name the rest of the players . xxmaj this is 
▁ xxmaj ercles ' vein , a tyrant 's vein : a lover is more condoling . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj francis xxmaj flute , the bellows - mender . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj here , xxmaj peter xxmaj quince . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj flute , you must take xxmaj thisby on you . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj what is xxmaj thisby ? a wand'ring knight ? 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj it is the lady that xxmaj pyramus must love . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj nay , faith , let not me play a woman ; i have a beard coming . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj that 's all one ; you shall play it in a mask , and you may 
▁ speak as small as you will . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj an i may hide my face , let me play xxmaj thisby too . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll speak in a monstrous little voice : ' thisne , xxmaj thisne ! ' 
▁ [ then speaking small ] ' ah xxmaj pyramus , my lover dear ! xxmaj thy 
▁ xxmaj thisby dear , and lady dear ! ' 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj no , no , you must play xxmaj pyramus ; and , xxmaj flute , you xxmaj thisby . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj well , proceed . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj robin xxmaj starveling , the tailor . 
▁ xxup starveling . xxmaj here , xxmaj peter xxmaj quince . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj robin xxmaj starveling , you must play xxmaj thisby 's mother . 
▁ xxmaj tom xxmaj snout , the tinker . 
▁ xxup snout . xxmaj here , xxmaj peter xxmaj quince . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj you , xxmaj pyramus ' father ; myself , xxmaj thisby 's father ; xxmaj snug , the 
▁ joiner , you , the lion 's part . xxmaj and , i hope , here is a play fitted . 
▁ xxup snug . xxmaj have you the lion 's part written ? xxmaj pray you , if it be , give it 
▁ me , for i am slow of study . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj you may do it extempore , for it is nothing but roaring . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj let me play the lion too . i will roar that i will do any 
▁ man 's heart good to hear me ; i will roar that i will make the 
▁ xxmaj duke say ' let him roar again , let him roar again . ' 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj an you should do it too terribly , you would fright the 
▁ xxmaj duchess and the ladies , that they would shriek ; and that were 
▁ enough to hang us all . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj that would hang us , every mother 's son . 
▁ xxup bottom . i grant you , friends , if you should fright the ladies out 
▁ of their wits , they would have no more discretion but to hang us ; 
▁ but i will aggravate my voice so , that i will roar you as gently 
▁ as any sucking dove ; i will roar you an ' twere any nightingale . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj you can play no part but xxmaj pyramus ; for xxmaj pyramus is a 
▁ sweet - fac'd man ; a proper man , as one shall see in a summer 's 
▁ day ; a most lovely gentleman - like man ; therefore you must needs 
▁ play xxmaj pyramus . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj well , i will undertake it . xxmaj what beard were i best to play 
▁ it in ? 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj why , what you will . 
▁ xxup bottom . i will discharge it in either your straw - colour beard , your 
▁ orange - tawny beard , your purple - in - grain beard , or your 
▁ xxmaj french - crown - colour beard , your perfect yellow . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj some of your xxmaj french crowns have no hair at all , and then 
▁ you will play bare - fac'd . xxmaj but , masters , here are your parts ; and 
▁ i am to entreat you , request you , and desire you , to con them by 
▁ to - morrow night ; and meet me in the palace wood , a mile without 
▁ the town , by moonlight ; there will we rehearse ; for if we meet in 
▁ the city , we shall be dogg'd with company , and our devices known . 
▁ xxmaj in the meantime i will draw a bill of properties , such as our 
▁ play wants . i pray you , fail me not . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj we will meet ; and there we may rehearse most obscenely and 
▁ courageously . xxmaj take pains ; be perfect ; adieu . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj at the xxmaj duke 's oak we meet . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj enough ; hold , or cut bow - strings . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a wood near xxmaj athens 

 xxmaj enter a xxup fairy at xxmaj one door , and xxup puck at another 

▁ xxup puck . xxmaj how now , spirit ! whither wander you ? 
▁ xxup fairy . xxmaj over hill , over dale , 
▁ xxmaj thorough bush , thorough brier , 
▁ xxmaj over park , over pale , 
▁ xxmaj thorough flood , thorough fire , 
▁ i do wander every where , 
▁ xxmaj swifter than the moon 's sphere ; 
▁ xxmaj and i serve the xxmaj fairy xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj to dew her orbs upon the green . 
▁ xxmaj the cowslips tall her pensioners be ; 
▁ xxmaj in their gold coats spots you see ; 
▁ xxmaj those be rubies , fairy favours , 
▁ xxmaj in those freckles live their savours . 

▁ i must go seek some dewdrops here , 
▁ xxmaj and hang a pearl in every cowslip 's ear . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , thou lob of spirits ; xxmaj i 'll be gone . 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj queen and all her elves come here anon . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj the xxmaj king doth keep his revels here to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj take heed the xxmaj queen come not within his sight ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj oberon is passing fell and wrath , 
▁ xxmaj because that she as her attendant hath 
▁ a lovely boy , stolen from an xxmaj indian king . 
▁ xxmaj she never had so sweet a changeling ; 
▁ xxmaj and jealous xxmaj oberon would have the child 
▁ xxmaj knight of his train , to trace the forests wild ; 
▁ xxmaj but she perforce withholds the loved boy , 
▁ xxmaj crowns him with flowers , and makes him all her joy . 
▁ xxmaj and now they never meet in grove or green , 
▁ xxmaj by fountain clear , or spangled starlight sheen , 
▁ xxmaj but they do square , that all their elves for fear 
▁ xxmaj creep into acorn cups and hide them there . 
▁ xxup fairy . xxmaj either i mistake your shape and making quite , 
▁ xxmaj or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite 
▁ xxmaj call'd xxmaj robin xxmaj goodfellow . xxmaj are not you he 
▁ xxmaj that frights the maidens of the villagery , 
▁ xxmaj skim milk , and sometimes labour in the quern , 
▁ xxmaj and bootless make the breathless housewife churn , 
▁ xxmaj and sometime make the drink to bear no barm , 
▁ xxmaj mislead night - wanderers , laughing at their harm ? 
▁ xxmaj those that xxmaj hobgoblin call you , and sweet xxmaj puck , 
▁ xxmaj you do their work , and they shall have good luck . 
▁ xxmaj are not you he ? 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj thou speakest aright : 
▁ i am that merry wanderer of the night . 
▁ i jest to xxmaj oberon , and make him smile 
▁ xxmaj when i a fat and bean - fed horse beguile , 
▁ xxmaj neighing in likeness of a filly foal ; 
▁ xxmaj and sometime lurk i in a gossip 's bowl 
▁ xxmaj in very likeness of a roasted crab , 
▁ xxmaj and , when she drinks , against her lips i bob , 
▁ xxmaj and on her withered dewlap pour the ale . 
▁ xxmaj the wisest aunt , telling the saddest tale , 
▁ xxmaj sometime for three - foot stool mistaketh me ; 
▁ xxmaj then slip i from her bum , down topples she , 
▁ xxmaj and ' tailor ' cries , and falls into a cough ; 
▁ xxmaj and then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh , 
▁ xxmaj and waxen in their mirth , and neeze , and swear 
▁ a merrier hour was never wasted there . 
▁ xxmaj but room , fairy , here comes xxmaj oberon . 
▁ xxup fairy . xxmaj and here my mistress . xxmaj would that he were gone ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oberon at one door , with his xxup train , and xxup titania , 
▁ at another , with hers 

▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj ill met by moonlight , proud xxmaj titania . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj what , jealous xxmaj oberon ! xxmaj fairies , skip hence ; 
▁ i have forsworn his bed and company . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj tarry , rash wanton ; am not i thy lord ? 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj then i must be thy lady ; but i know 
▁ xxmaj when thou hast stolen away from fairy land , 
▁ xxmaj and in the shape of xxmaj corin sat all day , 
▁ xxmaj playing on pipes of corn , and versing love 
▁ xxmaj to amorous xxmaj phillida . xxmaj why art thou here , 
▁ xxmaj come from the farthest steep of xxmaj india , 
▁ xxmaj but that , forsooth , the bouncing xxmaj amazon , 
▁ xxmaj your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj theseus must be wedded , and you come 
▁ xxmaj to give their bed joy and prosperity ? 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj how canst thou thus , for shame , xxmaj titania , 
▁ xxmaj glance at my credit with xxmaj hippolyta , 
▁ xxmaj knowing i know thy love to xxmaj theseus ? 
▁ xxmaj didst not thou lead him through the glimmering night 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj perigouna , whom he ravished ? 
▁ xxmaj and make him with fair xxmaj aegles break his faith , 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj ariadne and xxmaj antiopa ? 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj these are the forgeries of jealousy ; 
▁ xxmaj and never , since the middle summer 's spring , 
▁ xxmaj met we on hill , in dale , forest , or mead , 
▁ xxmaj by paved fountain , or by rushy brook , 
▁ xxmaj or in the beached margent of the sea , 
▁ xxmaj to dance our ringlets to the whistling wind , 
▁ xxmaj but with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport . 
▁ xxmaj therefore the winds , piping to us in vain , 
▁ xxmaj as in revenge , have suck'd up from the sea 
▁ xxmaj contagious fogs ; which , falling in the land , 
▁ xxmaj hath every pelting river made so proud 
▁ xxmaj that they have overborne their continents . 
▁ xxmaj the ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain , 
▁ xxmaj the ploughman lost his sweat , and the green corn 
▁ xxmaj hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard ; 
▁ xxmaj the fold stands empty in the drowned field , 
▁ xxmaj and crows are fatted with the murrion flock ; 
▁ xxmaj the nine men 's morris is fill'd up with mud , 
▁ xxmaj and the quaint mazes in the wanton green , 
▁ xxmaj for lack of tread , are undistinguishable . 
▁ xxmaj the human mortals want their winter here ; 
▁ xxmaj no night is now with hymn or carol blest ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore the moon , the governess of floods , 
▁ xxmaj pale in her anger , washes all the air , 
▁ xxmaj that rheumatic diseases do abound . 
▁ xxmaj and thorough this distemperature we see 
▁ xxmaj the seasons alter : hoary - headed frosts 
▁ xxmaj fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose ; 
▁ xxmaj and on old xxmaj hiems ' thin and icy crown 
▁ xxmaj an odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds 
▁ xxmaj is , as in mockery , set . xxmaj the spring , the summer , 
▁ xxmaj the childing autumn , angry winter , change 
▁ xxmaj their wonted liveries ; and the mazed world , 
▁ xxmaj by their increase , now knows not which is which . 
▁ xxmaj and this same progeny of evils comes 
▁ xxmaj from our debate , from our dissension ; 
▁ xxmaj we are their parents and original . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj do you amend it , then ; it lies in you . 
▁ xxmaj why should xxmaj titania cross her xxmaj oberon ? 
▁ i do but beg a little changeling boy 
▁ xxmaj to be my henchman . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj set your heart at rest ; 
▁ xxmaj the fairy land buys not the child of me . 
▁ xxmaj his mother was a vot'ress of my order ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in the spiced xxmaj indian air , by night , 
▁ xxmaj full often hath she gossip'd by my side ; 
▁ xxmaj and sat with me on xxmaj neptune 's yellow sands , 
▁ xxmaj marking th ' embarked traders on the flood ; 
▁ xxmaj when we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive , 
▁ xxmaj and grow big - bellied with the wanton wind ; 
▁ xxmaj which she , with pretty and with swimming gait 
▁ xxmaj following- her womb then rich with my young squire- 
▁ xxmaj would imitate , and sail upon the land , 
▁ xxmaj to fetch me trifles , and return again , 
▁ xxmaj as from a voyage , rich with merchandise . 
▁ xxmaj but she , being mortal , of that boy did die ; 
▁ xxmaj and for her sake do i rear up her boy ; 
▁ xxmaj and for her sake i will not part with him . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj how long within this wood intend you stay ? 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj perchance till after xxmaj theseus ' wedding - day . 
▁ xxmaj if you will patiently dance in our round , 
▁ xxmaj and see our moonlight revels , go with us ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , shun me , and i will spare your haunts . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj give me that boy and i will go with thee . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj not for thy fairy kingdom . xxmaj fairies , away . 
▁ xxmaj we shall chide downright if i longer stay . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup titania with her train 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj well , go thy way ; thou shalt not from this grove 
▁ xxmaj till i torment thee for this injury . 
▁ xxmaj my gentle xxmaj puck , come hither . xxmaj thou rememb'rest 
▁ xxmaj since once i sat upon a promontory , 
▁ xxmaj and heard a mermaid on a dolphin 's back 
▁ xxmaj uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath 
▁ xxmaj that the rude sea grew civil at her song , 
▁ xxmaj and certain stars shot madly from their spheres 
▁ xxmaj to hear the sea - maid 's music . 
▁ xxup puck . i remember . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj that very time i saw , but thou couldst not , 
▁ xxmaj flying between the cold moon and the earth 
▁ xxmaj cupid , all arm'd ; a certain aim he took 
▁ xxmaj at a fair vestal , throned by the west , 
▁ xxmaj and loos'd his love - shaft smartly from his bow , 
▁ xxmaj as it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts ; 
▁ xxmaj but i might see young xxmaj cupid 's fiery shaft 
▁ xxmaj quench'd in the chaste beams of the wat'ry moon ; 
▁ xxmaj and the imperial vot'ress passed on , 
▁ xxmaj in maiden meditation , fancy - free . 
▁ xxmaj yet mark'd i where the bolt of xxmaj cupid fell . 
▁ xxmaj it fell upon a little western flower , 
▁ xxmaj before milk - white , now purple with love 's wound , 
▁ xxmaj and maidens call it xxmaj love - in - idleness . 
▁ xxmaj fetch me that flow'r , the herb i showed thee once . 
▁ xxmaj the juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid 
▁ xxmaj will make or man or woman madly dote 
▁ xxmaj upon the next live creature that it sees . 
▁ xxmaj fetch me this herb , and be thou here again 
▁ xxmaj ere the leviathan can swim a league . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj i 'll put a girdle round about the earth 
▁ xxmaj in forty minutes . xxmaj exit xxup puck 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj having once this juice , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll watch xxmaj titania when she is asleep , 
▁ xxmaj and drop the liquor of it in her eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj the next thing then she waking looks upon , 
▁ xxmaj be it on lion , bear , or wolf , or bull , 
▁ xxmaj on meddling monkey , or on busy ape , 
▁ xxmaj she shall pursue it with the soul of love . 
▁ xxmaj and ere i take this charm from off her sight , 
▁ xxmaj as i can take it with another herb , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make her render up her page to me . 
▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? i am invisible ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will overhear their conference . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup demetrius , xxup helena following him 

▁ xxup demetrius . i love thee not , therefore pursue me not . 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj lysander and fair xxmaj hermia ? 
▁ xxmaj the one xxmaj i 'll slay , the other slayeth me . 
▁ xxmaj thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood , 
▁ xxmaj and here am xxup i , and wood within this wood , 
▁ xxmaj because i can not meet my xxmaj hermia . 
▁ xxmaj hence , get thee gone , and follow me no more . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj you draw me , you hard - hearted adamant ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet you draw not iron , for my heart 
▁ xxmaj is true as steel . xxmaj leave you your power to draw , 
▁ xxmaj and i shall have no power to follow you . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj do i entice you ? xxmaj do i speak you fair ? 
▁ xxmaj or , rather , do i not in plainest truth 
▁ xxmaj tell you i do not nor i can not love you ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and even for that do i love you the more . 
▁ i am your spaniel ; and , xxmaj demetrius , 
▁ xxmaj the more you beat me , i will fawn on you . 
▁ xxmaj use me but as your spaniel , spurn me , strike me , 
▁ xxmaj neglect me , lose me ; only give me leave , 
▁ xxmaj unworthy as i am , to follow you . 
▁ xxmaj what worser place can i beg in your love , 
▁ xxmaj and yet a place of high respect with me , 
▁ xxmaj than to be used as you use your dog ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am sick when i do look on thee . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and i am sick when i look not on you . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj you do impeach your modesty too much 
▁ xxmaj to leave the city and commit yourself 
▁ xxmaj into the hands of one that loves you not ; 
▁ xxmaj to trust the opportunity of night , 
▁ xxmaj and the ill counsel of a desert place , 
▁ xxmaj with the rich worth of your virginity . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj your virtue is my privilege for that : 
▁ xxmaj it is not night when i do see your face , 
▁ xxmaj therefore i think i am not in the night ; 
▁ xxmaj nor doth this wood lack worlds of company , 
▁ xxmaj for you , in my respect , are all the world . 
▁ xxmaj then how can it be said i am alone 
▁ xxmaj when all the world is here to look on me ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj i 'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes , 
▁ xxmaj and leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj the wildest hath not such a heart as you . 
▁ xxmaj run when you will ; the story shall be chang'd : 
▁ xxmaj apollo flies , and xxmaj daphne holds the chase ; 
▁ xxmaj the dove pursues the griffin ; the mild hind 
▁ xxmaj makes speed to catch the tiger- bootless speed , 
▁ xxmaj when cowardice pursues and valour flies . 
▁ xxup demetrius . i will not stay thy questions ; let me go ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if thou follow me , do not believe 
▁ xxmaj but i shall do thee mischief in the wood . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay , in the temple , in the town , the field , 
▁ xxmaj you do me mischief . xxmaj fie , xxmaj demetrius ! 
▁ xxmaj your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex . 
▁ xxmaj we can not fight for love as men may do ; 
▁ xxmaj we should be woo'd , and were not made to woo . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup demetrius 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow thee , and make a heaven of hell , 
▁ xxmaj to die upon the hand i love so well . xxmaj exit xxup helena 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj fare thee well , nymph ; ere he do leave this grove , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt fly him , and he shall seek thy love . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup puck 

▁ xxmaj hast thou the flower there ? xxmaj welcome , wanderer . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj ay , there it is . 
▁ xxup oberon . i pray thee give it me . 
▁ i know a bank where the wild thyme blows , 
▁ xxmaj where oxlips and the nodding violet grows , 
▁ xxmaj quite over - canopied with luscious woodbine , 
▁ xxmaj with sweet musk - roses , and with eglantine ; 
▁ xxmaj there sleeps xxmaj titania sometime of the night , 
▁ xxmaj lull'd in these flowers with dances and delight ; 
▁ xxmaj and there the snake throws her enamell'd skin , 
▁ xxmaj weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in ; 
▁ xxmaj and with the juice of this xxmaj i 'll streak her eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and make her full of hateful fantasies . 
▁ xxmaj take thou some of it , and seek through this grove : 
▁ a sweet xxmaj athenian lady is in love 
▁ xxmaj with a disdainful youth ; anoint his eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj but do it when the next thing he espies 
▁ xxmaj may be the lady . xxmaj thou shalt know the man 
▁ xxmaj by the xxmaj athenian garments he hath on . 
▁ xxmaj effect it with some care , that he may prove 
▁ xxmaj more fond on her than she upon her love . 
▁ xxmaj and look thou meet me ere the first cock crow . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj fear not , my lord ; your servant shall do so . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj another part of the wood 

 xxmaj enter xxup titania , with her train 

▁ xxup titania . xxmaj come now , a roundel and a fairy song ; 
▁ xxmaj then , for the third part of a minute , hence : 
▁ xxmaj some to kill cankers in the musk - rose buds ; 
▁ xxmaj some war with rere - mice for their leathern wings , 
▁ xxmaj to make my small elves coats ; and some keep back 
▁ xxmaj the clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders 
▁ xxmaj at our quaint spirits . xxmaj sing me now asleep ; 
▁ xxmaj then to your offices , and let me rest . 

▁ xxmaj the xxup fairies xxmaj sing 

▁ xxup first xxup fairy . xxmaj you spotted snakes with double tongue , 
▁ xxmaj thorny hedgehogs , be not seen ; 
▁ xxmaj newts and blind - worms , do no wrong , 
▁ xxmaj come not near our fairy xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup chorus . xxmaj philomel with melody 
▁ xxmaj sing in our sweet lullaby . 
▁ xxmaj lulla , lulla , lullaby ; lulla , lulla , lullaby . 
▁ xxmaj never harm 
▁ xxmaj nor spell nor charm 
▁ xxmaj come our lovely lady nigh . 
▁ xxmaj so good night , with lullaby . 
▁ xxup second xxup fairy . xxmaj weaving spiders , come not here ; 
▁ xxmaj hence , you long - legg'd spinners , hence . 
▁ xxmaj beetles black , approach not near ; 
▁ xxmaj worm nor snail do no offence . 
▁ xxup chorus . xxmaj philomel with melody , etc . [ titania xxmaj sleeps ] 
▁ xxup first xxup fairy . xxmaj hence away ; now all is well . 
▁ xxmaj one aloof stand sentinel . xxmaj exeunt xxup fairies 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oberon and squeezes the flower on xxup titania 's eyelids 

▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj what thou seest when thou dost wake , 
▁ xxmaj do it for thy true - love take ; 
▁ xxmaj love and languish for his sake . 
▁ xxmaj be it ounce , or cat , or bear , 
▁ xxmaj pard , or boar with bristled hair , 
▁ xxmaj in thy eye that shall appear 
▁ xxmaj when thou wak'st , it is thy dear . 
▁ xxmaj wake when some vile thing is near . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lysander and xxup hermia 

▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj fair love , you faint with wand'ring in the wood ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to speak troth , i have forgot our way ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll rest us , xxmaj hermia , if you think it good , 
▁ xxmaj and tarry for the comfort of the day . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj be it so , xxmaj lysander : find you out a bed , 
▁ xxmaj for i upon this bank will rest my head . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj one turf shall serve as pillow for us both ; 
▁ xxmaj one heart , one bed , two bosoms , and one troth . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj nay , good xxmaj lysander ; for my sake , my dear , 
▁ xxmaj lie further off yet ; do not lie so near . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxup o , take the sense , sweet , of my innocence ! 
▁ xxmaj love takes the meaning in love 's conference . 
▁ i mean that my heart unto yours is knit , 
▁ xxmaj so that but one heart we can make of it ; 
▁ xxmaj two bosoms interchained with an oath , 
▁ xxmaj so then two bosoms and a single troth . 
▁ xxmaj then by your side no bed - room me deny , 
▁ xxmaj for lying so , xxmaj hermia , i do not lie . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj lysander riddles very prettily . 
▁ xxmaj now much beshrew my manners and my pride , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj hermia meant to say xxmaj lysander lied ! 
▁ xxmaj but , gentle friend , for love and courtesy 
▁ xxmaj lie further off , in human modesty ; 
▁ xxmaj such separation as may well be said 
▁ xxmaj becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid , 
▁ xxmaj so far be distant ; and good night , sweet friend . 
▁ xxmaj thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end ! 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj amen , amen , to that fair prayer say xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj and then end life when i end loyalty ! 
▁ xxmaj here is my bed ; sleep give thee all his rest ! 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj with half that wish the wisher 's eyes be press'd ! 
▁ [ they sleep ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup puck 

▁ xxup puck . xxmaj through the forest have i gone , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj athenian found i none 
▁ xxmaj on whose eyes i might approve 
▁ xxmaj this flower 's force in stirring love . 
▁ xxmaj night and silence- xxmaj who is here ? 
▁ xxmaj weeds of xxmaj athens he doth wear : 
▁ xxmaj this is he , my master said , 
▁ xxmaj despised the xxmaj athenian maid ; 
▁ xxmaj and here the maiden , sleeping sound , 
▁ xxmaj on the dank and dirty ground . 
▁ xxmaj pretty soul ! she durst not lie 
▁ xxmaj near this lack - love , this kill - courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj churl , upon thy eyes i throw 
▁ xxmaj all the power this charm doth owe : 
▁ xxmaj when thou wak'st let love forbid 
▁ xxmaj sleep his seat on thy eyelid . 
▁ xxmaj so awake when i am gone ; 
▁ xxmaj for i must now to xxmaj oberon . xxmaj exit 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup demetrius and xxup helena , running 

▁ xxup helena . xxmaj stay , though thou kill me , sweet xxmaj demetrius . 
▁ xxup demetrius . i charge thee , hence , and do not haunt me thus . 
▁ xxup helena . xxup o , wilt thou darkling leave me ? xxmaj do not so . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj stay on thy peril ; i alone will go . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup helena . xxup o , i am out of breath in this fond chase ! 
▁ xxmaj the more my prayer , the lesser is my grace . 
▁ xxmaj happy is xxmaj hermia , wheresoe'er she lies , 
▁ xxmaj for she hath blessed and attractive eyes . 
▁ xxmaj how came her eyes so bright ? xxmaj not with salt tears ; 
▁ xxmaj if so , my eyes are oft'ner wash'd than hers . 
▁ xxmaj no , no , i am as ugly as a bear , 
▁ xxmaj for beasts that meet me run away for fear ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore no marvel though xxmaj demetrius 
▁ xxmaj do , as a monster , fly my presence thus . 
▁ xxmaj what wicked and dissembling glass of mine 
▁ xxmaj made me compare with xxmaj hermia 's sphery eyne ? 
▁ xxmaj but who is here ? xxmaj lysander ! on the ground ! 
▁ xxmaj dead , or asleep ? i see no blood , no wound . 
▁ xxmaj lysander , if you live , good sir , awake . 
▁ xxup lysander . [ waking ] xxmaj and run through fire i will for thy sweet sake . 
▁ xxmaj transparent xxmaj helena ! xxmaj nature shows art , 
▁ xxmaj that through thy bosom makes me see thy heart . 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj demetrius ? xxup o , how fit a word 
▁ xxmaj is that vile name to perish on my sword ! 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj do not say so , xxmaj lysander ; say not so . 
▁ xxmaj what though he love your xxmaj hermia ? xxmaj lord , what though ? 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj hermia still loves you ; then be content . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj content with xxmaj hermia ! xxmaj no : i do repent 
▁ xxmaj the tedious minutes i with her have spent . 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj hermia but xxmaj helena i love : 
▁ xxmaj who will not change a raven for a dove ? 
▁ xxmaj the will of man is by his reason sway'd , 
▁ xxmaj and reason says you are the worthier maid . 
▁ xxmaj things growing are not ripe until their season ; 
▁ xxmaj so xxup i , being young , till now ripe not to reason ; 
▁ xxmaj and touching now the point of human skill , 
▁ xxmaj reason becomes the marshal to my will , 
▁ xxmaj and leads me to your eyes , where i o'erlook 
▁ xxmaj love 's stories , written in xxmaj love 's richest book . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj wherefore was i to this keen mockery born ? 
▁ xxmaj when at your hands did i deserve this scorn ? 
▁ xxmaj is't not enough , is't not enough , young man , 
▁ xxmaj that i did never , no , nor never can , 
▁ xxmaj deserve a sweet look from xxmaj demetrius ' eye , 
▁ xxmaj but you must flout my insufficiency ? 
▁ xxmaj good troth , you do me wrong , good sooth , you do , 
▁ xxmaj in such disdainful manner me to woo . 
▁ xxmaj but fare you well ; perforce i must confess 
▁ i thought you lord of more true gentleness . 
▁ xxup o , that a lady of one man refus'd 
▁ xxmaj should of another therefore be abus'd ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj she sees not xxmaj hermia . xxmaj hermia , sleep thou there ; 
▁ xxmaj and never mayst thou come xxmaj lysander near ! 
▁ xxmaj for , as a surfeit of the sweetest things 
▁ xxmaj the deepest loathing to the stomach brings , 
▁ xxmaj or as the heresies that men do leave 
▁ xxmaj are hated most of those they did deceive , 
▁ xxmaj so thou , my surfeit and my heresy , 
▁ xxmaj of all be hated , but the most of me ! 
▁ xxmaj and , all my powers , address your love and might 
▁ xxmaj to honour xxmaj helen , and to be her knight ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hermia . [ starting ] xxmaj help me , xxmaj lysander , help me ; do thy best 
▁ xxmaj to pluck this crawling serpent from my breast . 
▁ xxmaj ay me , for pity ! xxmaj what a dream was here ! 
▁ xxmaj lysander , look how i do quake with fear . 
▁ xxmaj methought a serpent eat my heart away , 
▁ xxmaj and you sat smiling at his cruel prey . 
▁ xxmaj lysander ! xxmaj what , remov'd ? xxmaj lysander ! lord ! 
▁ xxmaj what , out of hearing gone ? xxmaj no sound , no word ? 
▁ xxmaj alack , where are you ? xxmaj speak , an if you hear ; 
▁ xxmaj speak , of all loves ! i swoon almost with fear . 
▁ xxmaj no ? xxmaj then i well perceive you are not nigh . 
▁ xxmaj either death or you xxmaj i 'll find immediately . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the wood . xxup titania lying asleep 

 xxmaj enter xxup quince , xxup snug , xxup bottom , xxup flute , xxup snout , and xxup starveling 

▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj are we all met ? 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj pat , pat ; and here 's a marvellous convenient place for our 
▁ rehearsal . xxmaj this green plot shall be our stage , this hawthorn 
▁ brake our tiring - house ; and we will do it in action , as we will 
▁ do it before the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj peter xxmaj quince ! 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj what sayest thou , bully xxmaj bottom ? 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj there are things in this comedy of xxmaj pyramus and xxmaj thisby that 
▁ will never please . xxmaj first , xxmaj pyramus must draw a sword to kill 
▁ himself ; which the ladies can not abide . xxmaj how answer you that ? 
▁ xxup snout . xxmaj by'r lakin , a parlous fear . 
▁ xxup starveling . i believe we must leave the killing out , when all is 
▁ done . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj not a whit ; i have a device to make all well . xxmaj write me a 
▁ prologue ; and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm 
▁ with our swords , and that xxmaj pyramus is not kill'd indeed ; and for 
▁ the more better assurance , tell them that i xxmaj pyramus am not 
▁ xxmaj pyramus but xxmaj bottom the weaver . xxmaj this will put them out of fear . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj well , we will have such a prologue ; and it shall be written 
▁ in eight and six . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj no , make it two more ; let it be written in eight and eight . 
▁ xxup snout . xxmaj will not the ladies be afeard of the lion ? 
▁ xxup starveling . i fear it , i promise you . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj masters , you ought to consider with yourself to bring in- 
▁ xxmaj god shield us!- a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing ; for 
▁ there is not a more fearful wild - fowl than your lion living ; and 
▁ we ought to look to't . 
▁ xxup snout . xxmaj therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj nay , you must name his name , and half his face must be seen 
▁ through the lion 's neck ; and he himself must speak through , 
▁ saying thus , or to the same defect : ' ladies , ' or ' fair ladies , i 
▁ would wish you ' or ' i would request you ' or ' i would entreat you 
▁ not to fear , not to tremble . xxmaj my life for yours ! xxmaj if you think i 
▁ come hither as a lion , it were pity of my life . xxmaj no , i am no such 
▁ thing ; i am a man as other men are . ' xxmaj and there , indeed , let him 
▁ name his name , and tell them plainly he is xxmaj snug the joiner . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj well , it shall be so . xxmaj but there is two hard things- that 
▁ is , to bring the moonlight into a chamber ; for , you know , xxmaj pyramus 
▁ and xxmaj thisby meet by moonlight . 
▁ xxup snout . xxmaj doth the moon shine that night we play our play ? 
▁ xxup bottom . a calendar , a calendar ! xxmaj look in the almanack ; find out 
▁ moonshine , find out moonshine . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj yes , it doth shine that night . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj why , then may you leave a casement of the great chamber 
▁ window , where we play , open ; and the moon may shine in at the 
▁ casement . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj ay ; or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a 
▁ lantern , and say he comes to disfigure or to present the person 
▁ of xxmaj moonshine . xxmaj then there is another thing : we must have a wall in 
▁ the great chamber ; for xxmaj pyramus and xxmaj thisby , says the story , did 
▁ talk through the chink of a wall . 
▁ xxup snout . xxmaj you can never bring in a wall . xxmaj what say you , xxmaj bottom ? 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj some man or other must present xxmaj wall ; and let him have some 
▁ plaster , or some loam , or some rough - cast about him , to signify 
▁ wall ; and let him hold his fingers thus , and through that cranny 
▁ shall xxmaj pyramus and xxmaj thisby whisper . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj if that may be , then all is well . xxmaj come , sit down , every 
▁ mother 's son , and rehearse your parts . xxmaj pyramus , you begin ; when 
▁ you have spoken your speech , enter into that brake ; and so every 
▁ one according to his cue . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup puck behind 

▁ xxup puck . xxmaj what hempen homespuns have we swagg'ring here , 
▁ xxmaj so near the cradle of the xxmaj fairy xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxmaj what , a play toward ! xxmaj i 'll be an auditor ; 
▁ xxmaj an actor too perhaps , if i see cause . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj speak , xxmaj pyramus . xxmaj thisby , stand forth . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj thisby , the flowers of odious savours sweet- 
▁ xxup quince . ' odious'- odorous ! 
▁ xxup bottom . -odours savours sweet ; 
▁ xxmaj so hath thy breath , my dearest xxmaj thisby dear . 
▁ xxmaj but hark , a voice ! xxmaj stay thou but here awhile , 
▁ xxmaj and by and by i will to thee appear . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup puck . a stranger xxmaj pyramus than e'er played here ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj must i speak now ? 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj ay , marry , must you ; for you must understand he goes but to 
▁ see a noise that he heard , and is to come again . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj most radiant xxmaj pyramus , most lily - white of hue , 
▁ xxmaj of colour like the red rose on triumphant brier , 
▁ xxmaj most brisky juvenal , and eke most lovely xxmaj jew , 
▁ xxmaj as true as truest horse , that would never tire , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll meet thee , xxmaj pyramus , at xxmaj ninny 's tomb . 
▁ xxup quince . ' ninus ' tomb , ' man ! xxmaj why , you must not speak that yet ; that 
▁ you answer to xxmaj pyramus . xxmaj you speak all your part at once , cues , and 
▁ all . xxmaj pyramus enter : your cue is past ; it is ' never tire . ' 
▁ xxup flute . xxup o- xxmaj as true as truest horse , that y et would never tire . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup puck , and xxup bottom with an ass 's head 

▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj if i were fair , xxmaj thisby , i were only thine . 
▁ xxup quince . o monstrous ! o strange ! xxmaj we are haunted . xxmaj pray , masters ! fly , 
▁ masters ! xxmaj help ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup bottom and xxup puck 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj i 'll follow you ; xxmaj i 'll lead you about a round , 
▁ xxmaj through bog , through bush , through brake , through brier ; 
▁ xxmaj sometime a horse xxmaj i 'll be , sometime a hound , 
▁ a hog , a headless bear , sometime a fire ; 
▁ xxmaj and neigh , and bark , and grunt , and roar , and burn , 
▁ xxmaj like horse , hound , hog , bear , fire , at every turn . 
 xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj why do they run away ? xxmaj this is a knavery of them to make me 
▁ afeard . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup snout 

▁ xxup snout . o xxmaj bottom , thou art chang'd ! xxmaj what do i see on thee ? 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj what do you see ? xxmaj you see an ass - head of your own , do you ? 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup snout 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup quince 

▁ xxup quince . xxmaj bless thee , xxmaj bottom , bless thee ! xxmaj thou art translated . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bottom . i see their knavery : this is to make an ass of me ; to 
▁ fright me , if they could . xxmaj but i will not stir from this place , do 
▁ what they can ; i will walk up and down here , and will sing , that 
▁ they shall hear i am not afraid . [ sings ] 

▁ xxmaj the ousel cock , so black of hue , 
▁ xxmaj with orange - tawny bill , 
▁ xxmaj the throstle with his note so true , 
▁ xxmaj the wren with little quill . 

▁ xxup titania . xxmaj what angel wakes me from my flow'ry bed ? 
▁ xxup bottom . [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj the finch , the sparrow , and the lark , 
▁ xxmaj the plain - song cuckoo grey , 
▁ xxmaj whose note full many a man doth mark , 
▁ xxmaj and dares not answer nay- 
▁ for , indeed , who would set his wit to so foolish a bird ? 
▁ xxmaj who would give a bird the he , though he cry ' cuckoo ' never so ? 
▁ xxup titania . i pray thee , gentle mortal , sing again . 
▁ xxmaj mine ear is much enamoured of thy note ; 
▁ xxmaj so is mine eye enthralled to thy shape ; 
▁ xxmaj and thy fair virtue 's force perforce doth move me , 
▁ xxmaj on the first view , to say , to swear , i love thee . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj methinks , mistress , you should have little reason for that . 
▁ xxmaj and yet , to say the truth , reason and love keep little company 
▁ together now - a - days . xxmaj the more the pity that some honest 
▁ neighbours will not make them friends . xxmaj nay , i can gleek upon 
▁ occasion . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj thou art as wise as thou art beautiful . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj not so , neither ; but if i had wit enough to get out of this 
▁ wood , i have enough to serve mine own turn . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj out of this wood do not desire to go ; 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no . 
▁ i am a spirit of no common rate ; 
▁ xxmaj the summer still doth tend upon my state ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do love thee ; therefore , go with me . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give thee fairies to attend on thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep , 
▁ xxmaj and sing , while thou on pressed flowers dost sleep ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will purge thy mortal grossness so 
▁ xxmaj that thou shalt like an airy spirit go . 
▁ xxmaj peaseblossom ! xxmaj cobweb ! xxmaj moth ! and xxmaj mustardseed ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup peaseblossom , xxup cobweb , xxup moth , and xxup mustardseed 

▁ xxup peaseblossom . xxmaj ready . 
▁ xxup cobweb . xxmaj and xxup i. 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj and xxup i. 
▁ xxup mustardseed . xxmaj and xxup i. 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj where shall we go ? 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj be kind and courteous to this gentleman ; 
▁ xxmaj hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj feed him with apricocks and dewberries , 
▁ xxmaj with purple grapes , green figs , and mulberries ; 
▁ xxmaj the honey bags steal from the humble - bees , 
▁ xxmaj and for night - tapers crop their waxen thighs , 
▁ xxmaj and light them at the fiery glow - worm 's eyes , 
▁ xxmaj to have my love to bed and to arise ; 
▁ xxmaj and pluck the wings from painted butterflies , 
▁ xxmaj to fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes . 
▁ xxmaj nod to him , elves , and do him courtesies . 
▁ xxup peaseblossom . xxmaj hail , mortal ! 
▁ xxup cobweb . xxmaj hail ! 
▁ xxup moth . xxmaj hail ! 
▁ xxup mustardseed . xxmaj hail ! 
▁ xxup bottom . i cry your worships mercy , heartily ; i beseech your 
▁ worship 's name . 
▁ xxup cobweb . xxmaj cobweb . 
▁ xxup bottom . i shall desire you of more acquaintance , good xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj cobweb . xxmaj if i cut my finger , i shall make bold with you . xxmaj your 
▁ name , honest gentleman ? 
▁ xxup peaseblossom . xxmaj peaseblossom . 
▁ xxup bottom . i pray you , commend me to xxmaj mistress xxmaj squash , your mother , and 
▁ to xxmaj master xxmaj peascod , your father . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj peaseblossom , i shall 
▁ desire you of more acquaintance too . xxmaj your name , i beseech you , 
▁ sir ? 
▁ xxup mustardseed . xxmaj mustardseed . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj mustardseed , i know your patience well . xxmaj that 
▁ same cowardly giant - like ox - beef hath devour'd many a gentleman 
▁ of your house . i promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water 
▁ ere now . i desire you of more acquaintance , good xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj mustardseed . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj come , wait upon him ; lead him to my bower . 
▁ xxmaj the moon , methinks , looks with a wat'ry eye ; 
▁ xxmaj and when she weeps , weeps every little flower ; 
▁ xxmaj lamenting some enforced chastity . 
▁ xxmaj tie up my love 's tongue , bring him silently . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj another part of the wood 

 xxmaj enter xxup oberon 

▁ xxup oberon . i wonder if xxmaj titania be awak'd ; 
▁ xxmaj then , what it was that next came in her eye , 
▁ xxmaj which she must dote on in extremity . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup puck 

▁ xxmaj here comes my messenger . xxmaj how now , mad spirit ! 
▁ xxmaj what night - rule now about this haunted grove ? 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj my mistress with a monster is in love . 
▁ xxmaj near to her close and consecrated bower , 
▁ xxmaj while she was in her dull and sleeping hour , 
▁ a crew of patches , rude mechanicals , 
▁ xxmaj that work for bread upon xxmaj athenian stalls , 
▁ xxmaj were met together to rehearse a play 
▁ xxmaj intended for great xxmaj theseus ' nuptial day . 
▁ xxmaj the shallowest thickskin of that barren sort , 
▁ xxmaj who xxmaj pyramus presented , in their sport 
▁ xxmaj forsook his scene and ent'red in a brake ; 
▁ xxmaj when i did him at this advantage take , 
▁ xxmaj an ass 's nole i fixed on his head .