xxbos xxmaj anon his xxmaj thisby must be answered , 
▁ xxmaj and forth my mimic comes . xxmaj when they him spy , 
▁ xxmaj as wild geese that the creeping fowler eye , 
▁ xxmaj or russet - pated choughs , many in sort , 
▁ xxmaj rising and cawing at the gun 's report , 
▁ xxmaj sever themselves and madly sweep the sky , 
▁ xxmaj so at his sight away his fellows fly ; 
▁ xxmaj and at our stamp here , o'er and o'er one falls ; 
▁ xxmaj he murder cries , and help from xxmaj athens calls . 
▁ xxmaj their sense thus weak , lost with their fears thus strong , 
▁ xxmaj made senseless things begin to do them wrong , 
▁ xxmaj for briers and thorns at their apparel snatch ; 
▁ xxmaj some sleeves , some hats , from yielders all things catch . 
▁ i led them on in this distracted fear , 
▁ xxmaj and left sweet xxmaj pyramus translated there ; 
▁ xxmaj when in that moment , so it came to pass , 
▁ xxmaj titania wak'd , and straightway lov'd an ass . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj this falls out better than i could devise . 
▁ xxmaj but hast thou yet latch'd the xxmaj athenian 's eyes 
▁ xxmaj with the love - juice , as i did bid thee do ? 
▁ xxup puck . i took him sleeping- that is finish'd too- 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj athenian woman by his side ; 
▁ xxmaj that , when he wak'd , of force she must be ey'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup demetrius and xxup hermia 

▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj stand close ; this is the same xxmaj athenian . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj this is the woman , but not this the man . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxup o , why rebuke you him that loves you so ? 
▁ xxmaj lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj now i but chide , but i should use thee worse , 
▁ xxmaj for thou , i fear , hast given me cause to curse . 
▁ xxmaj if thou hast slain xxmaj lysander in his sleep , 
▁ xxmaj being o'er shoes in blood , plunge in the deep , 
▁ xxmaj and kill me too . 
▁ xxmaj the sun was not so true unto the day 
▁ xxmaj as he to me . xxmaj would he have stolen away 
▁ xxmaj from sleeping xxmaj hermia ? xxmaj i 'll believe as soon 
▁ xxmaj this whole earth may be bor'd , and that the moon 
▁ xxmaj may through the centre creep and so displease 
▁ xxmaj her brother 's noontide with th ' xxmaj antipodes . 
▁ xxmaj it can not be but thou hast murd'red him ; 
▁ xxmaj so should a murderer look- so dead , so grim . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj so should the murdered look ; and so should xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj pierc'd through the heart with your stern cruelty ; 
▁ xxmaj yet you , the murderer , look as bright , as clear , 
▁ xxmaj as yonder xxmaj venus in her glimmering sphere . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj what 's this to my xxmaj lysander ? xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , good xxmaj demetrius , wilt thou give him me ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . i had rather give his carcass to my hounds . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj out , dog ! out , cur ! xxmaj thou driv'st me past the bounds 
▁ xxmaj of maiden 's patience . xxmaj hast thou slain him , then ? 
▁ xxmaj henceforth be never numb'red among men ! 
▁ xxup o , once tell true ; tell true , even for my sake ! 
▁ xxmaj durst thou have look'd upon him being awake , 
▁ xxmaj and hast thou kill'd him sleeping ? o brave touch ! 
▁ xxmaj could not a worm , an adder , do so much ? 
▁ xxmaj an adder did it ; for with doubler tongue 
▁ xxmaj than thine , thou serpent , never adder stung . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj you spend your passion on a mispris'd mood : 
▁ i am not guilty of xxmaj lysander 's blood ; 
▁ xxmaj nor is he dead , for aught that i can tell . 
▁ xxup hermia . i pray thee , tell me then that he is well . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj an if i could , what should i get therefore ? 
▁ xxup hermia . a privilege never to see me more . 
▁ xxmaj and from thy hated presence part i so ; 
▁ xxmaj see me no more whether he be dead or no . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj there is no following her in this fierce vein ; 
▁ xxmaj here , therefore , for a while i will remain . 
▁ xxmaj so sorrow 's heaviness doth heavier grow 
▁ xxmaj for debt that bankrupt sleep doth sorrow owe ; 
▁ xxmaj which now in some slight measure it will pay , 
▁ xxmaj if for his tender here i make some stay . [ lies down ] 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj what hast thou done ? xxmaj thou hast mistaken quite , 
▁ xxmaj and laid the love - juice on some true - love 's sight . 
▁ xxmaj of thy misprision must perforce ensue 
▁ xxmaj some true love turn'd , and not a false turn'd true . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj then fate o'er - rules , that , one man holding troth , 
▁ a million fail , confounding oath on oath . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj about the wood go swifter than the wind , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj helena of xxmaj athens look thou find ; 
▁ xxmaj all fancy - sick she is and pale of cheer , 
▁ xxmaj with sighs of love that costs the fresh blood dear . 
▁ xxmaj by some illusion see thou bring her here ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll charm his eyes against she do appear . 
▁ xxup puck . i go , i go ; look how i go , 
▁ xxmaj swifter than arrow from the xxmaj tartar 's bow . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj flower of this purple dye , 
▁ xxmaj hit with xxmaj cupid 's archery , 
▁ xxmaj sink in apple of his eye . 
▁ xxmaj when his love he doth espy , 
▁ xxmaj let her shine as gloriously 
▁ xxmaj as the xxmaj venus of the sky . 
▁ xxmaj when thou wak'st , if she be by , 
▁ xxmaj beg of her for remedy . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup puck 
▁
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj captain of our fairy band , 
▁ xxmaj helena is here at hand , 
▁ xxmaj and the youth mistook by me 
▁ xxmaj pleading for a lover 's fee ; 
▁ xxmaj shall we their fond pageant see ? 
▁ xxmaj lord , what fools these mortals be ! 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj stand aside . xxmaj the noise they make 
▁ xxmaj will cause xxmaj demetrius to awake . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj then will two at once woo one . 
▁ xxmaj that must needs be sport alone ; 
▁ xxmaj and those things do best please me 
▁ xxmaj that befall prepost'rously . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lysander and xxup helena 

▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj why should you think that i should woo in scorn ? 
▁ xxmaj scorn and derision never come in tears . 
▁ xxmaj look when i vow , i weep ; and vows so born , 
▁ xxmaj in their nativity all truth appears . 
▁ xxmaj how can these things in me seem scorn to you , 
▁ xxmaj bearing the badge of faith , to prove them true ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj you do advance your cunning more and more . 
▁ xxmaj when truth kills truth , o devilish - holy fray ! 
▁ xxmaj these vows are xxmaj hermia 's . xxmaj will you give her o'er ? 
▁ xxmaj weigh oath with oath , and you will nothing weigh : 
▁ xxmaj your vows to her and me , put in two scales , 
▁ xxmaj will even weigh ; and both as light as tales . 
▁ xxup lysander . i hod no judgment when to her i swore . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj nor none , in my mind , now you give her o'er . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj demetrius loves her , and he loves not you . 
▁ xxup demetrius . [ awaking ] o xxmaj helen , goddess , nymph , perfect , divine ! 
▁ xxmaj to what , my love , shall i compare thine eyne ? 
▁ xxmaj crystal is muddy . xxup o , how ripe in show 
▁ xxmaj thy lips , those kissing cherries , tempting grow ! 
▁ xxmaj that pure congealed white , high xxmaj taurus ' snow , 
▁ xxmaj fann'd with the eastern wind , turns to a crow 
▁ xxmaj when thou hold'st up thy hand . xxup o , let me kiss 
▁ xxmaj this princess of pure white , this seal of bliss ! 
▁ xxup helena . o spite ! o hell ! i see you all are bent 
▁ xxmaj to set against me for your merriment . 
▁ xxmaj if you were civil and knew courtesy , 
▁ xxmaj you would not do me thus much injury . 
▁ xxmaj can you not hate me , as i know you do , 
▁ xxmaj but you must join in souls to mock me too ? 
▁ xxmaj if you were men , as men you are in show , 
▁ xxmaj you would not use a gentle lady so : 
▁ xxmaj to vow , and swear , and superpraise my parts , 
▁ xxmaj when i am sure you hate me with your hearts . 
▁ xxmaj you both are rivals , and love xxmaj hermia ; 
▁ xxmaj and now both rivals , to mock xxmaj helena . 
▁ a trim exploit , a manly enterprise , 
▁ xxmaj to conjure tears up in a poor maid 's eyes 
▁ xxmaj with your derision ! xxmaj none of noble sort 
▁ xxmaj would so offend a virgin , and extort 
▁ a poor soul 's patience , all to make you sport . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj you are unkind , xxmaj demetrius ; be not so ; 
▁ xxmaj for you love xxmaj hermia . xxmaj this you know i know ; 
▁ xxmaj and here , with all good will , with all my heart , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj hermia 's love i yield you up my part ; 
▁ xxmaj and yours of xxmaj helena to me bequeath , 
▁ xxmaj whom i do love and will do till my death . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj never did mockers waste more idle breath . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj lysander , keep thy xxmaj hermia ; i will none . 
▁ xxmaj if e'er i lov'd her , all that love is gone . 
▁ xxmaj my heart to her but as guest - wise sojourn'd , 
▁ xxmaj and now to xxmaj helen is it home return'd , 
▁ xxmaj there to remain . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj helen , it is not so . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj disparage not the faith thou dost not know , 
▁ xxmaj lest , to thy peril , thou aby it dear . 
▁ xxmaj look where thy love comes ; yonder is thy dear . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hermia 

▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj dark night , that from the eye his function takes , 
▁ xxmaj the ear more quick of apprehension makes ; 
▁ xxmaj wherein it doth impair the seeing sense , 
▁ xxmaj it pays the hearing double recompense . 
▁ xxmaj thou art not by mine eye , xxmaj lysander , found ; 
▁ xxmaj mine ear , i thank it , brought me to thy sound . 
▁ xxmaj but why unkindly didst thou leave me so ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj why should he stay whom love doth press to go ? 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj what love could press xxmaj lysander from my side ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj lysander 's love , that would not let him bide- 
▁ xxmaj fair xxmaj helena , who more engilds the night 
▁ xxmaj than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light . 
▁ xxmaj why seek'st thou me ? xxmaj could not this make thee know 
▁ xxmaj the hate i bare thee made me leave thee so ? 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj you speak not as you think ; it can not be . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj lo , she is one of this confederacy ! 
▁ xxmaj now i perceive they have conjoin'd all three 
▁ xxmaj to fashion this false sport in spite of me . 
▁ xxmaj injurious xxmaj hermia ! most ungrateful maid ! 
▁ xxmaj have you conspir'd , have you with these contriv'd , 
▁ xxmaj to bait me with this foul derision ? 
▁ xxmaj is all the counsel that we two have shar'd , 
▁ xxmaj the sisters ' vows , the hours that we have spent , 
▁ xxmaj when we have chid the hasty - footed time 
▁ xxmaj for parting us- xxup o , is all forgot ? 
▁ xxmaj all school - days ' friendship , childhood innocence ? 
▁ xxmaj we , xxmaj hermia , like two artificial gods , 
▁ xxmaj have with our needles created both one flower , 
▁ xxmaj both on one sampler , sitting on one cushion , 
▁ xxmaj both warbling of one song , both in one key ; 
▁ xxmaj as if our hands , our sides , voices , and minds , 
▁ xxmaj had been incorporate . xxmaj so we grew together , 
▁ xxmaj like to a double cherry , seeming parted , 
▁ xxmaj but yet an union in partition , 
▁ xxmaj two lovely berries moulded on one stern ; 
▁ xxmaj so , with two seeming bodies , but one heart ; 
▁ xxmaj two of the first , like coats in heraldry , 
▁ xxmaj due but to one , and crowned with one crest . 
▁ xxmaj and will you rent our ancient love asunder , 
▁ xxmaj to join with men in scorning your poor friend ? 
▁ xxmaj it is not friendly , ' tis not maidenly ; 
▁ xxmaj our sex , as well as xxup i , may chide you for it , 
▁ xxmaj though i alone do feel the injury . 
▁ xxup hermia . i am amazed at your passionate words ; 
▁ i scorn you not ; it seems that you scorn me . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj have you not set xxmaj lysander , as in scorn , 
▁ xxmaj to follow me and praise my eyes and face ? 
▁ xxmaj and made your other love , xxmaj demetrius , 
▁ xxmaj who even but now did spurn me with his foot , 
▁ xxmaj to call me goddess , nymph , divine , and rare , 
▁ xxmaj precious , celestial ? xxmaj wherefore speaks he this 
▁ xxmaj to her he hates ? xxmaj and wherefore doth xxmaj lysander 
▁ xxmaj deny your love , so rich within his soul , 
▁ xxmaj and tender me , forsooth , affection , 
▁ xxmaj but by your setting on , by your consent ? 
▁ xxmaj what though i be not so in grace as you , 
▁ xxmaj so hung upon with love , so fortunate , 
▁ xxmaj but miserable most , to love unlov'd ? 
▁ xxmaj this you should pity rather than despise . 
▁ xxup hermia . i understand not what you mean by this . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj ay , do- persever , counterfeit sad looks , 
▁ xxmaj make mouths upon me when i turn my back , 
▁ xxmaj wink each at other ; hold the sweet jest up ; 
▁ xxmaj this sport , well carried , shall be chronicled . 
▁ xxmaj if you have any pity , grace , or manners , 
▁ xxmaj you would not make me such an argument . 
▁ xxmaj but fare ye well ; ' tis partly my own fault , 
▁ xxmaj which death , or absence , soon shall remedy . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj stay , gentle xxmaj helena ; hear my excuse ; 
▁ xxmaj my love , my life , my soul , fair xxmaj helena ! 
▁ xxup helena . o excellent ! 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj sweet , do not scorn her so . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj if she can not entreat , i can compel . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj thou canst compel no more than she entreat ; 
▁ xxmaj thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers 
▁ xxmaj helen , i love thee , by my life i do ; 
▁ i swear by that which i will lose for thee 
▁ xxmaj to prove him false that says i love thee not . 
▁ xxup demetrius . i say i love thee more than he can do . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj if thou say so , withdraw , and prove it too . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj quick , come . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj lysander , whereto tends all this ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj away , you xxmaj ethiope ! 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj no , no , he will 
▁ xxmaj seem to break loose- take on as you would follow , 
▁ xxmaj but yet come not . xxmaj you are a tame man ; go ! 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj hang off , thou cat , thou burr ; vile thing , let loose , 
▁ xxmaj or i will shake thee from me like a serpent . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj why are you grown so rude ? xxmaj what change is this , 
▁ xxmaj sweet love ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj thy love ! xxmaj out , tawny xxmaj tartar , out ! 
▁ xxmaj out , loathed med'cine ! o hated potion , hence ! 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj do you not jest ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj yes , sooth ; and so do you . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj demetrius , i will keep my word with thee . 
▁ xxup demetrius . i would i had your bond ; for i perceive 
▁ a weak bond holds you ; xxmaj i 'll not trust your word . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj what , should i hurt her , strike her , kill her dead ? 
▁ xxmaj although i hate her , xxmaj i 'll not harm her so . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj what ! xxmaj can you do me greater harm than hate ? 
▁ xxmaj hate me ! wherefore ? o me ! what news , my love ? 
▁ xxmaj am not i xxmaj hermia ? xxmaj are not you xxmaj lysander ? 
▁ i am as fair now as i was erewhile . 
▁ xxmaj since night you lov'd me ; yet since night you left me . 
▁ xxmaj why then , you left me- xxup o , the gods forbid!- 
▁ xxmaj in earnest , shall i say ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj ay , by my life ! 
▁ xxmaj and never did desire to see thee more . 
▁ xxmaj therefore be out of hope , of question , of doubt ; 
▁ xxmaj be certain , nothing truer ; ' tis no jest 
▁ xxmaj that i do hate thee and love xxmaj helena . 
▁ xxup hermia . o me ! you juggler ! you cankerblossom ! 
▁ xxmaj you thief of love ! xxmaj what ! xxmaj have you come by night , 
▁ xxmaj and stol'n my love 's heart from him ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj fine , i ' faith ! 
▁ xxmaj have you no modesty , no maiden shame , 
▁ xxmaj no touch of bashfulness ? xxmaj what ! xxmaj will you tear 
▁ xxmaj impatient answers from my gentle tongue ? 
▁ xxmaj fie , fie ! you counterfeit , you puppet you ! 
▁ xxup hermia . ' puppet ! ' why so ? xxmaj ay , that way goes the game . 
▁ xxmaj now i perceive that she hath made compare 
▁ xxmaj between our statures ; she hath urg'd her height ; 
▁ xxmaj and with her personage , her tall personage , 
▁ xxmaj her height , forsooth , she hath prevail'd with him . 
▁ xxmaj and are you grown so high in his esteem 
▁ xxmaj because i am so dwarfish and so low ? 
▁ xxmaj how low am xxup i , thou painted maypole ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxmaj how low am xxup i ? i am not yet so low 
▁ xxmaj but that my nails can reach unto thine eyes . 
▁ xxup helena . i pray you , though you mock me , gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj let her not hurt me . i was never curst ; 
▁ i have no gift at all in shrewishness ; 
▁ i am a right maid for my cowardice ; 
▁ xxmaj let her not strike me . xxmaj you perhaps may think , 
▁ xxmaj because she is something lower than myself , 
▁ xxmaj that i can match her . 
▁ xxup hermia . ' lower ' hark , again . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj good xxmaj hermia , do not be so bitter with me . 
▁ i evermore did love you , xxmaj hermia , 
▁ xxmaj did ever keep your counsels , never wrong'd you ; 
▁ xxmaj save that , in love unto xxmaj demetrius , 
▁ i told him of your stealth unto this wood . 
▁ xxmaj he followed you ; for love i followed him ; 
▁ xxmaj but he hath chid me hence , and threat'ned me 
▁ xxmaj to strike me , spurn me , nay , to kill me too ; 
▁ xxmaj and now , so you will let me quiet go , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj athens will i bear my folly back , 
▁ xxmaj and follow you no further . xxmaj let me go . 
▁ xxmaj you see how simple and how fond i am . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj why , get you gone ! xxmaj who is't that hinders you ? 
▁ xxup helena . a foolish heart that i leave here behind . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj what ! with xxmaj lysander ? 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj with xxmaj demetrius . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj be not afraid ; she shall not harm thee , xxmaj helena . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj no , sir , she shall not , though you take her part . 
▁ xxup helena . xxup o , when she is angry , she is keen and shrewd ; 
▁ xxmaj she was a vixen when she went to school ; 
▁ xxmaj and , though she be but little , she is fierce . 
▁ xxup hermia . ' little ' again ! xxmaj nothing but ' low ' and ' little ' ! 
▁ xxmaj why will you suffer her to flout me thus ? 
▁ xxmaj let me come to her . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj get you gone , you dwarf ; 
▁ xxmaj you minimus , of hind'ring knot - grass made ; 
▁ xxmaj you bead , you acorn . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj you are too officious 
▁ xxmaj in her behalf that scorns your services . 
▁ xxmaj let her alone ; speak not of xxmaj helena ; 
▁ xxmaj take not her part ; for if thou dost intend 
▁ xxmaj never so little show of love to her , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt aby it . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj now she holds me not . 
▁ xxmaj now follow , if thou dar'st , to try whose right , 
▁ xxmaj of thine or mine , is most in xxmaj helena . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj follow ! xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll go with thee , cheek by jowl . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lysander and xxup demetrius 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj you , mistress , all this coil is long of you . 
▁ xxmaj nay , go not back . 
▁ xxup helena . i will not trust you , xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj nor longer stay in your curst company . 
▁ xxmaj your hands than mine are quicker for a fray ; 
▁ xxmaj my legs are longer though , to run away . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hermia . i am amaz'd , and know not what to say . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj this is thy negligence . xxmaj still thou mistak'st , 
▁ xxmaj or else committ'st thy knaveries wilfully . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj believe me , king of shadows , i mistook . 
▁ xxmaj did not you tell me i should know the man 
▁ xxmaj by the xxmaj athenian garments he had on ? 
▁ xxmaj and so far blameless proves my enterprise 
▁ xxmaj that i have ' nointed an xxmaj athenian 's eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj and so far am i glad it so did sort , 
▁ xxmaj as this their jangling i esteem a sport . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight . 
▁ xxmaj hie therefore , xxmaj robin , overcast the night ; 
▁ xxmaj the starry welkin cover thou anon 
▁ xxmaj with drooping fog as black as xxmaj acheron , 
▁ xxmaj and lead these testy rivals so astray 
▁ xxmaj as one come not within another 's way . 
▁ xxmaj like to xxmaj lysander sometime frame thy tongue , 
▁ xxmaj then stir xxmaj demetrius up with bitter wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj and sometime rail thou like xxmaj demetrius ; 
▁ xxmaj and from each other look thou lead them thus , 
▁ xxmaj till o'er their brows death - counterfeiting sleep 
▁ xxmaj with leaden legs and batty wings doth creep . 
▁ xxmaj then crush this herb into xxmaj lysander 's eye ; 
▁ xxmaj whose liquor hath this virtuous property , 
▁ xxmaj to take from thence all error with his might 
▁ xxmaj and make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight . 
▁ xxmaj when they next wake , all this derision 
▁ xxmaj shall seem a dream and fruitless vision ; 
▁ xxmaj and back to xxmaj athens shall the lovers wend 
▁ xxmaj with league whose date till death shall never end . 
▁ xxmaj whiles i in this affair do thee employ , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to my queen , and beg her xxmaj indian boy ; 
▁ xxmaj and then i will her charmed eye release 
▁ xxmaj from monster 's view , and all things shall be peace . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj my fairy lord , this must be done with haste , 
▁ xxmaj for night 's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast ; 
▁ xxmaj and yonder shines xxmaj aurora 's harbinger , 
▁ xxmaj at whose approach ghosts , wand'ring here and there , 
▁ xxmaj troop home to churchyards . xxmaj damned spirits all 
▁ xxmaj that in cross - ways and floods have burial , 
▁ xxmaj already to their wormy beds are gone , 
▁ xxmaj for fear lest day should look their shames upon ; 
▁ xxmaj they wilfully themselves exil'd from light , 
▁ xxmaj and must for aye consort with black - brow'd night . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj but we are spirits of another sort : 
▁ i with the xxmaj morning 's love have oft made sport ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like a forester , the groves may tread 
▁ xxmaj even till the eastern gate , all fiery red , 
▁ xxmaj opening on xxmaj neptune with fair blessed beams , 
▁ xxmaj turns into yellow gold his salt green streams . 
▁ xxmaj but , notwithstanding , haste , make no delay ; 
▁ xxmaj we may effect this business yet ere day . xxmaj exit xxup oberon 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj up and down , up and down , 
▁ i will lead them up and down . 
▁ i am fear'd in field and town . 
▁ xxmaj goblin , lead them up and down . 
▁ xxmaj here comes one . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lysander 

▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj where art thou , proud xxmaj demetrius ? xxmaj speak thou now . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj here , villain , drawn and ready . xxmaj where art thou ? 
▁ xxup lysander . i will be with thee straight . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj follow me , then , 
▁ xxmaj to plainer ground . xxmaj exit xxup lysander as following the voice 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup demetrius 

▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj lysander , speak again . 
▁ xxmaj thou runaway , thou coward , art thou fled ? 
▁ xxmaj speak ! xxmaj in some bush ? xxmaj where dost thou hide thy head ? 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj thou coward , art thou bragging to the stars , 
▁ xxmaj telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars , 
▁ xxmaj and wilt not come ? xxmaj come , recreant , come , thou child ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll whip thee with a rod . xxmaj he is defil'd 
▁ xxmaj that draws a sword on thee . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj yea , art thou there ? 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj follow my voice ; we 'll try no manhood here . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lysander 

▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj he goes before me , and still dares me on ; 
▁ xxmaj when i come where he calls , then he is gone . 
▁ xxmaj the villain is much lighter heel'd than xxup i. 
▁ i followed fast , but faster he did fly , 
▁ xxmaj that fallen am i in dark uneven way , 
▁ xxmaj and here will rest me . [ lies down ] xxmaj come , thou gentle day . 
▁ xxmaj for if but once thou show me thy grey light , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find xxmaj demetrius , and revenge this spite . [ sleeps ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup puck and xxup demetrius 

▁ xxup puck . xxmaj ho , ho , ho ! xxmaj coward , why com'st thou not ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj abide me , if thou dar'st ; for well i wot 
▁ xxmaj thou run'st before me , shifting every place , 
▁ xxmaj and dar'st not stand , nor look me in the face . 
▁ xxmaj where art thou now ? 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj come hither ; i am here . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj nay , then , thou mock'st me . xxmaj thou shalt buy this dear , 
▁ xxmaj if ever i thy face by daylight see ; 
▁ xxmaj now , go thy way . xxmaj faintness constraineth me 
▁ xxmaj to measure out my length on this cold bed . 
▁ xxmaj by day 's approach look to be visited . 
▁ [ lies down and sleeps ] 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup helena 

▁ xxup helena . o weary night , o long and tedious night , 
▁ xxmaj abate thy hours ! xxmaj shine comforts from the east , 
▁ xxmaj that i may back to xxmaj athens by daylight , 
▁ xxmaj from these that my poor company detest . 
▁ xxmaj and sleep , that sometimes shuts up sorrow 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj steal me awhile from mine own company . [ sleeps ] 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj yet but three ? xxmaj come one more ; 
▁ xxmaj two of both kinds makes up four . 
▁ xxmaj here she comes , curst and sad . 
▁ xxmaj cupid is a knavish lad , 
▁ xxmaj thus to make poor females mad . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hermia 

▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj never so weary , never so in woe , 
▁ xxmaj bedabbled with the dew , and torn with briers , 
▁ i can no further crawl , no further go ; 
▁ xxmaj my legs can keep no pace with my desires . 
▁ xxmaj here will i rest me till the break of day . 
▁ xxmaj heavens shield xxmaj lysander , if they mean a fray ! 
▁ [ lies down and sleeps ] 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj on the ground 
▁ xxmaj sleep sound ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll apply 
▁ xxmaj to your eye , 
▁ xxmaj gentle lover , remedy . 
▁ [ squeezing the juice on xxup lysander 's eyes ] 
▁ xxmaj when thou wak'st , 
▁ xxmaj thou tak'st 
▁ xxmaj true delight 
▁ xxmaj in the sight 
▁ xxmaj of thy former lady 's eye ; 
▁ xxmaj and the country proverb known , 
▁ xxmaj that every man should take his own , 
▁ xxmaj in your waking shall be shown : 
▁ xxmaj jack shall have xxmaj jill ; 
▁ xxmaj nought shall go ill ; 
▁ xxmaj the man shall have his mare again , and all shall be well . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the wood . xxup lysander , xxup demetrius , xxup helena , and xxup hermia , lying asleep 

 xxmaj enter xxup titania and xxmaj bottom ; xxup peaseblossom , xxup cobweb , xxup moth , xxup mustardseed , 
 and other xxup fairies attending ; 
▁ xxup oberon behind , unseen 

▁ xxup titania . xxmaj come , sit thee down upon this flow'ry bed , 
▁ xxmaj while i thy amiable cheeks do coy , 
▁ xxmaj and stick musk - roses in thy sleek smooth head , 
▁ xxmaj and kiss thy fair large ears , my gentle joy . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj where 's xxmaj peaseblossom ? 
▁ xxup peaseblossom . xxmaj ready . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj scratch my head , xxmaj peaseblossom . 
▁ xxmaj where 's xxmaj mounsieur xxmaj cobweb ? 
▁ xxup cobweb . xxmaj ready . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj mounsieur xxmaj cobweb ; good mounsieur , get you your weapons in 
▁ your hand and kill me a red - hipp'd humble - bee on the top of a 
▁ thistle ; and , good mounsieur , bring me the honey - bag . xxmaj do not fret 
▁ yourself too much in the action , mounsieur ; and , good mounsieur , 
▁ have a care the honey - bag break not ; i would be loath to have you 
▁ overflown with a honey - bag , signior . xxmaj where 's xxmaj mounsieur 
▁ xxmaj mustardseed ? 
▁ xxup mustardseed . xxmaj ready . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj give me your neaf , xxmaj mounsieur xxmaj mustardseed . xxmaj pray you , leave 
▁ your curtsy , good mounsieur . 
▁ xxup mustardseed . xxmaj what 's your will ? 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj nothing , good mounsieur , but to help xxmaj cavalery xxmaj cobweb to 
▁ scratch . i must to the barber 's , mounsieur ; for methinks i am 
▁ marvellous hairy about the face ; and i am such a tender ass , if 
▁ my hair do but tickle me i must scratch . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj what , wilt thou hear some music , my sweet love ? 
▁ xxup bottom . i have a reasonable good ear in music . xxmaj let 's have the tongs 
▁ and the bones . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj or say , sweet love , what thou desirest to eat . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj truly , a peck of provender ; i could munch your good dry 
▁ oats . xxmaj methinks i have a great desire to a bottle of hay . xxmaj good 
▁ hay , sweet hay , hath no fellow . 
▁ xxup titania . i have a venturous fairy that shall seek 
▁ xxmaj the squirrel 's hoard , and fetch thee new nuts . 
▁ xxup bottom . i had rather have a handful or two of dried peas . xxmaj but , i 
▁ pray you , let none of your people stir me ; i have an exposition 
▁ of sleep come upon me . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj sleep thou , and i will wind thee in my arms . 
▁ xxmaj fairies , be gone , and be all ways away . xxmaj exeunt xxup fairies 
▁ xxmaj so doth the woodbine the sweet honeysuckle 
▁ xxmaj gently entwist ; the female ivy so 
▁ xxmaj enrings the barky fingers of the elm . 
▁ xxup o , how i love thee ! how i dote on thee ! [ they sleep ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup puck 

▁ xxup oberon . [ advancing ] xxmaj welcome , good xxmaj robin . xxmaj seest thou this sweet 
▁ sight ? 
▁ xxmaj her dotage now i do begin to pity ; 
▁ xxmaj for , meeting her of late behind the wood , 
▁ xxmaj seeking sweet favours for this hateful fool , 
▁ i did upbraid her and fall out with her . 
▁ xxmaj for she his hairy temples then had rounded 
▁ xxmaj with coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers ; 
▁ xxmaj and that same dew which sometime on the buds 
▁ xxmaj was wo nt to swell like round and orient pearls 
▁ xxmaj stood now within the pretty flowerets ' eyes , 
▁ xxmaj like tears that did their own disgrace bewail . 
▁ xxmaj when i had at my pleasure taunted her , 
▁ xxmaj and she in mild terms begg'd my patience , 
▁ i then did ask of her her changeling child ; 
▁ xxmaj which straight she gave me , and her fairy sent 
▁ xxmaj to bear him to my bower in fairy land . 
▁ xxmaj and now i have the boy , i will undo 
▁ xxmaj this hateful imperfection of her eyes . 
▁ xxmaj and , gentle xxmaj puck , take this transformed scalp 
▁ xxmaj from off the head of this xxmaj athenian swain , 
▁ xxmaj that he awaking when the other do 
▁ xxmaj may all to xxmaj athens back again repair , 
▁ xxmaj and think no more of this night 's accidents 
▁ xxmaj but as the fierce vexation of a dream . 
▁ xxmaj but first i will release the xxmaj fairy xxmaj queen . 
▁ [ touching her eyes ] 
▁ xxmaj be as thou wast wo nt to be ; 
▁ xxmaj see as thou was wo nt to see . 
▁ xxmaj dian 's bud o'er xxmaj cupid 's flower 
▁ xxmaj hath such force and blessed power . 
▁ xxmaj now , my xxmaj titania ; wake you , my sweet queen . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj my xxmaj oberon ! xxmaj what visions have i seen ! 
▁ xxmaj methought i was enamour'd of an ass . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj there lies your love . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj how came these things to pass ? 
▁ xxup o , how mine eyes do loathe his visage now ! 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj silence awhile . xxmaj robin , take off this head . 
▁ xxmaj titania , music call ; and strike more dead 
▁ xxmaj than common sleep of all these five the sense . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj music , ho , music , such as charmeth sleep ! 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj now when thou wak'st with thine own fool 's eyes peep . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj sound , music . xxmaj come , my xxmaj queen , take hands with me , 
▁ [ music ] 
▁ xxmaj and rock the ground whereon these sleepers be . 
▁ xxmaj now thou and i are new in amity , 
▁ xxmaj and will to - morrow midnight solemnly 
▁ xxmaj dance in xxmaj duke xxmaj theseus ' house triumphantly , 
▁ xxmaj and bless it to all fair prosperity . 
▁ xxmaj there shall the pairs of faithful lovers be 
▁ xxmaj wedded , with xxmaj theseus , an in jollity . 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj fairy xxmaj king , attend and mark ; 
▁ i do hear the morning lark . 
▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj then , my xxmaj queen , in silence sad , 
▁ xxmaj trip we after night 's shade . 
▁ xxmaj we the globe can compass soon , 
▁ xxmaj swifter than the wand'ring moon . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj come , my lord ; and in our flight , 
▁ xxmaj tell me how it came this night 
▁ xxmaj that i sleeping here was found 
▁ xxmaj with these mortals on the ground . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj to the winding of horns , enter xxup theseus , xxup hippolyta , 
▁ xxup egeus , and train 

▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj go , one of you , find out the forester ; 
▁ xxmaj for now our observation is perform'd , 
▁ xxmaj and since we have the vaward of the day , 
▁ xxmaj my love shall hear the music of my hounds . 
▁ xxmaj uncouple in the western valley ; let them go . 
▁ xxmaj dispatch , i say , and find the forester . xxmaj exit an xxup attendant 
▁ xxmaj we will , fair xxmaj queen , up to the mountain 's top , 
▁ xxmaj and mark the musical confusion 
▁ xxmaj of hounds and echo in conjunction . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . i was with xxmaj hercules and xxmaj cadmus once 
▁ xxmaj when in a wood of xxmaj crete they bay'd the bear 
▁ xxmaj with hounds of xxmaj sparta ; never did i hear 
▁ xxmaj such gallant chiding , for , besides the groves , 
▁ xxmaj the skies , the fountains , every region near 
▁ xxmaj seem'd all one mutual cry . i never heard 
▁ xxmaj so musical a discord , such sweet thunder . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj my hounds are bred out of the xxmaj spartan kind , 
▁ xxmaj so flew'd , so sanded ; and their heads are hung 
▁ xxmaj with ears that sweep away the morning dew ; 
▁ xxmaj crook - knee'd and dew - lapp'd like xxmaj thessalian bulls ; 
▁ xxmaj slow in pursuit , but match'd in mouth like bells , 
▁ xxmaj each under each . a cry more tuneable 
▁ xxmaj was never holla'd to , nor cheer'd with horn , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj crete , in xxmaj sparta , nor in xxmaj thessaly . 
▁ xxmaj judge when you hear . xxmaj but , soft , what nymphs are these ? 
▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj my lord , this is my daughter here asleep , 
▁ xxmaj and this xxmaj lysander , this xxmaj demetrius is , 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj helena , old xxmaj nedar 's xxmaj helena . 
▁ i wonder of their being here together . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj no doubt they rose up early to observe 
▁ xxmaj the rite of xxmaj may ; and , hearing our intent , 
▁ xxmaj came here in grace of our solemnity . 
▁ xxmaj but speak , xxmaj egeus ; is not this the day 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj hermia should give answer of her choice ? 
▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj it is , my lord . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj go , bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns . 
▁ [ horns and shout within . xxmaj the sleepers 
▁ awake and kneel to xxup theseus ] 
▁ xxmaj good - morrow , friends . xxmaj saint xxmaj valentine is past ; 
▁ xxmaj begin these wood - birds but to couple now ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj pardon , my lord . 
▁ xxup theseus . i pray you all , stand up . 
▁ i know you two are rival enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj how comes this gentle concord in the world 
▁ xxmaj that hatred is so far from jealousy 
▁ xxmaj to sleep by hate , and fear no enmity ? 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj my lord , i shall reply amazedly , 
▁ xxmaj half sleep , half waking ; but as yet , i swear , 
▁ i can not truly say how i came here , 
▁ xxmaj but , as i think- for truly would i speak , 
▁ xxmaj and now i do bethink me , so it is- 
▁ i came with xxmaj hermia hither . xxmaj our intent 
▁ xxmaj was to be gone from xxmaj athens , where we might , 
▁ xxmaj without the peril of the xxmaj athenian law- 
▁ xxup egeus . xxmaj enough , enough , my xxmaj lord ; you have enough ; 
▁ i beg the law , the law upon his head . 
▁ xxmaj they would have stol'n away , they would , xxmaj demetrius , 
▁ xxmaj thereby to have defeated you and me : 
▁ xxmaj you of your wife , and me of my consent , 
▁ xxmaj of my consent that she should be your wife . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj my lord , fair xxmaj helen told me of their stealth , 
▁ xxmaj of this their purpose hither to this wood ; 
▁ xxmaj and i in fury hither followed them , 
▁ xxmaj fair xxmaj helena in fancy following me . 
▁ xxmaj but , my good lord , i wot not by what power- 
▁ xxmaj but by some power it is- my love to xxmaj hermia , 
▁ xxmaj melted as the snow , seems to me now 
▁ xxmaj as the remembrance of an idle gaud 
▁ xxmaj which in my childhood i did dote upon ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the faith , the virtue of my heart , 
▁ xxmaj the object and the pleasure of mine eye , 
▁ xxmaj is only xxmaj helena . xxmaj to her , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj was i betroth'd ere i saw xxmaj hermia . 
▁ xxmaj but , like a sickness , did i loathe this food ; 
▁ xxmaj but , as in health , come to my natural taste , 
▁ xxmaj now i do wish it , love it , long for it , 
▁ xxmaj and will for evermore be true to it . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj fair lovers , you are fortunately met ; 
▁ xxmaj of this discourse we more will hear anon . 
▁ xxmaj egeus , i will overbear your will ; 
▁ xxmaj for in the temple , by and by , with us 
▁ xxmaj these couples shall eternally be knit . 
▁ xxmaj and , for the morning now is something worn , 
▁ xxmaj our purpos'd hunting shall be set aside . 
▁ xxmaj away with us to xxmaj athens , three and three ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll hold a feast in great solemnity . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj hippolyta . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup theseus , xxup hippolyta , xxup egeus , and train 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj these things seem small and undistinguishable , 
▁ xxmaj like far - off mountains turned into clouds . 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj methinks i see these things with parted eye , 
▁ xxmaj when every thing seems double . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj so methinks ; 
▁ xxmaj and i have found xxmaj demetrius like a jewel , 
▁ xxmaj mine own , and not mine own . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj are you sure 
▁ xxmaj that we are awake ? xxmaj it seems to me 
▁ xxmaj that yet we sleep , we dream . xxmaj do not you think 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke was here , and bid us follow him ? 
▁ xxup hermia . xxmaj yea , and my father . 
▁ xxup helena . xxmaj and xxmaj hippolyta . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj and he did bid us follow to the temple . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj why , then , we are awake ; let 's follow him ; 
▁ xxmaj and by the way let us recount our dreams . xxmaj exeunt 
▁ xxup bottom . [ awaking ] xxmaj when my cue comes , call me , and i will answer . xxmaj my 
▁ next is ' most fair xxmaj pyramus . ' xxmaj heigh - ho ! xxmaj peter xxmaj quince ! xxmaj flute , the 
▁ bellows - mender ! xxmaj snout , the tinker ! xxmaj starveling ! xxmaj god 's my life , 
▁ stol'n hence , and left me asleep ! i have had a most rare vision . 
▁ i have had a dream , past the wit of man to say what dream it was . 
▁ xxmaj man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream . xxmaj methought 
▁ i was- there is no man can tell what . xxmaj methought i was , and 
▁ methought i had , but man is but a patch'd fool , if he will offer 
▁ to say what methought i had . xxmaj the eye of man hath not heard , the 
▁ ear of man hath not seen , man 's hand is not able to taste , his 
▁ tongue to conceive , nor his heart to report , what my dream was . i 
▁ will get xxmaj peter xxmaj quince to write a ballad of this dream . xxmaj it shall 
▁ be call'd ' bottom 's xxmaj dream , ' because it hath no bottom ; and i will 
▁ sing it in the latter end of a play , before the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxmaj peradventure , to make it the more gracious , i shall sing it at 
▁ her death . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj athens . xxup quince 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup quince , xxup flute , xxup snout , and xxup starveling 

▁ xxup quince . xxmaj have you sent to xxmaj bottom 's house ? xxmaj is he come home yet ? 
▁ xxup starveling . xxmaj he can not be heard of . xxmaj out of doubt he is transported . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj if he come not , then the play is marr'd ; it goes not 
▁ forward , doth it ? 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj it is not possible . xxmaj you have not a man in all xxmaj athens able 
▁ to discharge xxmaj pyramus but he . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj no ; he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in 
▁ xxmaj athens . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj yea , and the best person too ; and he is a very paramour for 
▁ a sweet voice . 
▁ xxup flute . xxmaj you must say ' paragon . ' a paramour is- xxmaj god bless us!- a 
▁ thing of naught . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup snug 

▁ xxup snug . xxmaj masters , the xxmaj duke is coming from the temple ; and there is two 
▁ or three lords and ladies more married . xxmaj if our sport had gone 
▁ forward , we had all been made men . 
▁ xxup flute . o sweet bully xxmaj bottom ! xxmaj thus hath he lost sixpence a day 
▁ during his life ; he could not have scaped sixpence a day . xxmaj an the 
▁ xxmaj duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing xxmaj pyramus , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ be hanged . xxmaj he would have deserved it : sixpence a day in xxmaj pyramus , 
▁ or nothing . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bottom 

▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj where are these lads ? xxmaj where are these hearts ? 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj bottom ! o most courageous day ! o most happy hour ! 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj masters , i am to discourse wonders ; but ask me not what ; 
▁ for if i tell you , i am not true xxmaj athenian . i will tell you 
▁ everything , right as it fell out . 
▁ xxup quince . xxmaj let us hear , sweet xxmaj bottom . 
▁ xxup bottom . xxmaj not a word of me . xxmaj all that i will tell you is , that the 
▁ xxmaj duke hath dined . xxmaj get your apparel together ; good strings to your 
▁ beards , new ribbons to your pumps ; meet presently at the palace ; 
▁ every man look o'er his part ; for the short and the long is , our 
▁ play is preferr'd . xxmaj in any case , let xxmaj thisby have clean linen ; and 
▁ let not him that plays the lion pare his nails , for they shall 
▁ hang out for the lion 's claws . xxmaj and , most dear actors , eat no 
▁ onions nor garlic , for we are to utter sweet breath ; and i do not 
▁ doubt but to hear them say it is a sweet comedy . xxmaj no more words . 
▁ xxmaj away , go , away ! xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj athens . xxmaj the palace of xxup theseus 

 xxmaj enter xxup theseus , xxup hippolyta , xxup philostrate , xxup lords , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup hippolyta . ' tis strange , my xxmaj theseus , that these lovers speak of . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj more strange than true . i never may believe 
▁ xxmaj these antique fables , nor these fairy toys . 
▁ xxmaj lovers and madmen have such seething brains , 
▁ xxmaj such shaping fantasies , that apprehend 
▁ xxmaj more than cool reason ever comprehends . 
▁ xxmaj the lunatic , the lover , and the poet , 
▁ xxmaj are of imagination all compact . 
▁ xxmaj one sees more devils than vast hell can hold ; 
▁ xxmaj that is the madman . xxmaj the lover , all as frantic , 
▁ xxmaj sees xxmaj helen 's beauty in a brow of xxmaj egypt . 
▁ xxmaj the poet 's eye , in a fine frenzy rolling , 
▁ xxmaj doth glance from heaven to earth , from earth to heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj and as imagination bodies forth 
▁ xxmaj the forms of things unknown , the poet 's pen 
▁ xxmaj turns them to shapes , and gives to airy nothing 
▁ a local habitation and a name . 
▁ xxmaj such tricks hath strong imagination 
▁ xxmaj that , if it would but apprehend some joy , 
▁ xxmaj it comprehends some bringer of that joy ; 
▁ xxmaj or in the night , imagining some fear , 
▁ xxmaj how easy is a bush suppos'd a bear ? 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj but all the story of the night told over , 
▁ xxmaj and all their minds transfigur'd so together , 
▁ xxmaj more witnesseth than fancy 's images , 
▁ xxmaj and grows to something of great constancy , 
▁ xxmaj but howsoever strange and admirable . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lysander , xxup demetrius , xxup hermia , and xxup helena 

▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj here come the lovers , full of joy and mirth . 
▁ xxmaj joy , gentle friends , joy and fresh days of love 
▁ xxmaj accompany your hearts ! 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj more than to us 
▁ xxmaj wait in your royal walks , your board , your bed ! 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj come now ; what masques , what dances shall we have , 
▁ xxmaj to wear away this long age of three hours 
▁ xxmaj between our after - supper and bed - time ? 
▁ xxmaj where is our usual manager of mirth ? 
▁ xxmaj what revels are in hand ? xxmaj is there no play 
▁ xxmaj to ease the anguish of a torturing hour ? 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj philostrate . 
▁ xxup philostrate . xxmaj here , mighty xxmaj theseus . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj say , what abridgment have you for this evening ? 
▁ xxmaj what masque ? what music ? xxmaj how shall we beguile 
▁ xxmaj the lazy time , if not with some delight ? 
▁ xxup philostrate . xxmaj there is a brief how many sports are ripe ; 
▁ xxmaj make choice of which your xxmaj highness will see first . 
▁ [ giving a paper ] 
▁ xxup theseus . ' the battle with the xxmaj centaurs , to be sung 
▁ xxmaj by an xxmaj athenian eunuch to the harp . ' 
▁ xxmaj we 'll none of that : that have i told my love , 
▁ xxmaj in glory of my kinsman xxmaj hercules . 
▁ ' the riot of the tipsy xxmaj bacchanals , 
▁ xxmaj tearing the xxmaj thracian singer in their rage . ' 
▁ xxmaj that is an old device , and it was play'd 
▁ xxmaj when i from xxmaj thebes came last a conqueror . 
▁ ' the thrice three xxmaj muses mourning for the death 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj learning , late deceas'd in beggary . ' 
▁ xxmaj that is some satire , keen and critical , 
▁ xxmaj not sorting with a nuptial ceremony . 
▁ ' a tedious brief scene of young xxmaj pyramus 
▁ xxmaj and his love xxmaj thisby ; very tragical mirth . ' 
▁ xxmaj merry and tragical ! tedious and brief ! 
▁ xxmaj that is hot ice and wondrous strange snow . 
▁ xxmaj how shall we find the concord of this discord ? 
▁ xxup philostrate . a play there is , my lord , some ten words long , 
▁ xxmaj which is as brief as i have known a play ; 
▁ xxmaj but by ten words , my lord , it is too long , 
▁ xxmaj which makes it tedious ; for in all the play 
▁ xxmaj there is not one word apt , one player fitted . 
▁ xxmaj and tragical , my noble lord , it is ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj pyramus therein doth kill himself . 
▁ xxmaj which when i saw rehears'd , i must confess , 
▁ xxmaj made mine eyes water ; but more merry tears 
▁ xxmaj the passion of loud laughter never shed . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj what are they that do play it ? 
▁ xxup philostrate . xxmaj hard - handed men that work in xxmaj athens here , 
▁ xxmaj which never labour'd in their minds till now ; 
▁ xxmaj and now have toil'd their unbreathed memories 
▁ xxmaj with this same play against your nuptial . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj and we will hear it . 
▁ xxup philostrate . xxmaj no , my noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj it is not for you . i have heard it over , 
▁ xxmaj and it is nothing , nothing in the world ; 
▁ xxmaj unless you can find sport in their intents , 
▁ xxmaj extremely stretch'd and conn'd with cruel pain , 
▁ xxmaj to do you service . 
▁ xxup theseus . i will hear that play ; 
▁ xxmaj for never anything can be amiss 
▁ xxmaj when simpleness and duty tender it . 
▁ xxmaj go , bring them in ; and take your places , ladies . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup philostrate 
▁ xxup hippolyta . i love not to see wretchedness o'er - charged , 
▁ xxmaj and duty in his service perishing . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj why , gentle sweet , you shall see no such thing . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj he says they can do nothing in this kind . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj the kinder we , to give them thanks for nothing . 
▁ xxmaj our sport shall be to take what they mistake ; 
▁ xxmaj and what poor duty can not do , noble respect 
▁ xxmaj takes it in might , not merit . 
▁ xxmaj where i have come , great clerks have purposed 
▁ xxmaj to greet me with premeditated welcomes ; 
▁ xxmaj where i have seen them shiver and look pale , 
▁ xxmaj make periods in the midst of sentences , 
▁ xxmaj throttle their practis'd accent in their fears , 
▁ xxmaj and , in conclusion , dumbly have broke off , 
▁ xxmaj not paying me a welcome . xxmaj trust me , sweet , 
▁ xxmaj out of this silence yet i pick'd a welcome ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the modesty of fearful duty 
▁ i read as much as from the rattling tongue 
▁ xxmaj of saucy and audacious eloquence . 
▁ xxmaj love , therefore , and tongue - tied simplicity 
▁ xxmaj in least speak most to my capacity . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup philostrate 

▁ xxup philostrate . xxup so please your xxmaj grace , the xxmaj prologue is address'd . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj let him approach . [ flourish of trumpets ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup quince as the xxup prologue 

▁ xxup prologue . xxmaj if we offend , it is with our good will . 
▁ xxmaj that you should think , we come not to offend , 
▁ xxmaj but with good will . xxmaj to show our simple skill , 
▁ xxmaj that is the true beginning of our end . 
▁ xxmaj consider then , we come but in despite . 
▁ xxmaj we do not come , as minding to content you , 
▁ xxmaj our true intent is . xxmaj all for your delight 
▁ xxmaj we are not here . xxmaj that you should here repent you , 
▁ xxmaj the actors are at band ; and , by their show , 
▁ xxmaj you shall know all , that you are like to know , 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj this fellow doth not stand upon points . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj he hath rid his prologue like a rough colt ; he knows not 
▁ the stop . a good moral , my lord : it is not enough to speak , but 
▁ to speak true . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj indeed he hath play'd on this prologue like a child on a 
▁ recorder- a sound , but not in government . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj his speech was like a tangled chain ; nothing i m paired , 
▁ but all disordered . xxmaj who is next ? 

▁ xxmaj enter , with a trumpet before them , as in dumb show , 
▁ xxup pyramus and xxup thisby , xxup wall , xxup moonshine , and xxup lion 

▁ xxup prologue . xxmaj gentles , perchance you wonder at this show ; 
▁ xxmaj but wonder on , till truth make all things plain . 
▁ xxmaj this man is xxmaj pyramus , if you would know ; 
▁ xxmaj this beauteous lady xxmaj thisby is certain . 
▁ xxmaj this man , with lime and rough - cast , doth present 
▁ xxmaj wall , that vile xxmaj wall which did these lovers sunder ; 
▁ xxmaj and through xxmaj walls chink , poor souls , they are content 
▁ xxmaj to whisper . xxmaj at the which let no man wonder . 
▁ xxmaj this man , with lanthorn , dog , and bush of thorn , 
▁ xxmaj presenteth xxmaj moonshine ; for , if you will know , 
▁ xxmaj by moonshine did these lovers think no scorn 
▁ xxmaj to meet at xxmaj ninus ' tomb , there , there to woo . 
▁ xxmaj this grisly beast , which xxmaj lion hight by name , 
▁ xxmaj the trusty xxmaj thisby , coming first by night , 
▁ xxmaj did scare away , or rather did affright ; 
▁ xxmaj and as she fled , her mantle she did fall ; 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj lion vile with bloody mouth did stain . 
▁ xxmaj anon comes xxmaj pyramus , sweet youth and tall , 
▁ xxmaj and finds his trusty xxmaj thisby 's mantle slain ; 
▁ xxmaj whereat with blade , with bloody blameful blade , 
▁ xxmaj he bravely broach'd his boiling bloody breast ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj thisby , tarrying in mulberry shade , 
▁ xxmaj his dagger drew , and died . xxmaj for all the rest , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj lion , xxmaj moonshine , xxmaj wall , and lovers twain , 
▁ xxmaj at large discourse while here they do remain . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup prologue , xxup pyramus , xxup thisby , 
▁ xxup lion , and xxup moonshine 
▁ xxup theseus . i wonder if the lion be to speak . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj no wonder , my lord : one lion may , when many asses do . 
▁ xxup wall . xxmaj in this same interlude it doth befall 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , one xxmaj snout by name , present a wall ; 
▁ xxmaj and such a wall as i would have you think 
▁ xxmaj that had in it a crannied hole or chink , 
▁ xxmaj through which the lovers , xxmaj pyramus and xxmaj thisby ,