xxbos xxmaj did whisper often very secretly . 
▁ xxmaj this loam , this rough - cast , and this stone , doth show 
▁ xxmaj that i am that same wall ; the truth is so ; 
▁ xxmaj and this the cranny is , right and sinister , 
▁ xxmaj through which the fearful lovers are to whisper . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj would you desire lime and hair to speak better ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj it is the wittiest partition that ever i heard 
▁ discourse , my lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pyramus 

▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj pyramus draws near the wall ; silence . 
▁ xxup pyramus . o grim - look'd night ! o night with hue so black ! 
▁ o night , which ever art when day is not ! 
▁ o night , o night , alack , alack , alack , 
▁ i fear my xxmaj thisby 's promise is forgot ! 
▁ xxmaj and thou , o wall , o sweet , o lovely wall , 
▁ xxmaj that stand'st between her father 's ground and mine ; 
▁ xxmaj thou wall , o wall , o sweet and lovely wall , 
▁ xxmaj show me thy chink , to blink through with mine eyne . 
▁ [ wall holds up his fingers ] 
▁ xxmaj thanks , courteous wall . xxmaj jove shield thee well for this ! 
▁ xxmaj but what see what see xxup i ? xxmaj no xxmaj thisby do i see . 
▁ o wicked wall , through whom i see no bliss , 
▁ xxmaj curs'd he thy stones for thus deceiving me ! 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj the wall , methinks , being sensible , should curse again . 
▁ xxup pyramus . xxmaj no , in truth , sir , he should not . xxmaj deceiving me is xxmaj thisby 's 
▁ cue . xxmaj she is to enter now , and i am to spy her through the wall . 
▁ xxmaj you shall see it will fall pat as i told you ; yonder she comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup thisby 

▁ xxup thisby . o wall , full often hast thou beard my moans , 
▁ xxmaj for parting my fair xxmaj pyramus and me ! 
▁ xxmaj my cherry lips have often kiss'd thy stones , 
▁ xxmaj thy stones with lime and hair knit up in thee . 
▁ xxup pyramus . i see a voice ; now will i to the chink , 
▁ xxmaj to spy an i can hear my xxmaj thisby 's face . 
▁ xxmaj thisby ! 
▁ xxup thisby . xxmaj my love ! thou art my love , i think . 
▁ xxup pyramus . xxmaj think what thou wilt , i am thy lover 's grace ; 
▁ xxmaj and like xxmaj limander am i trusty still . 
▁ xxup thisby . xxmaj and i like xxmaj helen , till the xxmaj fates me kill . 
▁ xxup pyramus . xxmaj not xxmaj shafalus to xxmaj procrus was so true . 
▁ xxup thisby . xxmaj as xxmaj shafalus to xxmaj procrus , i to you . 
▁ xxup pyramus . xxup o , kiss me through the hole of this vile wall . 
▁ xxup thisby . i kiss the wall 's hole , not your lips at all . 
▁ xxup pyramus . xxmaj wilt thou at xxmaj ninny 's tomb meet me straightway ? 
▁ xxup thisby . xxmaj tide life , tide death , i come without delay . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup pyramus and xxup thisby 
▁ xxup wall . xxmaj thus have xxup i , xxmaj wall , my part discharged so ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being done , thus xxmaj wall away doth go . xxmaj exit xxup wall 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj now is the moon used between the two neighbours . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj no remedy , my lord , when walls are so wilful to hear 
▁ without warning . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj this is the silliest stuff that ever i heard . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj the best in this kind are but shadows ; and the worst are 
▁ no worse , if imagination amend them . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj it must be your imagination then , and not theirs . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj if we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves , 
▁ they may pass for excellent men . xxmaj here come two noble beasts in , a 
▁ man and a lion . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lion and xxup moonshine 

▁ xxup lion . xxmaj you , ladies , you , whose gentle hearts do fear 
▁ xxmaj the smallest monstrous mouse that creeps on floor , 
▁ xxmaj may now , perchance , both quake and tremble here , 
▁ xxmaj when lion rough in wildest rage doth roar . 
▁ xxmaj then know that i as xxmaj snug the joiner am 
▁ a lion fell , nor else no lion 's dam ; 
▁ xxmaj for , if i should as lion come in strife 
▁ xxmaj into this place , ' twere pity on my life . 
▁ xxup theseus . a very gentle beast , and of a good conscience . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj the very best at a beast , my lord , that e'er i saw . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj this lion is a very fox for his valour . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj true ; and a goose for his discretion . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj not so , my lord ; for his valour can not carry his 
▁ discretion , and the fox carries the goose . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj his discretion , i am sure , can not carry his valour ; for 
▁ the goose carries not the fox . xxmaj it is well . xxmaj leave it to his 
▁ discretion , and let us listen to the xxmaj moon . 
▁ xxup moonshine . xxmaj this lanthorn doth the horned moon present- 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj he should have worn the horns on his head . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj he is no crescent , and his horns are invisible within the 
▁ circumference . 
▁ xxup moonshine . xxmaj this lanthorn doth the horned moon present ; 
▁ xxmaj myself the xxmaj man i ' th ' xxmaj moon do seem to be . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj this is the greatest error of all the rest ; the man should 
▁ be put into the lantern . xxmaj how is it else the man i ' th ' moon ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj he dares not come there for the candle ; for , you see , it 
▁ is already in snuff . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . i am aweary of this moon . xxmaj would he would change ! 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj it appears , by his small light of discretion , that he is 
▁ in the wane ; but yet , in courtesy , in all reason , we must stay 
▁ the time . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj proceed , xxmaj moon . 
▁ xxup moon . xxmaj all that i have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is 
▁ the moon ; xxup i , the xxmaj man i ' th ' xxmaj moon ; this thorn - bush , my thorn - bush ; 
▁ and this dog , my dog . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj why , all these should be in the lantern ; for all these 
▁ are in the moon . xxmaj but silence ; here comes xxmaj thisby . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup thisby 

▁ xxup thisby . xxmaj this is old xxmaj ninny 's tomb . xxmaj where is my love ? 
▁ xxup lion . [ roaring ] xxup o- [ thisby runs off ] 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj well roar'd , xxmaj lion . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj well run , xxmaj thisby . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj well shone , xxmaj moon . xxmaj truly , the moon shines with a good 
▁ grace . [ the xxup lion tears xxup thisby 's xxmaj mantle , and exit ] 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj well mous'd , xxmaj lion . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pyramus 

▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj and then came xxmaj pyramus . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj and so the lion vanish'd . 
▁ xxup pyramus . xxmaj sweet xxmaj moon , i thank thee for thy sunny beams ; 
▁ i thank thee , xxmaj moon , for shining now so bright ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by thy gracious golden , glittering gleams , 
▁ i trust to take of truest xxmaj thisby sight . 
▁ xxmaj but stay , o spite ! 
▁ xxmaj but mark , poor knight , 
▁ xxmaj what dreadful dole is here ! 
▁ xxmaj eyes , do you see ? 
▁ xxmaj how can it he ? 
▁ o dainty duck ! o dear ! 
▁ xxmaj thy mantle good , 
▁ xxmaj what ! stain'd with blood ? 
▁ xxmaj approach , ye xxmaj furies fell . 
▁ o xxmaj fates ! come , come ; 
▁ xxmaj cut thread and thrum ; 
▁ xxmaj quail , crush , conclude , and quell . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj this passion , and the death of a dear friend , would go 
▁ near to make a man look sad . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj beshrew my heart , but i pity the man . 
▁ xxup pyramus . o wherefore , xxmaj nature , didst thou lions frame ? 
▁ xxmaj since lion vile hath here deflower'd my dear ; 
▁ xxmaj which is- no , no- which was the fairest dame 
▁ xxmaj that liv'd , that lov'd , that lik'd , that look'd with cheer . 
▁ xxmaj come , tears , confound ; 
▁ xxmaj out , sword , and wound 
▁ xxmaj the pap of xxmaj pyramus ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , that left pap , 
▁ xxmaj where heart doth hop . [ stabs himself ] 
▁ xxmaj thus die xxup i , thus , thus , thus . 
▁ xxmaj now am i dead , 
▁ xxmaj now am i fled ; 
▁ xxmaj my soul is in the sky . 
▁ xxmaj tongue , lose thy light ; 
▁ xxmaj moon , take thy flight . [ exit xxup moonshine ] 
▁ xxmaj now die , die , die , die , die . [ dies ] 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj no die , but an ace , for him ; for he is but one . 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj less than an ace , man ; for he is dead ; he is nothing . 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj with the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and yet 
▁ prove an ass . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj how chance xxmaj moonshine is gone before xxmaj thisby comes back 
▁ and finds her lover ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup thisby 

▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj she will find him by starlight . xxmaj here she comes ; and her 
▁ passion ends the play . 
▁ xxup hippolyta . xxmaj methinks she should not use a long one for such a 
▁ xxmaj pyramus ; i hope she will be brief . 
▁ xxup demetrius . a mote will turn the balance , which xxmaj pyramus , which 
▁ xxmaj thisby , is the better- he for a man , xxmaj god warrant us : xxmaj she for a 
▁ woman , xxmaj god bless us ! 
▁ xxup lysander . xxmaj she hath spied him already with those sweet eyes . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj and thus she moans , videlicet:- 
▁ xxup thisby . xxmaj asleep , my love ? 
▁ xxmaj what , dead , my dove ? 
▁ o xxmaj pyramus , arise , 
▁ xxmaj speak , speak . xxmaj quite dumb ? 
▁ xxmaj dead , dead ? a tomb 
▁ xxmaj must cover thy sweet eyes . 
▁ xxmaj these lily lips , 
▁ xxmaj this cherry nose , 
▁ xxmaj these yellow cowslip cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj are gone , are gone ; 
▁ xxmaj lovers , make moan ; 
▁ xxmaj his eyes were green as leeks . 
▁ o xxmaj sisters xxmaj three , 
▁ xxmaj come , come to me , 
▁ xxmaj with hands as pale as milk ; 
▁ xxmaj lay them in gore , 
▁ xxmaj since you have shore 
▁ xxmaj with shears his thread of silk . 
▁ xxmaj tongue , not a word . 
▁ xxmaj come , trusty sword ; 
▁ xxmaj come , blade , my breast imbrue . [ stabs herself ] 
▁ xxmaj and farewell , friends ; 
▁ xxmaj thus xxmaj thisby ends ; 
▁ xxmaj adieu , adieu , adieu . [ dies ] 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj moonshine and xxmaj lion are left to bury the dead . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj ay , and xxmaj wall too . 
▁ xxup bottom . [ starting up ] xxmaj no , i assure you ; the wall is down that 
▁ parted their fathers . xxmaj will it please you to see the xxmaj epilogue , or 
▁ to hear a xxmaj bergomask dance between two of our company ? 
▁ xxup theseus . xxmaj no epilogue , i pray you ; for your play needs no excuse . 
▁ xxmaj never excuse ; for when the players are all dead there need none 
▁ to be blamed . xxmaj marry , if he that writ it had played xxmaj pyramus , and 
▁ hang'd himself in xxmaj thisby 's garter , it would have been a fine 
▁ tragedy . xxmaj and so it is , truly ; and very notably discharg'd . xxmaj but 
▁ come , your xxmaj bergomask ; let your epilogue alone . [ a dance ] 
▁ xxmaj the iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve . 
▁ xxmaj lovers , to bed ; ' tis almost fairy time . 
▁ i fear we shall out - sleep the coming morn , 
▁ xxmaj as much as we this night have overwatch'd . 
▁ xxmaj this palpable - gross play hath well beguil'd 
▁ xxmaj the heavy gait of night . xxmaj sweet friends , to bed . 
▁ a fortnight hold we this solemnity , 
▁ xxmaj in nightly revels and new jollity . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup puck with a broom 

▁ xxup puck . xxmaj now the hungry lion roars , 
▁ xxmaj and the wolf behowls the moon ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst the heavy ploughman snores , 
▁ xxmaj all with weary task fordone . 
▁ xxmaj now the wasted brands do glow , 
▁ xxmaj whilst the screech - owl , screeching loud , 
▁ xxmaj puts the wretch that lies in woe 
▁ xxmaj in remembrance of a shroud . 
▁ xxmaj now it is the time of night 
▁ xxmaj that the graves , all gaping wide , 
▁ xxmaj every one lets forth his sprite , 
▁ xxmaj in the church - way paths to glide . 
▁ xxmaj and we fairies , that do run 
▁ xxmaj by the triple xxmaj hecate 's team 
▁ xxmaj from the presence of the sun , 
▁ xxmaj following darkness like a dream , 
▁ xxmaj now are frolic . xxmaj not a mouse 
▁ xxmaj shall disturb this hallowed house . 
▁ i am sent with broom before , 
▁ xxmaj to sweep the dust behind the door . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup oberon and xxup titania , with all their train 

▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj through the house give glimmering light , 
▁ xxmaj by the dead and drowsy fire ; 
▁ xxmaj every elf and fairy sprite 
▁ xxmaj hop as light as bird from brier ; 
▁ xxmaj and this ditty , after me , 
▁ xxmaj sing and dance it trippingly . 
▁ xxup titania . xxmaj first , rehearse your song by rote , 
▁ xxmaj to each word a warbling note ; 
▁ xxmaj hand in hand , with fairy grace , 
▁ xxmaj will we sing , and bless this place . 

▁ [ oberon leading , the xxup fairies sing and dance ] 

▁ xxup oberon . xxmaj now , until the break of day , 
▁ xxmaj through this house each fairy stray . 
▁ xxmaj to the best bride - bed will we , 
▁ xxmaj which by us shall blessed be ; 
▁ xxmaj and the issue there create 
▁ xxmaj ever shall be fortunate . 
▁ xxmaj so shall all the couples three 
▁ xxmaj ever true in loving be ; 
▁ xxmaj and the blots of xxmaj nature 's hand 
▁ xxmaj shall not in their issue stand ; 
▁ xxmaj never mole , hare - lip , nor scar , 
▁ xxmaj nor mark prodigious , such as are 
▁ xxmaj despised in nativity , 
▁ xxmaj shall upon their children be . 
▁ xxmaj with this field - dew consecrate , 
▁ xxmaj every fairy take his gait , 
▁ xxmaj and each several chamber bless , 
▁ xxmaj through this palace , with sweet peace ; 
▁ xxmaj and the owner of it blest 
▁ xxmaj ever shall in safety rest . 
▁ xxmaj trip away ; make no stay ; 
▁ xxmaj meet me all by break of day . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup puck 
▁ xxup puck . xxmaj if we shadows have offended , 
▁ xxmaj think but this , and all is mended , 
▁ xxmaj that you have but slumb'red here 
▁ xxmaj while these visions did appear . 
▁ xxmaj and this weak and idle theme , 
▁ xxmaj no more yielding but a dream , 
▁ xxmaj gentles , do not reprehend . 
▁ xxmaj if you pardon , we will mend . 
▁ xxmaj and , as i am an honest xxmaj puck , 
▁ xxmaj if we have unearned luck 
▁ xxmaj now to scape the serpent 's tongue , 
▁ xxmaj we will make amends ere long ; 
▁ xxmaj else the xxmaj puck a liar call . 
▁ xxmaj so , good night unto you all . 
▁ xxmaj give me your hands , if we be friends , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj robin shall restore amends . xxmaj exit 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1599 


 xxup much xxup ado xxup about xxup nothing 


 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxmaj don xxmaj pedro , xxmaj prince of xxmaj arragon . 
▁ xxmaj don xxmaj john , his bastard brother . 
▁ xxmaj claudio , a young lord of xxmaj florence . 
▁ xxmaj benedick , a xxmaj young lord of xxmaj padua . 
▁ xxmaj leonato , xxmaj governor of xxmaj messina . 
▁ xxmaj antonio , an old man , his brother . 
▁ xxmaj balthasar , attendant on xxmaj don xxmaj pedro . 
▁ xxmaj borachio , follower of xxmaj don xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj conrade , follower of xxmaj don xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj friar xxmaj francis . 
▁ xxmaj dogberry , a xxmaj constable . 
▁ xxmaj verges , a xxmaj headborough . 
▁ a xxmaj sexton . 
▁ a xxmaj boy . 

▁ xxmaj hero , daughter to xxmaj leonato . 
▁ xxmaj beatrice , niece to xxmaj leonato . 
▁ xxmaj margaret , waiting gentlewoman attending on xxmaj hero . 
▁ xxmaj ursula , waiting gentlewoman attending on xxmaj hero . 

▁ xxmaj messengers , xxmaj watch , xxmaj attendants , etc . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 scene.--messina . 


 xxup act xxup i. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj an orchard before xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj leonato ( governor of xxmaj messina ) , xxmaj hero ( his xxmaj daughter ) , 
 and xxmaj beatrice ( his xxmaj niece ) , with a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj leon . i learn in this letter that xxmaj don xxmaj pedro of xxmaj arragon comes this 
▁ night to xxmaj messina . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj he is very near by this . xxmaj he was not three leagues off when i 
▁ left him . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj how many gentlemen have you lost in this action ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj but few of any sort , and none of name . 
▁ xxmaj leon . a victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full 
▁ numbers . i find here that xxmaj don xxmaj pedro hath bestowed much honour on 
▁ a young xxmaj florentine called xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj much deserv'd on his part , and equally rememb'red by xxmaj don 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj he hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age , doing 
▁ in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion . xxmaj he hath indeed 
▁ better bett'red expectation than you must expect of me to tell 
▁ you how . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj he hath an uncle here in xxmaj messina will be very much glad of it . 
▁ xxmaj mess . i have already delivered him letters , and there appears much 
▁ joy in him ; even so much that joy could not show itself modest 
▁ enough without a badge of bitterness . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj did he break out into tears ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj in great measure . 
▁ xxmaj leon . a kind overflow of kindness . xxmaj there are no faces truer than 
▁ those that are so wash'd . xxmaj how much better is it to weep at joy 
▁ than to joy at weeping ! 
▁ xxmaj beat . i pray you , is xxmaj signior xxmaj mountanto return'd from the wars or no ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . i know none of that name , lady . xxmaj there was none such in the 
▁ army of any sort . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj what is he that you ask for , niece ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj my cousin means xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick of xxmaj padua . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxup o , he 's return'd , and as pleasant as ever he was . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj he set up his bills here in xxmaj messina and challeng'd xxmaj cupid at 
▁ the flight , and my uncle 's fool , reading the challenge , 
▁ subscrib'd for xxmaj cupid and challeng'd him at the burbolt . i pray 
▁ you , how many hath he kill'd and eaten in these wars ? xxmaj but how 
▁ many hath he kill'd ? xxmaj for indeed i promised to eat all of his 
▁ killing . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj faith , niece , you tax xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick too much ; but he 'll 
▁ be meet with you , i doubt it not . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj he hath done good service , lady , in these wars . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj you had musty victual , and he hath holp to eat it . xxmaj he is a 
▁ very valiant trencherman ; he hath an excellent stomach . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj and a good soldier too , lady . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj and a good soldier to a lady ; but what is he to a lord ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . a lord to a lord , a man to a man ; stuff'd with all honourable 
▁ virtues . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj it is so indeed . xxmaj he is no less than a stuff'd man ; but for 
▁ the stuffing -- well , we are all mortal . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj you must not , sir , mistake my niece . xxmaj there is a kind of merry 
▁ war betwixt xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick and her . xxmaj they never meet but there 's 
▁ a skirmish of wit between them . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj alas , he gets nothing by that ! xxmaj in our last conflict four of 
▁ his five wits went halting off , and now is the whole man govern'd 
▁ with one ; so that if he have wit enough to keep himself warm , let 
▁ him bear it for a difference between himself and his horse ; for 
▁ it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable 
▁ creature . xxmaj who is his companion now ? xxmaj he hath every month a new 
▁ sworn brother . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj very easily possible . xxmaj he wears his faith but as the fashion 
▁ of his hat ; it ever changes with the next block . 
▁ xxmaj mess . i see , lady , the gentleman is not in your books . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj no . xxmaj an he were , i would burn my study . xxmaj but i pray you , who is 
▁ his companion ? xxmaj is there no young squarer now that will make a 
▁ voyage with him to the devil ? 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj he is most in the company of the right noble xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj beat . o xxmaj lord , he will hang upon him like a disease ! xxmaj he is sooner 
▁ caught than the pestilence , and the taker runs presently mad . xxmaj god 
▁ help the noble xxmaj claudio ! xxmaj if he have caught the xxmaj benedick , it will 
▁ cost him a thousand pound ere ' a be cured . 
▁ xxmaj mess . i will hold friends with you , lady . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj do , good friend . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj you will never run mad , niece . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj no , not till a hot xxmaj january . 
▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj don xxmaj pedro is approach'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj don xxmaj pedro , xxmaj claudio , xxmaj benedick , xxmaj balthasar , and xxmaj john the xxmaj bastard . 
▁
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj good xxmaj signior xxmaj leonato , are you come to meet your trouble ? xxmaj the 
▁ fashion of the world is to avoid cost , and you encounter it . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your xxmaj grace ; 
▁ for trouble being gone , comfort should remain ; but when you depart 
▁ from me , sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj you embrace your charge too willingly . i think this is your 
▁ daughter . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj her mother hath many times told me so . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj were you in doubt , sir , that you ask'd her ? 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick , no ; for then were you a child . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj you have it full , xxmaj benedick . xxmaj we may guess by this what you 
▁ are , being a man . xxmaj truly the lady fathers herself . xxmaj be happy , lady ; 
▁ for you are like an honourable father . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj if xxmaj signior xxmaj leonato be her father , she would not have his head 
▁ on her shoulders for all xxmaj messina , as like him as she is . 
▁ xxmaj beat . i wonder that you will still be talking , xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj nobody marks you . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj what , my dear xxmaj lady xxmaj disdain ! are you yet living ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj is it possible xxmaj disdain should die while she hath such meet 
▁ food to feed it as xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick ? xxmaj courtesy itself must convert 
▁ to disdain if you come in her presence . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj then is courtesy a turncoat . xxmaj but it is certain i am loved of 
▁ all ladies , only you excepted ; and i would i could find in my 
▁ heart that i had not a hard heart , for truly i love none . 
▁ xxmaj beat . a dear happiness to women ! xxmaj they would else have been troubled 
▁ with a pernicious suitor . i thank xxmaj god and my cold blood , i am of 
▁ your humour for that . i had rather hear my dog bark at a crow 
▁ than a man swear he loves me . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj god keep your ladyship still in that mind ! xxmaj so some gentleman 
▁ or other shall scape a predestinate scratch'd face . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj scratching could not make it worse an ' twere such a face as 
▁ yours were . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj well , you are a rare parrot - teacher . 
▁ xxmaj beat . a bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours . 
▁ xxmaj bene . i would my horse had the speed of your tongue , and so good a 
▁ continuer . xxmaj but keep your way , a xxmaj god 's name ! i have done . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj you always end with a jade 's trick . i know you of old . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj that is the sum of all , xxmaj leonato . xxmaj signior xxmaj claudio and xxmaj signior 
▁ xxmaj benedick , my dear friend xxmaj leonato hath invited you all . i tell him 
▁ we shall stay here at the least a month , and he heartly prays 
▁ some occasion may detain us longer . i dare swear he is no 
▁ hypocrite , but prays from his heart . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj if you swear , my lord , you shall not be forsworn . [ to xxmaj don 
▁ xxmaj john ] xxmaj let me bid you welcome , my lord . xxmaj being reconciled to the 
▁ xxmaj prince your brother , i owe you all duty . 
▁ xxmaj john . i thank you . i am not of many words , but i thank you . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj please it your xxmaj grace lead on ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj your hand , xxmaj leonato . xxmaj we will go together . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj manent xxmaj benedick and xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj benedick , didst thou note the daughter of xxmaj signior xxmaj leonato ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . i noted her not , but i look'd on her . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj is she not a modest young lady ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj do you question me , as an honest man should do , for my simple 
▁ true judgment ? or would you have me speak after my custom , as 
▁ being a professed tyrant to their sex ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj no . i pray thee speak in sober judgment . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj why , i ' faith , methinks she 's too low for a high praise , 
▁ too brown for a fair praise , and too little for a great praise . 
▁ xxmaj only this commendation i can afford her , that were she other 
▁ than she is , she were unhandsome , and being no other but as she 
▁ is , i do not like her . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj thou thinkest i am in sport . i pray thee tell me truly how 
▁ thou lik'st her . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj would you buy her , that you enquire after her ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj can the world buy such a jewel ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj yea , and a case to put it into . xxmaj but speak you this with a sad 
▁ brow ? or do you play the flouting xxmaj jack , to tell us xxmaj cupid is a 
▁ good hare - finder and xxmaj vulcan a rare carpenter ? xxmaj come , in what key 
▁ shall a man take you to go in the song ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj in mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever i look'd on . 
▁ xxmaj bene . i can see yet without spectacles , and i see no such matter . 
▁ xxmaj there 's her cousin , an she were not possess'd with a fury , exceeds 
▁ her as much in beauty as the first of xxmaj may doth the last of 
▁ xxmaj december . xxmaj but i hope you have no intent to turn husband , have 
▁ you ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . i would scarce trust myself , though i had sworn the 
▁ contrary , if xxmaj hero would be my wife . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj is't come to this ? xxmaj in faith , hath not the world one man but 
▁ he will wear his cap with suspicion ? xxmaj shall i never see a 
▁ bachelor of threescore again ? xxmaj go to , i ' faith ! xxmaj an thou wilt needs 
▁ thrust thy neck into a yoke , wear the print of it and sigh away 
▁ xxmaj sundays . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj don xxmaj pedro . 

▁ xxmaj look ! xxmaj don xxmaj pedro is returned to seek you . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj what secret hath held you here , that you followed not to 
▁ xxmaj leonato 's ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . i would your xxmaj grace would constrain me to tell . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . i charge thee on thy allegiance . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj you hear , xxmaj count xxmaj claudio . i can be secret as a dumb man , i 
▁ would have you think so ; but , on my allegiance -- mark you this - on 
▁ my allegiance ! he is in love . xxmaj with who ? xxmaj now that is your xxmaj grace 's 
▁ part . xxmaj mark how short his answer is : xxmaj with xxmaj hero , xxmaj leonato 's short 
▁ daughter . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if this were so , so were it utt'red . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj like the old tale , my lord : ' it is not so , nor ' twas not so ; 
▁ but indeed , xxmaj god forbid it should be so ! ' 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if my passion change not shortly , xxmaj god forbid it should be 
▁ otherwise . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj amen , if you love her ; for the lady is very well worthy . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj you speak this to fetch me in , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj by my troth , i speak my thought . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and , in faith , my lord , i spoke mine . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj and , by my two faiths and troths , my lord , i spoke mine . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj that i love her , i feel . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj that she is worthy , i know . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj that i neither feel how she should be loved , nor know how she 
▁ should be worthy , is the opinion that fire can not melt out of me . 
▁ i will die in it at the stake . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of 
▁ beauty . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and never could maintain his part but in the force of his 
▁ will . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj that a woman conceived me , i thank her ; that she brought me 
▁ up , i likewise give her most humble thanks ; but that i will have 
▁ a rechate winded in my forehead , or hang my bugle in an invisible 
▁ baldrick , all women shall pardon me . xxmaj because i will not do them 
▁ the wrong to mistrust any , i will do myself the right to trust 
▁ none ; and the fine is ( for the which i may go the finer ) , i will 
▁ live a bachelor . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . i shall see thee , ere i die , look pale with love . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj with anger , with sickness , or with hunger , my lord ; not with 
▁ love . xxmaj prove that ever i lose more blood with love than i will get 
▁ again with drinking , pick out mine eyes with a ballad - maker 's pen 
▁ and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of 
▁ blind xxmaj cupid . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj well , if ever thou dost fall from this faith , thou wilt 
▁ prove a notable argument . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj if i do , hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me ; and 
▁ he that hits me , let him be clapp'd on the shoulder and call'd 
▁ xxmaj adam . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj well , as time shall try . 
▁ ' in time the savage bull doth bear the yoke . ' 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj the savage bull may ; but if ever the sensible xxmaj benedick bear 
▁ it , pluck off the bull 's horns and set them in my forehead , and 
▁ let me be vilely painted , and in such great letters as they write 
▁ ' here is good horse to hire , ' let them signify under my sign 
▁ ' here you may see xxmaj benedick the married man . ' 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if this should ever happen , thou wouldst be horn - mad . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj nay , if xxmaj cupid have not spent all his quiver in xxmaj venice , thou 
▁ wilt quake for this shortly . 
▁ xxmaj bene . i look for an earthquake too then . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj well , you will temporize with the hours . xxmaj in the meantime , 
▁ good xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick , repair to xxmaj leonato 's , commend me to him and 
▁ tell him i will not fail him at supper ; for indeed he hath made 
▁ great preparation . 
▁ xxmaj bene . i have almost matter enough in me for such an embassage ; and 
▁ so i commit you-- 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj to the tuition of xxmaj god . xxmaj from my house -- if i had it-- 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj the sixth of xxmaj july . xxmaj your loving friend , xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj nay , mock not , mock not . xxmaj the body of your discourse is 
▁ sometime guarded with fragments , and the guards are but slightly 
▁ basted on neither . xxmaj ere you flout old ends any further , examine 
▁ your conscience . xxmaj and so i leave you . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj my liege , your xxmaj highness now may do me good . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj my love is thine to teach . xxmaj teach it but how , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt see how apt it is to learn 
▁ xxmaj any hard lesson that may do thee good . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj hath xxmaj leonato any son , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj no child but xxmaj hero ; she 's his only heir . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou affect her , xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ claud.o my lord , 
▁ xxmaj when you went onward on this ended action , 
▁ i look'd upon her with a soldier 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj that lik'd , but had a rougher task in hand 
▁ xxmaj than to drive liking to the name of love ; 
▁ xxmaj but now i am return'd and that war - thoughts 
▁ xxmaj have left their places vacant , in their rooms 
▁ xxmaj come thronging soft and delicate desires , 
▁ xxmaj all prompting me how fair young xxmaj hero is , 
▁ xxmaj saying i lik'd her ere i went to wars . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj thou wilt be like a lover presently 
▁ xxmaj and tire the hearer with a book of words . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost love fair xxmaj hero , cherish it , 
▁ xxmaj and i will break with her and with her father , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt have her . xxmaj wast not to this end 
▁ xxmaj that thou began'st to twist so fine a story ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj how sweetly you do minister to love , 
▁ xxmaj that know love 's grief by his complexion ! 
▁ xxmaj but lest my liking might too sudden seem , 
▁ i would have salv'd it with a longer treatise . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj what need the bridge much broader than the flood ? 
▁ xxmaj the fairest grant is the necessity . 
▁ xxmaj look , what will serve is fit . ' tis once , thou lovest , 
▁ xxmaj and i will fit thee with the remedy . 
▁ i know we shall have revelling to - night . 
▁ i will assume thy part in some disguise 
▁ xxmaj and tell fair xxmaj hero i am xxmaj claudio , 
▁ xxmaj and in her bosom xxmaj i 'll unclasp my heart 
▁ xxmaj and take her hearing prisoner with the force 
▁ xxmaj and strong encounter of my amorous tale . 
▁ xxmaj then after to her father will i break , 
▁ xxmaj and the conclusion is , she shall be thine . 
▁ xxmaj in practice let us put it presently . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 a room in xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter [ at one door ] xxmaj leonato and [ at another door , xxmaj antonio ] an old man , 
 brother to xxmaj leonato . 

▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj how now , brother ? xxmaj where is my cousin your son ? xxmaj hath he 
▁ provided this music ? 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj he is very busy about it . xxmaj but , brother , i can tell you strange 
▁ news that you yet dreamt not of . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj are they good ? 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj as the event stamps them ; but they have a good cover , they 
▁ show well outward . xxmaj the xxmaj prince and xxmaj count xxmaj claudio , walking in a 
▁ thick - pleached alley in mine orchard , were thus much overheard by 
▁ a man of mine : the xxmaj prince discovered to xxmaj claudio that he loved my 
▁ niece your daughter and meant to acknowledge it this night in a 
▁ dance , and if he found her accordant , he meant to take the 
▁ present time by the top and instantly break with you of it . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj hath the fellow any wit that told you this ? 
▁ xxmaj ant . a good sharp fellow . i will send for him , and question him 
▁ yourself . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj no , no . xxmaj we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself ; but 
▁ i will acquaint my daughter withal , that she may be the better 
▁ prepared for an answer , if peradventure this be true . xxmaj go you and 
▁ tell her of it . [ exit xxmaj antonio . ] 

▁ [ enter xxmaj antonio 's xxmaj son with a xxmaj musician , and others . ] 

▁ [ to the xxmaj son ] xxmaj cousin , you know what you have to do . 
▁ --[to the xxmaj musician ] xxup o , i cry you mercy , friend . xxmaj go you with me , 
▁ and i will use your skill.--good cousin , have a care this busy 
▁ time . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another room in xxmaj leonato 's house . ] 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj sir xxmaj john the xxmaj bastard and xxmaj conrade , his companion . 

▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj what the goodyear , my lord ! xxmaj why are you thus out of measure 
▁ sad ? 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj there is no measure in the occasion that breeds ; therefore 
▁ the sadness is without limit . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj you should hear reason . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj and when i have heard it , what blessings brings it ? 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj if not a present remedy , at least a patient sufferance . 
▁ xxmaj john . i wonder that thou ( being , as thou say'st thou art , born 
▁ under xxmaj saturn ) goest about to apply a moral medicine to a 
▁ mortifying mischief . i can not hide what i am : i must be sad when 
▁ i have cause , and smile at no man 's jests ; eat when i have 
▁ stomach , and wait for no man 's leisure ; sleep when i am drowsy , 
▁ and tend on no man 's business ; laugh when i am merry , and claw no 
▁ man in his humour . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj yea , but you must not make the full show of this till you may 
▁ do it without controlment . xxmaj you have of late stood out against 
▁ your brother , and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace , where 
▁ it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair 
▁ weather that you make yourself . xxmaj it is needful that you frame the 
▁ season for your own harvest . 
▁ xxmaj john . i had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace , 
▁ and it better fits my blood to be disdain'd of all than to 
▁ fashion a carriage to rob love from any . xxmaj in this , though i can not 
▁ be said to be a flattering honest man , it must not be denied but 
▁ i am a plain - dealing villain . i am trusted with a muzzle and 
▁ enfranchis'd with a clog ; therefore i have decreed not to sing in 
▁ my cage . xxmaj if i had my mouth , i would bite ; if i had my liberty , i 
▁ would do my liking . xxmaj in the meantime let me be that i am , and seek 
▁ not to alter me . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj can you make no use of your discontent ? 
▁ xxmaj john . i make all use of it , for i use it only . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj borachio . 

▁ xxmaj who comes here ? xxmaj what news , xxmaj borachio ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . i came yonder from a great supper . xxmaj the xxmaj prince your brother is 
▁ royally entertain'd by xxmaj leonato , and i can give you intelligence 
▁ of an intended marriage . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj will it serve for any model to build mischief on ? 
▁ xxmaj what is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj marry , it is your brother 's right hand . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj who ? the most exquisite xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj even he . 
▁ xxmaj john . a proper squire ! xxmaj and who ? and who ? which way looks he ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj marry , on xxmaj hero , the daughter and heir of xxmaj leonato . 
▁ xxmaj john . a very forward xxmaj march - chick ! xxmaj how came you to this ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj being entertain'd for a perfumer , as i was smoking a musty 
▁ room , comes me the xxmaj prince and xxmaj claudio , hand in hand in sad 
▁ conference . i whipt me behind the arras and there heard it agreed 
▁ upon that the xxmaj prince should woo xxmaj hero for himself , and having 
▁ obtain'd her , give her to xxmaj count xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj come , come , let us thither . xxmaj this may prove food to my 
▁ displeasure . xxmaj that young start - up hath all the glory of my 
▁ overthrow . xxmaj if i can cross him any way , i bless myself every way . 
▁ xxmaj you are both sure , and will assist me ? 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj to the death , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj let us to the great supper . xxmaj their cheer is the greater that 
▁ i am subdued . xxmaj would the cook were o ' my mind ! xxmaj shall we go prove 
▁ what 's to be done ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj we 'll wait upon your lordship . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 a hall in xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj leonato , [ antonio ] his xxmaj brother , xxmaj hero his xxmaj daughter , 
 and xxmaj beatrice his xxmaj niece , and a xxmaj kinsman ; [ also xxmaj margaret and xxmaj ursula ] . 

▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj was not xxmaj count xxmaj john here at supper ? 
▁ xxmaj ant . i saw him not . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj how tartly that gentleman looks ! i never can see him but i am 
▁ heart - burn'd an hour after . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj he is of a very melancholy disposition . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj he were an excellent man that were made just in the midway 
▁ between him and xxmaj benedick . xxmaj the one is too like an image and says 
▁ nothing , and the other too like my lady 's eldest son , evermore 
▁ tattling . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj then half xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick 's tongue in xxmaj count xxmaj john 's mouth , 
▁ and half xxmaj count xxmaj john 's melancholy in xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick 's face-- 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj with a good leg and a good foot , uncle , and money enough in 
▁ his purse , such a man would win any woman in the world -- if ' a 
▁ could get her good will . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj by my troth , niece , thou wilt never get thee a husband if 
▁ thou be so shrewd of thy tongue . 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj in faith , she 's too curst . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj too curst is more than curst . i shall lessen xxmaj god 's sending 
▁ that way , for it is said , ' god sends a curst cow short horns , ' 
▁ but to a cow too curst he sends none . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj so , by being too curst , xxmaj god will send you no horns . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj just , if he send me no husband ; for the which blessing i am 
▁ at him upon my knees every morning and evening . xxmaj lord , i could not 
▁ endure a husband with a beard on his face . i had rather lie in 
▁ the woollen ! 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj you may light on a husband that hath no beard . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj what should i do with him ? dress him in my apparel and make 
▁ him my waiting gentlewoman ? xxmaj he that hath a beard is more than a 
▁ youth , and he that hath no beard is less than a man ; and he that 
▁ is more than a youth is not for me ; and he that is less than a 
▁ man , i am not for him . xxmaj therefore i will even take sixpence in 
▁ earnest of the berrord and lead his apes into hell . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj well then , go you into hell ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj no ; but to the gate , and there will the devil meet me like an 
▁ old cuckold with horns on his head , and say ' get you to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj beatrice , get you to heaven . xxmaj here 's no place for you maids . ' xxmaj so 
▁ deliver i up my apes , and away to xxmaj saint xxmaj peter -- for the heavens . 
▁ xxmaj he shows me where the bachelors sit , and there live we as merry 
▁ as the day is long . 
▁ xxmaj ant . [ to xxmaj hero ] xxmaj well , niece , i trust you will be rul'd by your 
▁ father . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj yes faith . xxmaj it is my cousin 's duty to make cursy and say , 
▁ ' father , as it please you . ' xxmaj but yet for all that , cousin , let him 
▁ be a handsome fellow , or else make another cursy , and say , 
▁ ' father , as it please me . ' 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj well , niece , i hope to see you one day fitted with a husband . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj not till xxmaj god make men of some other metal than earth . xxmaj would 
▁ it not grieve a woman to be overmaster'd with a piece of valiant 
▁ dust ? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl ? 
▁ xxmaj no , uncle , xxmaj i 'll none . xxmaj adam 's sons are my brethren , and truly i 
▁ hold it a sin to match in my kinred . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj daughter , remember what i told you . xxmaj if the xxmaj prince do solicit 
▁ you in that kind , you know your answer . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj the fault will be in the music , cousin , if you be not wooed 
▁ in good time . xxmaj if the xxmaj prince be too important , tell him there is 
▁ measure in everything , and so dance out the answer . xxmaj for , hear me , 
▁ xxmaj hero : wooing , wedding , and repenting is as a xxmaj scotch jig , a 
▁ measure , and a cinque - pace : the first suit is hot and hasty like 
▁ a xxmaj scotch jig -- and full as fantastical ; the wedding , mannerly 
▁ modest , as a measure , full of state and ancientry ; and then comes 
▁ xxmaj repentance and with his bad legs falls into the cinque - pace 
▁ faster and faster , till he sink into his grave . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj cousin , you apprehend passing shrewdly . 
▁ xxmaj beat . i have a good eye , uncle ; i can see a church by daylight . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj the revellers are ent'ring , brother . xxmaj make good room . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj antonio . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter , [ masked , ] xxmaj don xxmaj pedro , xxmaj claudio , xxmaj benedick , and xxmaj balthasar . 
▁ [ with them enter xxmaj antonio , also masked . xxmaj after them enter ] 
▁ xxmaj don xxmaj john [ and xxmaj borachio ( without masks ) , who stand aside 
▁ and look on during the dance ] . 

▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj lady , will you walk a bout with your friend ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj so you walk softly and look sweetly and say nothing , 
▁ i am yours for the walk ; and especially when i walk away . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj with me in your company ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . i may say so when i please . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj and when please you to say so ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj when i like your favour , for xxmaj god defend the lute should be 
▁ like the case ! 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj my visor is xxmaj philemon 's roof ; within the house is xxmaj jove . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj why then , your visor should be thatch'd . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj speak low if you speak love . [ takes her aside . ] 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj well , i would you did like me . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj so would not i for your own sake , for i have many ill 
▁ qualities . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj which is one ? 
▁ xxmaj marg . i say my prayers aloud . 
▁ xxmaj balth . i love you the better . xxmaj the hearers may cry xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj god match me with a good dancer ! 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj and xxmaj god keep him out of my sight when the dance is done ! 
▁ xxmaj answer , clerk . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj no more words . xxmaj the clerk is answered . 
▁ [ takes her aside . ] 
▁ xxmaj urs . i know you well enough . xxmaj you are xxmaj signior xxmaj antonio . 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj at a word , i am not . 
▁ xxmaj urs . i know you by the waggling of your head . 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj to tell you true , i counterfeit him . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj you could never do him so ill - well unless you were the very 
▁ man . xxmaj here 's his dry hand up and down . xxmaj you are he , you are he ! 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj at a word , i am not . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj come , come , do you think i do not know you by your excellent 
▁ wit ? xxmaj can virtue hide itself ? xxmaj go to , mum you are he . xxmaj graces will 
▁ appear , and there 's an end . [ xxmaj they step aside . ] 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj will you not tell me who told you so ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj no , you shall pardon me . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj nor will you not tell me who you are ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj not now . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj that i was disdainful , and that i had my good wit out of the 
▁ ' hundred xxmaj merry xxmaj tales . ' xxmaj well , this was xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick that said 
▁ so . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj what 's he ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . i am sure you know him well enough . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj not xxup i , believe me . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj did he never make you laugh ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . i pray you , what is he ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj why , he is the xxmaj prince 's jester , a very dull fool . xxmaj only his 
▁ gift is in devising impossible slanders . xxmaj none but libertines 
▁ delight in him ; and the commendation is not in his wit , but in 
▁ his villany ; for he both pleases men and angers them , and then 
▁ they laugh at him and beat him . i am sure he is in the fleet . 
▁ i would he had boarded me . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj when i know the gentleman , xxmaj i 'll tell him what you say . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj do , do . xxmaj he 'll but break a comparison or two on me ; which 
▁ peradventure , not marked or not laugh'd at , strikes him into 
▁ melancholy ; and then there 's a partridge wing saved , for the fool 
▁ will eat no supper that night . 
▁ [ music . ] 
▁ xxmaj we must follow the leaders . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj in every good thing . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj nay , if they lead to any ill , i will leave them at the next 
▁ turning . 
▁ xxmaj dance . xxmaj exeunt ( all but xxmaj don xxmaj john , xxmaj borachio , and xxmaj claudio ] . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj sure my brother is amorous on xxmaj hero and hath withdrawn her 
▁ father to break with him about it . xxmaj the ladies follow her and but 
▁ one visor remains . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj and that is xxmaj claudio . i know him by his bearing . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj are you not xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj you know me well . i am he . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj signior , you are very near my brother in his love . xxmaj he is 
▁ enamour'd on xxmaj hero . i pray you dissuade him from her ; she is no 
▁ equal for his birth . xxmaj you may do the part of an honest man in it . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj how know you he loves her ? 
▁ xxmaj john . i heard him swear his affection . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj so did i too , and he swore he would marry her tonight . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj come , let us to the banquet . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj manet xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj thus answer i in name of xxmaj benedick 
▁ xxmaj but hear these ill news with the ears of xxmaj claudio . 
▁ [ unmasks . ] 
▁ ' tis certain so . xxmaj the xxmaj prince wooes for himself . 
▁ xxmaj friendship is constant in all other things 
▁ xxmaj save in the office and affairs of love . 
▁ xxmaj therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues ; 
▁ xxmaj let every eye negotiate for itself 
▁ xxmaj and trust no agent ; for beauty is a witch 
▁ xxmaj against whose charms faith melteth into blood . 
▁ xxmaj this is an accident of hourly proof , 
▁ xxmaj which i mistrusted not . xxmaj farewell therefore xxmaj hero ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj benedick [ unmasked ] . 

▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj count xxmaj claudio ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj yea , the same . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj come , will you go with me ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj whither ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj even to the next willow , about your own business , xxmaj county . xxmaj what 
▁ fashion will you wear the garland of ? about your neck , like an 
▁ usurer 's chain ? or under your arm , like a lieutenant 's scarf ? xxmaj you 
▁ must wear it one way , for the xxmaj prince hath got your xxmaj hero . 
▁ xxmaj claud . i wish him joy of her . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj why , that 's spoken like an honest drovier . xxmaj so they sell 
▁ bullocks . xxmaj but did you think the xxmaj prince would have served you 
▁ thus ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . i pray you leave me . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj ho ! now you strike like the blind man ! ' twas the boy that 
▁ stole your meat , and you 'll beat the post . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if it will not be , xxmaj i 'll leave you . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj alas , poor hurt fowl ! now will he creep into sedges . xxmaj but , 
▁ that my xxmaj lady xxmaj beatrice should know me , and not know me ! xxmaj the 
▁ xxmaj prince 's fool ! xxmaj ha ! it may be i go under that title because i am 
▁ merry . xxmaj yea , but so i am apt to do myself wrong . i am not so 
▁ reputed . xxmaj it is the base ( though bitter ) disposition of xxmaj beatrice 
▁ that puts the world into her person and so gives me out . xxmaj well , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be revenged as i may . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj don xxmaj pedro . 

▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj now , signior , where 's the xxmaj count ? xxmaj did you see him ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj troth , my lord , i have played the part of xxmaj lady xxmaj fame , i found 
▁ him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren . i told him , and i 
▁ think i told him true , that your xxmaj grace had got the good will of 
▁ this young lady , and i off'red him my company to a willow tree , 
▁ either to make him a garland , as being forsaken , or to bind him 
▁ up a rod , as being worthy to be whipt . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj to be whipt ? xxmaj what 's his fault ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj the flat transgression of a schoolboy who , being overjoyed 
▁ with finding a bird 's nest , shows it his companion , and he steals 
▁ it . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj wilt thou make a trust a transgression ? xxmaj the transgression is 
▁ in the stealer . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made , and the 
▁ garland too ; for the garland he might have worn himself , and the 
▁ rod he might have bestowed on you , who , as i take it , have stol'n 
▁ his bird 's nest . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . i will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj if their singing answer your saying , by my faith you say 
▁ honestly . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj the xxmaj lady xxmaj beatrice hath a quarrel to you . xxmaj the gentleman that 
▁ danc'd with her told her she is much wrong'd by you . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxup o , she misus'd me past the endurance of a block ! xxmaj an oak but 
▁ with one green leaf on it would have answered her ; my very visor 
▁ began to assume life and scold with her . xxmaj she told me , not 
▁ thinking i had been myself , that i was the xxmaj prince 's jester , that 
▁ i was duller than a great thaw ; huddling jest upon jest with such 
▁ impossible conveyance upon me that i stood like a man at a mark , 
▁ with a whole army shooting at me . xxmaj she speaks poniards , and every 
▁ word stabs . xxmaj if her breath were as terrible as her terminations , 
▁ there were no living near her ; she would infect to the xxmaj north 
▁ xxmaj star . i would not marry her though she were endowed with all that 
▁ xxmaj adam had left him before he transgress'd . xxmaj she would have made 
▁ xxmaj hercules have turn'd spit , yea , and have cleft his club to make 
▁ the fire too . xxmaj come , talk not of her . xxmaj you shall find her the 
▁ infernal xxmaj ate in good apparel . i would to xxmaj god some scholar would 
▁ conjure her , for certainly , while she is here , a man may live as 
▁ quiet in hell as in a sanctuary ; and people sin upon purpose , 
▁ because they would go thither ; so indeed all disquiet , horror , 
▁ and perturbation follows her . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj claudio and xxmaj beatrice , xxmaj leonato , xxmaj hero . 

▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj look , here she comes . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj will your xxmaj grace command me any service to the world 's end ? i 
▁ will go on the slightest errand now to the xxmaj antipodes that you can 
▁ devise to send me on ; i will fetch you a toothpicker now from the 
▁ furthest inch of xxmaj asia ; bring you the length of xxmaj prester xxmaj john 's