xxbos foot ; fetch you a hair off the great xxmaj cham 's beard ; do you any 
▁ embassage to the xxmaj pygmies -- rather than hold three words ' 
▁ conference with this harpy . xxmaj you have no employment for me ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj none , but to desire your good company . 
▁ xxmaj bene . o xxmaj god , sir , here 's a dish i love not ! i can not endure my xxmaj lady 
▁ xxmaj tongue . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj come , lady , come ; you have lost the heart of xxmaj signior 
▁ xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj indeed , my lord , he lent it me awhile , and i gave him use for 
▁ it -- a double heart for his single one . xxmaj marry , once before he won 
▁ it of me with false dice ; therefore your xxmaj grace may well say i 
▁ have lost it . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj you have put him down , lady ; you have put him down . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj so i would not he should do me , my lord , lest i should prove 
▁ the mother of fools . i have brought xxmaj count xxmaj claudio , whom you sent 
▁ me to seek . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj count ? xxmaj wherefore are you sad ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj not sad , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj how then ? sick ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj neither , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj the xxmaj count is neither sad , nor sick , nor merry , nor well ; but 
▁ civil count -- civil as an orange , and something of that jealous 
▁ complexion . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxup i ' faith , lady , i think your blazon to be true ; though xxmaj i 'll 
▁ be sworn , if he be so , his conceit is false . xxmaj here , xxmaj claudio , i 
▁ have wooed in thy name , and fair xxmaj hero is won . i have broke with 
▁ her father , and his good will obtained . xxmaj name the day of marriage , 
▁ and xxmaj god give thee joy ! 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj count , take of me my daughter , and with her my fortunes . xxmaj his 
▁ xxmaj grace hath made the match , and all grace say xxmaj amen to it ! 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj speak , xxmaj count , ' tis your cue . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj silence is the perfectest herald of joy . i were but little 
▁ happy if i could say how much . xxmaj lady , as you are mine , i am yours . 
▁ i give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj speak , cousin ; or , if you can not , stop his mouth with a kiss 
▁ and let not him speak neither . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj in faith , lady , you have a merry heart . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj yea , my lord ; i thank it , poor fool , it keeps on the windy 
▁ side of care . xxmaj my cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her 
▁ heart . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and so she doth , cousin . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj good xxmaj lord , for alliance ! xxmaj thus goes every one to the world but 
▁ xxup i , and i am sunburnt . i may sit in a corner and cry ' heigh - ho for 
▁ a husband ! ' 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj lady xxmaj beatrice , i will get you one . 
▁ xxmaj beat . i would rather have one of your father 's getting . xxmaj hath your 
▁ xxmaj grace ne'er a brother like you ? xxmaj your father got excellent 
▁ husbands , if a maid could come by them . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj will you have me , lady ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj no , my lord , unless i might have another for working days : 
▁ your xxmaj grace is too costly to wear every day . xxmaj but i beseech your 
▁ xxmaj grace pardon me . i was born to speak all mirth and no matter . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj your silence most offends me , and to be merry best becomes 
▁ you , for out o ' question you were born in a merry hour . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj no , sure , my lord , my mother cried ; but then there was a star 
▁ danc'd , and under that was i born . xxmaj cousins , xxmaj god give you joy ! 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj niece , will you look to those things i told you of ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . i cry you mercy , uncle , xxmaj by your xxmaj grace 's pardon . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj by my troth , a pleasant - spirited lady . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj there 's little of the melancholy element in her , my lord . xxmaj she 
▁ is never sad but when she sleeps , and not ever sad then ; for i 
▁ have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamt of unhappiness 
▁ and wak'd herself with laughing . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj she can not endure to hear tell of a husband . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxup o , by no means ! xxmaj she mocks all her wooers out of suit . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj she were an excellent wife for xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj leon . o xxmaj lord , my lord ! if they were but a week married , they would 
▁ talk themselves mad . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj county xxmaj claudio , when mean you to go to church ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj to - morrow , my lord . xxmaj time goes on crutches till love have all 
▁ his rites . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj not till xxmaj monday , my dear son , which is hence a just 
▁ sevennight ; and a time too brief too , to have all things answer 
▁ my mind . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj come , you shake the head at so long a breathing ; 
▁ but i warrant thee , xxmaj claudio , the time shall not go dully by us . 
▁ i will in the interim undertake one of xxmaj hercules ' labours , which 
▁ is , to bring xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick and the xxmaj lady xxmaj beatrice into a 
▁ mountain of affection th ' one with th ' other . i would fain have 
▁ it a match , and i doubt not but to fashion it if you three will 
▁ but minister such assistance as i shall give you direction . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj my lord , i am for you , though it cost me ten nights ' 
▁ watchings . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and xxup i , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj and you too , gentle xxmaj hero ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . i will do any modest office , my lord , to help my cousin to a 
▁ good husband . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj and xxmaj benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that i know . 
▁ xxmaj thus far can i praise him : he is of a noble strain , of approved 
▁ valour , and confirm'd honesty . i will teach you how to humour 
▁ your cousin , that she shall fall in love with xxmaj benedick ; and xxup i , 
▁ [ to xxmaj leonato and xxmaj claudio ] with your two helps , will so practise on 
▁ xxmaj benedick that , in despite of his quick wit and his queasy 
▁ stomach , he shall fall in love with xxmaj beatrice . xxmaj if we can do this , 
▁ xxmaj cupid is no longer an archer ; his glory shall be ours , for we are 
▁ the only love - gods . xxmaj go in with me , and i will tell you my drift . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 a hall in xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter [ don ] xxmaj john and xxmaj borachio . 

▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj it is so . xxmaj the xxmaj count xxmaj claudio shall marry the daughter of 
▁ xxmaj leonato . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj yea , my lord ; but i can cross it . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj any bar , any cross , any impediment will be med'cinable to me . 
▁ i am sick in displeasure to him , and whatsoever comes athwart his 
▁ affection ranges evenly with mine . xxmaj how canst thou cross this 
▁ marriage ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj not honestly , my lord , but so covertly that no dishonesty 
▁ shall appear in me . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj show me briefly how . 
▁ xxmaj bora . i think i told your lordship , a year since , how much i am in 
▁ the favour of xxmaj margaret , the waiting gentlewoman to xxmaj hero . 
▁ xxmaj john . i remember . 
▁ xxmaj bora . i can , at any unseasonable instant of the night , appoint her 
▁ to look out at her lady 's chamber window . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj what life is in that to be the death of this marriage ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj the poison of that lies in you to temper . xxmaj go you to the 
▁ xxmaj prince your brother ; spare not to tell him that he hath wronged 
▁ his honour in marrying the renowned xxmaj claudio ( whose estimation do 
▁ you mightily hold up ) to a contaminated stale , such a one as 
▁ xxmaj hero . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj what proof shall i make of that ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj proof enough to misuse the xxmaj prince , to vex xxmaj claudio , to undo 
▁ xxmaj hero , and kill xxmaj leonato . xxmaj look you for any other issue ? 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj only to despite them i will endeavour anything . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj go then ; find me a meet hour to draw xxmaj don xxmaj pedro and the xxmaj count 
▁ xxmaj claudio alone ; tell them that you know that xxmaj hero loves me ; intend 
▁ a kind of zeal both to the xxmaj prince and xxmaj claudio , as -- in love of 
▁ your brother 's honour , who hath made this match , and his friend 's 
▁ reputation , who is thus like to be cozen'd with the semblance of 
▁ a maid -- that you have discover'd thus . xxmaj they will scarcely believe 
▁ this without trial . xxmaj offer them instances ; which shall bear no 
▁ less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window , hear me 
▁ call xxmaj margaret xxmaj hero , hear xxmaj margaret term me xxmaj claudio ; and bring them 
▁ to see this the very night before the intended wedding ( for in 
▁ the meantime i will so fashion the matter that xxmaj hero shall be 
▁ absent ) and there shall appear such seeming truth of xxmaj hero 's 
▁ disloyalty that jealousy shall be call'd assurance and all the 
▁ preparation overthrown . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj grow this to what adverse issue it can , i will put it in 
▁ practice . xxmaj be cunning in the working this , and thy fee is a 
▁ thousand ducats . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj be you constant in the accusation , and my cunning shall not 
▁ shame me . 
▁ xxmaj john . i will presently go learn their day of marriage . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj leonato 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj benedick alone . 

▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj boy ! 

▁ [ enter xxmaj boy . ] 

▁ xxmaj boy . xxmaj signior ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj in my chamber window lies a book . xxmaj bring it hither to me in 
▁ the orchard . 
▁ xxmaj boy . i am here already , sir . 
▁ xxmaj bene . i know that , but i would have thee hence and here again . 
▁ ( exit xxmaj boy . ) i do much wonder that one man , seeing how much 
▁ another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviours to love , 
▁ will , after he hath laugh'd at such shallow follies in others , 
▁ become the argument of his own scorn by falling in love ; and such 
▁ a man is xxmaj claudio . i have known when there was no music with him 
▁ but the drum and the fife ; and now had he rather hear the tabor 
▁ and the pipe . i have known when he would have walk'd ten mile 
▁ afoot to see a good armour ; and now will he lie ten nights awake 
▁ carving the fashion of a new doublet . xxmaj he was wo nt to speak plain 
▁ and to the purpose , like an honest man and a soldier ; and now is 
▁ he turn'd orthography ; his words are a very fantastical banquet-- 
▁ just so many strange dishes . xxmaj may i be so converted and see with 
▁ these eyes ? i can not tell ; i think not . i will not be sworn but 
▁ love may transform me to an oyster ; but xxmaj i 'll take my oath on it , 
▁ till he have made an oyster of me he shall never make me such a 
▁ fool . xxmaj one woman is fair , yet i am well ; another is wise , yet i am 
▁ well ; another virtuous , yet i am well ; but till all graces be in 
▁ one woman , one woman shall not come in my grace . xxmaj rich she shall 
▁ be , that 's certain ; wise , or xxmaj i 'll none ; virtuous , or xxmaj i 'll never 
▁ cheapen her ; fair , or xxmaj i 'll never look on her ; mild , or come not 
▁ near me ; noble , or not i for an angel ; of good discourse , an 
▁ excellent musician , and her hair shall be of what colour it 
▁ please xxmaj god . xxmaj ha , the xxmaj prince and xxmaj monsieur xxmaj love ! i will hide me in 
▁ the arbour . [ hides . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj don xxmaj pedro , xxmaj leonato , xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj music [ within ] . 
▁
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj come , shall we hear this music ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj yea , my good lord . xxmaj how still the evening is , 
▁ xxmaj as hush'd on purpose to grace harmony ! 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj see you where xxmaj benedick hath hid himself ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxup o , very well , my lord . xxmaj the music ended , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll fit the kid - fox with a pennyworth . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj balthasar with xxmaj music . 

▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj come , xxmaj balthasar , we 'll hear that song again . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxup o , good my lord , tax not so bad a voice 
▁ xxmaj to slander music any more than once . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj it is the witness still of excellency 
▁ xxmaj to put a strange face on his own perfection . 
▁ i pray thee sing , and let me woo no more . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj because you talk of wooing , i will sing , 
▁ xxmaj since many a wooer doth commence his suit 
▁ xxmaj to her he thinks not worthy , yet he wooes , 
▁ xxmaj yet will he swear he loves . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj nay , pray thee come ; 
▁ xxmaj or if thou wilt hold longer argument , 
▁ xxmaj do it in notes . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj note this before my notes : 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a note of mine that 's worth the noting . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj why , these are very crotchets that he speaks ! 
▁ xxmaj note notes , forsooth , and nothing ! [ music . ] 
▁ xxmaj bene . [ aside ] xxmaj now divine air ! xxmaj now is his soul ravish'd ! xxmaj is it not 
▁ strange that sheep 's guts should hale souls out of men 's bodies ? 
▁ xxmaj well , a horn for my money , when all 's done . 
▁ [ balthasar sings . ] 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj song . 

▁ xxmaj sigh no more , ladies , sigh no more ! 
▁ xxmaj men were deceivers ever , 
▁ xxmaj one foot in sea , and one on shore ; 
▁ xxmaj to one thing constant never . 
▁ xxmaj then sigh not so , 
▁ xxmaj but let them go , 
▁ xxmaj and be you blithe and bonny , 
▁ xxmaj converting all your sounds of woe 
▁ xxmaj into xxmaj hey nonny , nonny . 

▁ xxmaj sing no more ditties , sing no moe , 
▁ xxmaj of dumps so dull and heavy ! 
▁ xxmaj the fraud of men was ever so , 
▁ xxmaj since summer first was leavy . 
▁ xxmaj then sigh not so , & c. 

▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj by my troth , a good song . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj and an ill singer , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj ha , no , no , faith ! xxmaj thou sing'st well enough for a shift . 
▁ xxmaj bene . [ aside ] xxmaj an he had been a dog that should have howl'd thus , 
▁ they would have hang'd him ; and i pray xxmaj god his bad voice bode no 
▁ mischief . i had as live have heard the night raven , come what 
▁ plague could have come after it . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj yea , marry . xxmaj dost thou hear , xxmaj balthasar ? i pray thee get us 
▁ some excellent music ; for to - morrow night we would have it at the 
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj hero 's chamber window . 
▁ xxmaj balth . xxmaj the best i can , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj do so . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj balthasar [ with xxmaj musicians ] . 
▁ xxmaj come hither , xxmaj leonato . xxmaj what was it you told me of to - day ? that 
▁ your niece xxmaj beatrice was in love with xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxup o , ay!-[aside to xxmaj pedro ] xxmaj stalk on , stalk on ; the fowl sits . 
▁ --i did never think that lady would have loved any man . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj no , nor i neither ; but most wonderful that she should so dote 
▁ on xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick , whom she hath in all outward behaviours 
▁ seem'd ever to abhor . 
▁ xxmaj bene . [ aside ] xxmaj is't possible ? xxmaj sits the wind in that corner ? 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj by my troth , my lord , i can not tell what to think of it , but 
▁ that she loves him with an enraged affection . xxmaj it is past the 
▁ infinite of thought . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj may be she doth but counterfeit . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj faith , like enough . 
▁ xxmaj leon . o xxmaj god , counterfeit ? xxmaj there was never counterfeit of passion 
▁ came so near the life of passion as she discovers it . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj why , what effects of passion shows she ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . [ aside ] xxmaj bait the hook well ! xxmaj this fish will bite . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj what effects , my lord ? xxmaj she will sit you -- you heard my 
▁ daughter tell you how . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj she did indeed . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj how , how , i pray you ? xxmaj you amaze me . i would have thought her 
▁ spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection . 
▁ xxmaj leon . i would have sworn it had , my lord -- especially against 
▁ xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj bene . [ aside ] i should think this a gull but that the white - bearded 
▁ fellow speaks it . xxmaj knavery can not , sure , hide himself in such 
▁ reverence . 
▁ xxmaj claud . [ aside ] xxmaj he hath ta'en th ' infection . xxmaj hold it up . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj hath she made her affection known to xxmaj benedick ? 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj no , and swears she never will . xxmaj that 's her torment . 
▁ xxmaj claud . ' tis true indeed . xxmaj so your daughter says . ' shall xxup i , ' says 
▁ she , ' that have so oft encount'red him with scorn , write to him 
▁ that i love him ? ' " 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj this says she now when she is beginning to write to him ; for 
▁ she 'll be up twenty times a night , and there will she sit in her 
▁ smock till she have writ a sheet of paper . xxmaj my daughter tells us 
▁ all . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj now you talk of a sheet of paper , i remember a pretty jest 
▁ your daughter told us of . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxup o , when she had writ it , and was reading it over , she found 
▁ ' benedick ' and ' beatrice ' between the sheet ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj that . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxup o , she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence , rail'd at 
▁ herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she 
▁ knew would flout her . ' i measure him , ' says she , ' by my own 
▁ spirit ; for i should flout him if he writ to me . xxmaj yea , though i 
▁ love him , i should . ' 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj then down upon her knees she falls , weeps , sobs , beats her 
▁ heart , tears her hair , prays , curses--'o sweet xxmaj benedick ! xxmaj god give 
▁ me patience ! ' 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj she doth indeed ; my daughter says so . xxmaj and the ecstasy hath so 
▁ much overborne her that my daughter is sometime afeard she will 
▁ do a desperate outrage to herself . xxmaj it is very true . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj it were good that xxmaj benedick knew of it by some other , if she 
▁ will not discover it . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj to what end ? xxmaj he would make but a sport of it and torment the 
▁ poor lady worse . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj an he should , it were an alms to hang him ! xxmaj she 's an 
▁ excellent sweet lady , and ( out of all suspicion ) she is virtuous . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and she is exceeding wise . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj in everything but in loving xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxup o , my lord , wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body , 
▁ we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory . i am sorry 
▁ for her , as i have just cause , being her uncle and her guardian . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . i would she had bestowed this dotage on me . i would have 
▁ daff'd all other respects and made her half myself . i pray you 
▁ tell xxmaj benedick of it and hear what ' a will say . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj were it good , think you ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj hero thinks surely she will die ; for she says she will die 
▁ if he love her not , and she will die ere she make her love known , 
▁ and she will die , if he woo her , rather than she will bate one 
▁ breath of her accustomed crossness . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj she doth well . xxmaj if she should make tender of her love , ' tis 
▁ very possible he 'll scorn it ; for the man ( as you know all ) hath 
▁ a contemptible spirit . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj he is a very proper man . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj he hath indeed a good outward happiness . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj before xxmaj god ! and in my mind , very wise . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj he doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and i take him to be valiant . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj as xxmaj hector , i assure you ; and in the managing of quarrels you 
▁ may say he is wise , for either he avoids them with great 
▁ discretion , or undertakes them with a most xxmaj christianlike fear . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj if he do fear xxmaj god , ' a must necessarily keep peace . xxmaj if he 
▁ break the peace , he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and 
▁ trembling . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj and so will he do ; for the man doth fear xxmaj god , howsoever it 
▁ seems not in him by some large jests he will make . xxmaj well , i am 
▁ sorry for your niece . xxmaj shall we go seek xxmaj benedick and tell him of 
▁ her love ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj never tell him , my lord . xxmaj let her wear it out with good 
▁ counsel . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj nay , that 's impossible ; she may wear her heart out first . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj well , we will hear further of it by your daughter . xxmaj let it 
▁ cool the while . i love xxmaj benedick well , and i could wish he would 
▁ modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a 
▁ lady . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj my lord , will you .walk ? xxmaj dinner is ready . 
▁ [ they walk away . ] 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if he dote on her upon this , i will never trust my 
▁ expectation . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj let there be the same net spread for her , and that must your 
▁ daughter and her gentlewomen carry . xxmaj the sport will be , when they 
▁ hold one an opinion of another 's dotage , and no such matter . 
▁ xxmaj that 's the scene that i would see , which will be merely a dumb 
▁ show . xxmaj let us send her to call him in to dinner . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ don xxmaj pedro , xxmaj claudio , and xxmaj leonato ] . 

▁ [ benedick advances from the arbour . ] 

▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj this can be no trick . xxmaj the conference was sadly borne ; they 
▁ have the truth of this from xxmaj hero ; they seem to pity the lady . 
▁ xxmaj it seems her affections have their full bent . xxmaj love me ? xxmaj why , it 
▁ must be requited . i hear how i am censur'd . xxmaj they say i will bear 
▁ myself proudly if i perceive the love come from her . xxmaj they say too 
▁ that she will rather die than give any sign of affection . i did 
▁ never think to marry . i must not seem proud . xxmaj happy are they that 
▁ hear their detractions and can put them to mending . xxmaj they say the 
▁ lady is fair--'tis a truth , i can bear them witness ; and virtuous 
▁ --'tis so , i can not reprove it ; and wise , but for loving me -- by 
▁ my troth , it is no addition to her wit , nor no great argument of 
▁ her folly , for i will be horribly in love with her . i may chance 
▁ have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because i 
▁ have railed so long against marriage . xxmaj but doth not the appetite 
▁ alters ? a man loves the meat in his youth that he can not endure 
▁ in his age . xxmaj shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of 
▁ the brain awe a man from the career of his humour ? xxmaj no , the world 
▁ must be peopled . xxmaj when i said i would die a bachelor , i did not 
▁ think i should live till i were married . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj beatrice . 

▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj beatrice . xxmaj by this day , she 's a fair lady ! i do spy 
▁ some marks of love in her . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj against my will i am sent to bid xxmaj you come in to dinner . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj fair xxmaj beatrice , i thank you for your pains . 
▁ xxmaj beat . i took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to 
▁ thank me . xxmaj if it had been painful , i would not have come . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj you take pleasure then in the message ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj yea , just so much as you may take upon a knives point , and 
▁ choke a daw withal . xxmaj you have no stomach , signior . xxmaj fare you well . 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj ha ! ' against my will i am sent to bid you come in to dinner . ' 
▁ xxmaj there 's a double meaning in that . ' i took no more pains for those 
▁ thanks than you took pains to thank me . ' xxmaj that 's as much as to 
▁ say , ' any pains that i take for you is as easy as thanks . ' xxmaj if i 
▁ do not take pity of her , i am a villain ; if i do not love her , i 
▁ am a xxmaj jew . i will go get her picture . xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj leonato 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hero and two xxmaj gentlewomen , xxmaj margaret and xxmaj ursula . 

▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj good xxmaj margaret , run thee to the parlour . 
▁ xxmaj there shalt thou find my cousin xxmaj beatrice 
▁ xxmaj proposing with the xxmaj prince and xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj whisper her ear and tell her , i and xxmaj ursley 
▁ xxmaj walk in the orchard , and our whole discourse 
▁ xxmaj is all of her . xxmaj say that thou overheard'st us ; 
▁ xxmaj and bid her steal into the pleached bower , 
▁ xxmaj where honeysuckles , ripened by the sun , 
▁ xxmaj forbid the sun to enter -- like favourites , 
▁ xxmaj made proud by princes , that advance their pride 
▁ xxmaj against that power that bred it . xxmaj there will she hide her 
▁ xxmaj to listen our propose . xxmaj this is thy office . 
▁ xxmaj bear thee well in it and leave us alone . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj i 'll make her come , i warrant you , presently . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj now , xxmaj ursula , when xxmaj beatrice doth come , 
▁ xxmaj as we do trace this alley up and down , 
▁ xxmaj our talk must only be of xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj when i do name him , let it be thy part 
▁ xxmaj to praise him more than ever man did merit . 
▁ xxmaj my talk to thee must be how xxmaj benedick 
▁ xxmaj is sick in love with xxmaj beatrice . xxmaj of this matter 
▁ xxmaj is little xxmaj cupid 's crafty arrow made , 
▁ xxmaj that only wounds by hearsay . 

▁ [ enter xxmaj beatrice . ] 

▁ xxmaj now begin ; 
▁ xxmaj for look where xxmaj beatrice like a lapwing runs 
▁ xxmaj close by the ground , to hear our conference . 

▁ [ beatrice hides in the arbour ] . 

▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj the pleasant'st angling is to see the fish 
▁ xxmaj cut with her golden oars the silver stream 
▁ xxmaj and greedily devour the treacherous bait . 
▁ xxmaj so angle we for xxmaj beatrice , who even now 
▁ xxmaj is couched in the woodbine coverture . 
▁ xxmaj fear you not my part of the dialogue . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj then go we near her , that her ear lose nothing 
▁ xxmaj of the false sweet bait that we lay for it . 
▁ [ they approach the arbour . ] 
▁ xxmaj no , truly , xxmaj ursula , she is too disdainful . 
▁ i know her spirits are as coy and wild 
▁ xxmaj as haggards of the rock . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj but are you sure 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj benedick loves xxmaj beatrice so entirely ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj so says the xxmaj prince , and my new - trothed lord . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj and did they bid you tell her of it , madam ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj they did entreat me to acquaint her of it ; 
▁ xxmaj but i persuaded them , if they lov'd xxmaj benedick , 
▁ xxmaj to wish him wrestle with affection 
▁ xxmaj and never to let xxmaj beatrice know of it . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj why did you so ? xxmaj doth not the gentleman 
▁ xxmaj deserve as full , as fortunate a bed 
▁ xxmaj as ever xxmaj beatrice shall couch upon ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . o god of love ! i know he doth deserve 
▁ xxmaj as much as may be yielded to a man : 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj nature never fram'd a woman 's heart 
▁ xxmaj of prouder stuff than that of xxmaj beatrice . 
▁ xxmaj disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes , 
▁ xxmaj misprizing what they look on ; and her wit 
▁ xxmaj values itself so highly that to her 
▁ xxmaj all matter else seems weak . xxmaj she can not love , 
▁ xxmaj nor take no shape nor project of affection , 
▁ xxmaj she is so self - endeared . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj sure i think so ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore certainly it were not good 
▁ xxmaj she knew his love , lest she 'll make sport at it . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj why , you speak truth . i never yet saw man , 
▁ xxmaj how wise , how noble , young , how rarely featur'd , 
▁ xxmaj but she would spell him backward . xxmaj if fair - fac'd , 
▁ xxmaj she would swear the gentleman should be her sister ; 
▁ xxmaj if black , why , xxmaj nature , drawing of an antic , 
▁ xxmaj made a foul blot ; if tall , a lance ill - headed ; 
▁ xxmaj if low , an agate very vilely cut ; 
▁ xxmaj if speaking , why , a vane blown with all winds ; 
▁ xxmaj if silent , why , a block moved with none . 
▁ xxmaj so turns she every man the wrong side out 
▁ xxmaj and never gives to truth and virtue that 
▁ xxmaj which simpleness and merit purchaseth . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj sure , sure , such carping is not commendable . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj no , not to be so odd , and from all fashions , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj beatrice is , can not be commendable . 
▁ xxmaj but who dare tell her so ? xxmaj if i should speak , 
▁ xxmaj she would mock me into air ; xxup o , she would laugh me 
▁ xxmaj out of myself , press me to death with wit ! 
▁ xxmaj therefore let xxmaj benedick , like cover'd fire , 
▁ xxmaj consume away in sighs , waste inwardly . 
▁ xxmaj it were a better death than die with mocks , 
▁ xxmaj which is as bad as die with tickling . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj yet tell her of it . xxmaj hear what she will say . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj no ; rather i will go to xxmaj benedick 
▁ xxmaj and counsel him to fight against his passion . 
▁ xxmaj and truly , xxmaj i 'll devise some honest slanders 
▁ xxmaj to stain my cousin with . xxmaj one doth not know 
▁ xxmaj how much an ill word may empoison liking . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxup o , do not do your cousin such a wrong ! 
▁ xxmaj she can not be so much without true judgment 
▁ ( having so swift and excellent a wit 
▁ xxmaj as she is priz'd to have ) as to refuse 
▁ xxmaj so rare a gentleman as xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj he is the only man of xxmaj italy , 
▁ xxmaj always excepted my dear xxmaj claudio . 
▁ xxmaj urs . i pray you be not angry with me , madam , 
▁ xxmaj speaking my fancy : xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick , 
▁ xxmaj for shape , for bearing , argument , and valour , 
▁ xxmaj goes foremost in report through xxmaj italy . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj indeed he hath an excellent good name . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj his excellence did earn it ere he had it . 
▁ xxmaj when are you married , madam ? 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj why , every day to - morrow ! xxmaj come , go in . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll show thee some attires , and have thy counsel 
▁ xxmaj which is the best to furnish me to - morrow . 
▁ [ they walk away . ] 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj she 's lim'd , i warrant you ! xxmaj we have caught her , madam . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj if it prove so , then loving goes by haps ; 
▁ xxmaj some xxmaj cupid kills with arrows , some with traps . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ hero and xxmaj ursula ] . 

▁ [ beatrice advances from the arbour . ] 

▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj what fire is in mine ears ? xxmaj can this be true ? 
▁ xxmaj stand i condemn'd for pride and scorn so much ? 
▁ xxmaj contempt , farewell ! and maiden pride , adieu ! 
▁ xxmaj no glory lives behind the back of such . 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj benedick , love on ; i will requite thee , 
▁ xxmaj taming my wild heart to thy loving hand . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost love , my kindness shall incite thee 
▁ xxmaj to bind our loves up in a holy band ; 
▁ xxmaj for others say thou dost deserve , and i 
▁ xxmaj believe it better than reportingly . xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 a room in xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj don xxmaj pedro , xxmaj claudio , xxmaj benedick , and xxmaj leonato . 

▁ xxmaj pedro . i do but stay till your marriage be consummate , and then go 
▁ i toward xxmaj arragon . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj i 'll bring you thither , my lord , if you 'll vouchsafe me . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj nay , that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your 
▁ marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear 
▁ it . i will only be bold with xxmaj benedick for his company ; for , from 
▁ the crown of his head to the sole of his foot , he is all mirth . 
▁ xxmaj he hath twice or thrice cut xxmaj cupid 's bowstring , and the little 
▁ hangman dare not shoot at him . xxmaj he hath a heart as sound as a 
▁ bell ; and his tongue is the clapper , for what his heart thinks , 
▁ his tongue speaks . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj gallants , i am not as i have been . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj so say xxup i. xxmaj methinks you are sadder . 
▁ xxmaj claud . i hope he be in love . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj hang him , truant ! xxmaj there 's no true drop of blood in him to be 
▁ truly touch'd with love . xxmaj if he be sad , he wants money . 
▁ xxmaj bene . i have the toothache . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj draw it . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj hang it ! 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj you must hang it first and draw it afterwards . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj what ? sigh for the toothache ? 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj where is but a humour or a worm . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj well , every one can master a grief but he that has it . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj yet say i he is in love . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj there is no appearance of fancy in him , unless it be a fancy 
▁ that he hath to strange disguises ; as to be a xxmaj dutchman to - day , a 
▁ xxmaj frenchman to - morrow ; or in the shape of two countries at once , as 
▁ a xxmaj german from the waist downward , all slops , and a xxmaj spaniard from 
▁ the hip upward , no doublet . xxmaj unless he have a fancy to this 
▁ foolery , as it appears he hath , he is no fool for fancy , as you 
▁ would have it appear he is . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if he be not in love with some woman , there is no believing 
▁ old signs . ' a brushes his hat o ' mornings . xxmaj what should that bode ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj hath any man seen him at the barber 's ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj no , but the barber 's man hath been seen with him , and the 
▁ old ornament of his cheek hath already stuff'd tennis balls . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj indeed he looks younger than he did , by the loss of a beard . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj nay , ' a rubs himself with civet . xxmaj can you smell him out by 
▁ that ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj that 's as much as to say , the sweet youth 's in love . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj the greatest note of it is his melancholy . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and when was he wo nt to wash his face ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj yea , or to paint himself ? for the which i hear what they say 
▁ of him . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj nay , but his jesting spirit , which is new - crept into a 
▁ lutestring , and now govern'd by stops . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj indeed that tells a heavy tale for him . xxmaj conclude , conclude , 
▁ he is in love . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj nay , but i know who loves him . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj that would i know too . i warrant , one that knows him not . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj yes , and his ill conditions ; and in despite of all , dies for 
▁ him . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj she shall be buried with her face upwards . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj yet is this no charm for the toothache . xxmaj old signior , walk 
▁ aside with me . i have studied eight or nine wise words to speak 
▁ to you , which these hobby - horses must not hear . 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj benedick and xxmaj leonato . ] 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj for my life , to break with him about xxmaj beatrice ! 
▁ xxmaj claud . ' tis even so . xxmaj hero and xxmaj margaret have by this played their 
▁ parts with xxmaj beatrice , and then the two bears will not bite one 
▁ another when they meet . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj john the xxmaj bastard . 

▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj my lord and brother , xxmaj god save you . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj good den , brother . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj if your leisure serv'd , i would speak with you . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj in private ? 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj if it please you . xxmaj yet xxmaj count xxmaj claudio may hear , for what i 
▁ would speak of concerns him . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj john . [ to xxmaj claudio ] xxmaj means your lordship to be married tomorrow ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj you know he does . 
▁ xxmaj john . i know not that , when he knows what i know . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if there be any impediment , i pray you discover it . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj you may think i love you not . xxmaj let that appear hereafter , and 
▁ aim better at me by that i now will manifest . xxmaj for my brother , i 
▁ think he holds you well and in dearness of heart hath holp to 
▁ effect your ensuing marriage -- surely suit ill spent and labour 
▁ ill bestowed ! 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj why , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj john . i came hither to tell you , and , circumstances short'ned ( for 
▁ she has been too long a - talking of ) , the lady is disloyal . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj who ? xxmaj hero ? 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj even she -- leonato 's xxmaj hero , your xxmaj hero , every man 's xxmaj hero . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj disloyal ? 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj the word is too good to paint out her wickedness . i could say 
▁ she were worse ; think you of a worse title , and i will fit her to 
▁ it . xxmaj wonder not till further warrant . xxmaj go but with me to - night , you 
▁ shall see her chamber window ent'red , even the night before her 
▁ wedding day . xxmaj if you love her then , to - morrow we d her . xxmaj but it 
▁ would better fit your honour to change your mind . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj may this be so ? 
▁ xxmaj pedro . i will not think it . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj if you dare not trust that you see , confess not that you 
▁ know . xxmaj if you will follow me , i will show you enough ; and when you 
▁ have seen more and heard more , proceed accordingly . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj if i see anything to - night why i should not marry her 
▁ to - morrow , in the congregation where i should we d , there will i 
▁ shame her . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj and , as i wooed for thee to obtain her , i will join with 
▁ thee to disgrace her . 
▁ xxmaj john . i will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses . 
▁ xxmaj bear it coldly but till midnight , and let the issue show itself . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . o day untowardly turned ! 
▁ xxmaj claud . o mischief strangely thwarting ! 
▁ xxmaj john . o plague right well prevented ! 
▁ xxmaj so will you say when you have seen the xxmaj sequel . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj dogberry and his compartner [ verges ] , with the xxmaj watch . 

▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj are you good men and true ? 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj yea , or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation , 
▁ body and soul . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj nay , that were a punishment too good for them if they should 
▁ have any allegiance in them , being chosen for the xxmaj prince 's watch . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj well , give them their charge , neighbour xxmaj dogberry . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj first , who think you the most desartless man to be constable ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj hugh xxmaj oatcake , sir , or xxmaj george xxmaj seacoal ; for they can write 
▁ and read . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj come hither , neighbour xxmaj seacoal . xxmaj god hath bless'd you with a 
▁ good name . xxmaj to be a well - favoured man is the gift of fortune , but 
▁ to write and read comes by nature . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj both which , xxmaj master xxmaj constable-- 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj you have . i knew it would be your answer . xxmaj well , for your 
▁ favour , sir , why , give xxmaj god thanks and make no boast of it ; and 
▁ for your writing and reading , let that appear when there is no 
▁ need of such vanity . xxmaj you are thought here to be the most 
▁ senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch . xxmaj therefore 
▁ bear you the lanthorn . xxmaj this is your charge : you shall comprehend 
▁ all vagrom men ; you are to bid any man stand , in the xxmaj prince 's 
▁ name . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj how if ' a will not stand ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj why then , take no note of him , but let him go , and presently 
▁ call the rest of the watch together and thank xxmaj god you are rid of 
▁ a knave . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj if he will not stand when he is bidden , he is none of the 
▁ xxmaj prince 's subjects . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj true , and they are to meddle with none but the xxmaj prince 's 
▁ subjects . xxmaj you shall also make no noise in the streets ; for for 
▁ the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable , and not to be 
▁ endured . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj we will rather sleep than talk . xxmaj we know what belongs to 
▁ a watch . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj why , you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman , for i 
▁ can not see how sleeping should offend . xxmaj only have a care that your 
▁ bills be not stol'n . xxmaj well , you are to call at all the alehouses 
▁ and bid those that are drunk get them to bed . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj how if they will not ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj why then , let them alone till they are sober . xxmaj if they make you 
▁ not then the better answer , xxmaj you may say they are not the men you 
▁ took them for . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj well , sir . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj if you meet a thief , you may suspect him , by virtue of your 
▁ office , to be no true man ; and for such kind of men , the less you 
▁ meddle or make with them , why , the more your honesty . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj if we know him to be a thief , shall we not lay hands on 
▁ him ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj truly , by your office you may ; but i think they that touch 
▁ pitch will be defil'd . xxmaj the most peaceable way for you , if you do 
▁ take a thief , is to let him show himself what he is , and steal 
▁ out of your company . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj you have been always called a merciful man , partner . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj truly , i would not hang a dog by my will , much more a man who 
▁ hath any honesty in him . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj if you hear a child cry in the night , you must call to the 
▁ nurse and bid her still it . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj how if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj why then , depart in peace and let the child wake her with 
▁ crying ; for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baes will 
▁ never answer a calf when he bleats . 
▁ xxmaj verg . ' tis very true . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj this is the end of the charge : you , constable , are to present 
▁ the xxmaj prince 's own person . xxmaj if you meet the xxmaj prince in the night , 
▁ you may stay him . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj nay , by'r lady , that i think ' a can not . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj five shillings to one on't with any man that knows the 
▁ statutes , he may stay him ! xxmaj marry , not without the xxmaj prince be 
▁ willing ; for indeed the watch ought to offend no man , and it is 
▁ an offence to stay a man against his will . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj by'r lady , i think it be so . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj ha , ah , ha ! xxmaj well , masters , good night . xxmaj an there be any matter 
▁ of weight chances , call up me . xxmaj keep your fellows ' counsels and 
▁ your own , and good night . xxmaj come , neighbour . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj well , masters , we hear our charge . xxmaj let us go sit here 
▁ upon the church bench till two , and then all to bed . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj one word more , honest neighbours . i pray you watch about 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj leonato 's door ; for the wedding being there tomorrow , 
▁ there is a great coil to - night . xxmaj adieu . xxmaj be vigitant , i beseech 
▁ you . xxmaj exeunt [ dogberry and xxmaj verges ] . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj borachio and xxmaj conrade . 

▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj what , xxmaj conrade ! 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . [ aside ] xxmaj peace ! stir not ! 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj conrade , i say ! 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj here , man . i am at thy elbow . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj mass , and my elbow itch'd ! i thought there would a scab 
▁ follow . 
▁ xxmaj con . i will owe thee an answer for that ; and now forward with thy 
▁ tale . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj stand thee close then under this penthouse , for it drizzles 
▁ rain , and i will , like a true drunkard , utter all to thee . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . [ aside ] xxmaj some treason , masters . xxmaj yet stand close . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj therefore know i have earned of xxmaj don xxmaj john a thousand ducats . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj is it possible that any villany should be so dear ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villany 
▁ should be so rich ; for when rich villains have need of poor ones , 
▁ poor ones may make what price they will . 
▁ xxmaj con . i wonder at it . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj that shows thou art unconfirm'd . xxmaj thou knowest that the 
▁ fashion of a doublet , or a hat , or a cloak , is nothing to a man . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj yes , it is apparel . 
▁ xxmaj bora . i mean the fashion . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj yes , the fashion is the fashion . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj tush ! i may as well say the fool 's the fool . xxmaj but seest thou 
▁ not what a deformed thief this fashion is ? 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . [ aside ] i know that xxmaj deformed . ' a bas been a vile thief 
▁ this seven year ; ' a goes up and down like a gentleman . i remember 
▁ his name . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj didst thou not hear somebody ? 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj no ; ' twas the vane on the house . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj seest thou not , i say , what a deformed thief this fashion is ? 
▁ how giddily ' a turns about all the hot - bloods between fourteen 
▁ and five - and - thirty ? sometimes fashioning them like xxmaj pharaoh 's 
▁ soldiers in the reechy painting , sometime like god xxmaj bel 's priests 
▁ in the old church window , sometime like the shaven xxmaj hercules in 
▁ the smirch'd worm - eaten tapestry , where his codpiece seems as 
▁ massy as his club ? 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj all this i see ; and i see that the fashion wears out more 
▁ apparel than the man . xxmaj but art not thou thyself giddy with the 
▁ fashion too , that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling 
▁ me of the fashion ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj not so neither . xxmaj but know that i have to - night wooed xxmaj margaret , 
▁ the xxmaj lady xxmaj hero 's gentlewoman , by the name of xxmaj hero . xxmaj she leans me 
▁ out at her mistress ' chamber window , bids me a thousand times 
▁ good night -- i tell this tale vilely ; i should first tell thee how 
▁ the xxmaj prince , xxmaj claudio and my master , planted and placed and 
▁ possessed by my master xxmaj don xxmaj john , saw afar off in the orchard this 
▁ amiable encounter . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj and thought they xxmaj margaret was xxmaj hero ? 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj two of them did , the xxmaj prince and xxmaj claudio ; but the devil my 
▁ master knew she was xxmaj margaret ; and partly by his oaths , which 
▁ first possess'd them , partly by the dark night , which did deceive 
▁ them , but chiefly by my villany , which did confirm any slander 
▁ that xxmaj don xxmaj john had made , away went xxmaj claudio enrag'd ; swore he would 
▁ meet her , as he was appointed , next morning at the temple , and 
▁ there , before the whole congregation , shame her with what he saw 
▁ o'ernight and send her home again without a husband . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj we charge you in the xxmaj prince 's name stand ! 
▁ 1 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj call up the right xxmaj master xxmaj constable . xxmaj we have here 
▁ recover'd the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known 
▁ in the commonwealth . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj and one xxmaj deformed is one of them . i know him ; ' a wears a 
▁ lock . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj masters , masters-- 
▁ 1 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj you 'll be made bring xxmaj deformed forth , i warrant you . 
▁ xxmaj con . xxmaj masters-- 
▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj never speak , we charge you . xxmaj let us obey you to go with 
▁ us . 
▁ xxmaj bora . xxmaj we are like to prove a goodly commodity , being taken up of 
▁ these men 's bills . 
▁ xxmaj con . a commodity in question , i warrant you . xxmaj come , we 'll obey you . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 a xxmaj room in xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj hero , and xxmaj margaret and xxmaj ursula . 

▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj good xxmaj ursula , wake my cousin xxmaj beatrice and desire her to rise . 
▁ xxmaj urs . i will , lady . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj and bid her come hither . 
▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj well . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj troth , i think your other rebato were better . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj no , pray thee , good xxmaj meg , xxmaj i 'll wear this . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj by my troth , 's not so good , and i warrant your cousin will 
▁ say so . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj my cousin 's a fool , and thou art another . xxmaj i 'll wear none but 
▁ this . 
▁ xxmaj marg . i like the new tire within excellently , if the hair were a 
▁ thought browner ; and your gown 's a most rare fashion , i ' faith . 
▁ i saw the xxmaj duchess of xxmaj milan 's gown that they praise so . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxup o , that exceeds , they say . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj by my troth , 's but a nightgown in respect of yours-- 
▁ cloth - o'-gold and cuts , and lac'd with silver , set with pearls 
▁ down sleeves , side - sleeves , and skirts , round underborne with 
▁ a blush tinsel . xxmaj but for a fine , quaint , graceful , and excellent 
▁ fashion , yours is worth ten on't . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj god give me joy to wear it ! for my heart is exceeding heavy . 
▁ xxmaj marg . ' twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj fie upon thee ! art not ashamed ? 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj of what , lady ? of speaking honourably ? xxmaj is not marriage 
▁ honourable in a beggar ? xxmaj is not your lord honourable without 
▁ marriage ? i think you would have me say , ' saving your reverence , 
▁ a husband . ' xxmaj an bad thinking do not wrest true speaking , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ offend nobody . xxmaj is there any harm in ' the heavier for a husband ' ? 
▁ xxmaj none , i think , an it be the right husband and the right wife . 
▁ xxmaj otherwise ' tis light , and not heavy . xxmaj ask my xxmaj lady xxmaj beatrice else . 
▁ xxmaj here she comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj beatrice . 

▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj good morrow , coz . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj good morrow , sweet xxmaj hero . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj why , how now ? xxmaj do you speak in the sick tune ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . i am out of all other tune , methinks . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj clap 's into ' light o ' love . ' xxmaj that goes without a burden . xxmaj do 
▁ you sing it , and xxmaj i 'll dance it . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj yea , ' light o ' love ' with your heels ! then , if your husband 
▁ have stables enough , you 'll see he shall lack no barnes . 
▁ xxmaj marg . o illegitimate construction ! i scorn that with my heels . 
▁ xxmaj beat . ' tis almost five o'clock , cousin ; ' tis time you were ready . 
▁ xxmaj by my troth , i am exceeding ill . xxmaj hey - ho ! 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj for a hawk , a horse , or a husband ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj for the letter that begins them all , xxup h. 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj well , an you be not turn'd xxmaj turk , there 's no more sailing by 
▁ the star . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj what means the fool , trow ? 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj nothing xxup i ; but xxmaj god send every one their heart 's desire ! 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj these gloves the xxmaj count sent me , they are an excellent 
▁ perfume . 
▁ xxmaj beat . i am stuff'd , cousin ; i can not smell . 
▁ xxmaj marg . a maid , and stuff'd ! xxmaj there 's goodly catching of cold . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxup o , xxmaj god help me ! xxmaj god help me ! xxmaj how long have you profess'd 
▁ apprehension ? 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj ever since you left it . xxmaj doth not my wit become me rarely ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj it is not seen enough . xxmaj you should wear it in your cap . xxmaj by my 
▁ troth , i am sick . 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj get you some of this distill'd carduus benedictus and lay it 
▁ to your heart . xxmaj it is the only thing for a qualm . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj there thou prick'st her with a thistle . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj benedictus ? why benedictus ? xxmaj you have some moral in this 
▁ ' benedictus . ' 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj moral ? xxmaj no , by my troth , i have no moral meaning ; i meant 
▁ plain holy thistle . xxmaj you may think perchance that i think you are 
▁ in love . xxmaj nay , by'r lady , i am not such a fool to think what i 
▁ list ; nor i list not to think what i can ; nor indeed i can not 
▁ think , if i would think my heart out of thinking , that you are in 
▁ love , or that you will be in love , or that you can be in love . 
▁ xxmaj yet xxmaj benedick was such another , and now is he become a man . xxmaj he 
▁ swore he would never marry ; and yet now in despite of his heart 
▁ he eats his meat without grudging ; and how you may be converted i 
▁ know not , but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj what pace is this that thy tongue keeps ? 
▁ xxmaj marg . xxmaj not a false gallop . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ursula . 

▁ xxmaj urs . xxmaj madam , withdraw . xxmaj the xxmaj prince , the xxmaj count , xxmaj signior xxmaj benedick , xxmaj don 
▁ xxmaj john , and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to 
▁ church . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj help to dress me , good coz , good xxmaj meg , good xxmaj ursula . 
▁ [ exeunt . ] 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj the hall in xxmaj leonato 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj leonato and the xxmaj constable [ dogberry ] and the xxmaj headborough [ verges ] . 

▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj what would you with me , honest neighbour ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj marry , sir , i would have some confidence with you that decerns 
▁ you nearly . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj brief , i pray you ; for you see it is a busy time with me . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj marry , this it is , sir . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj yes , in truth it is , sir . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj what is it , my good friends ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj goodman xxmaj verges , sir , speaks a little off the matter -- an old 
▁ man , sir , and his wits are not so blunt as , xxmaj god help , i would 
▁ desire they were ; but , in faith , honest as the skin between his 
▁ brows . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj yes , i thank xxmaj god i am as honest as any man living that is an 
▁ old man and no honester than xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj comparisons are odorous . xxmaj palabras , neighbour xxmaj verges . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj neighbours , you are tedious . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj it pleases your worship to say so , but we are the poor xxmaj duke 's 
▁ officers ; but truly , for mine own part , if i were as tedious as a 
▁ king , i could find in my heart to bestow it all of your worship . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj all thy tediousness on me , ah ? 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj yea , in ' twere a thousand pound more than ' tis ; for i hear as 
▁ good exclamation on your worship as of any man in the city ; and 
▁ though i be but a poor man , i am glad to hear it . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj and so am xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj leon . i would fain know what you have to say . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj marry , sir , our watch to - night , excepting your worship 's 
▁ presence , ha ' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in 
▁ xxmaj messina . 
▁ xxmaj dog . a good old man , sir ; he will be talking . xxmaj as they say , ' when 
▁ the age is in , the wit is out . ' xxmaj god help us ! it is a world to 
▁ see ! xxmaj well said , i ' faith , neighbour xxmaj verges . xxmaj well , xxmaj god 's a good 
▁ man . xxmaj an two men ride of a horse , one must ride behind . xxmaj an honest 
▁ soul , i ' faith , sir , by my troth he is , as ever broke bread ; but 
▁ xxmaj god is to be worshipp'd ; all men are not alike , alas , good 
▁ neighbour ! 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj indeed , neighbour , he comes too short of you . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj gifts that xxmaj god gives . 
▁ xxmaj leon . i must leave you . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj one word , sir . xxmaj our watch , sir , have indeed comprehended two 
▁ aspicious persons , and we would have them this morning examined 
▁ before your worship . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj take their examination yourself and bring it me . i am now in 
▁ great haste , as it may appear unto you . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj it shall be suffigance . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj drink some wine ere you go . xxmaj fare you well . 

▁ [ enter a xxmaj messenger . ] 

▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj my lord , they stay for you to give your daughter to her 
▁ husband . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj i 'll wait upon them . i am ready . 
▁ [ exeunt xxmaj leonato and xxmaj messenger . ] 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj go , good partner , go get you to xxmaj francis xxmaj seacoal ; bid him bring 
▁ his pen and inkhorn to the jail . xxmaj we are now to examination these 
▁ men . 
▁ xxmaj verg . xxmaj and we must do it wisely . 
▁ xxmaj dog . xxmaj we will spare for no wit , i warrant you . xxmaj here 's that shall 
▁ drive some of them to a non - come . xxmaj only get the learned writer to 
▁ set down our excommunication , and meet me at the jail . 
▁ [ exeunt . ]