xxbos [ exit xxmaj antonio . ] 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj benedick . xxmaj why , what 's the matter 
▁ xxmaj that you have such a xxmaj february face , 
▁ xxmaj so full of frost , of storm , and cloudiness ? 
▁ xxmaj claud . i think he thinks upon the savage bull . 
▁ xxmaj tush , fear not , man ! xxmaj we 'll tip thy horns with gold , 
▁ xxmaj and all xxmaj europa shall rejoice at thee , 
▁ xxmaj as once xxmaj europa did at lusty xxmaj jove 
▁ xxmaj when he would play the noble beast in love . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj bull xxmaj jove , sir , had an amiable low , 
▁ xxmaj and some such strange bull leap'd your father 's cow 
▁ xxmaj and got a calf in that same noble feat 
▁ xxmaj much like to you , for you have just his bleat . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ leonato 's ] brother [ antonio ] , xxmaj hero , xxmaj beatrice , 
▁ xxmaj margaret , xxmaj ursula , [ the ladies wearing masks ] . 

▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj for this i owe you . xxmaj here comes other reckonings . 
▁ xxmaj which is the lady i must seize upon ? 
▁ xxmaj ant . xxmaj this same is she , and i do give you her . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj why then , she 's mine . xxmaj sweet , let me see your face . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj no , that you shall not till you take her hand 
▁ xxmaj before this friar and swear to marry her . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj give me your hand before this holy friar . 
▁ i am your husband if you like of me . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj and when i liv'd i was your other wife ; [ unmasks . ] 
▁ xxmaj and when you lov'd you were my other husband . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj another xxmaj hero ! 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj nothing certainer . 
▁ xxmaj one xxmaj hero died defil'd ; but i do live , 
▁ xxmaj and surely as i live , i am a maid . 
▁ xxmaj pedro . xxmaj the former xxmaj hero ! xxmaj hero that is dead ! 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj she died , my lord , but whiles her slander liv'd . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj all this amazement can i qualify , 
▁ xxmaj when , after that the holy rites are ended , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell you largely of fair xxmaj hero 's death . 
▁ xxmaj meantime let wonder seem familiar , 
▁ xxmaj and to the chapel let us presently . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj soft and fair , friar . xxmaj which is xxmaj beatrice ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . [ unmasks ] i answer to that name . xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj do not you love me ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj why , no ; no more than reason . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj why , then your uncle , and the xxmaj prince , and xxmaj claudio 
▁ xxmaj have been deceived ; for they swore you did . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj do not you love me ? 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj troth , no ; no more than reason . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj why , then my cousin , xxmaj margaret , and xxmaj ursula 
▁ xxmaj are much deceiv'd ; for they did swear you did . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj they swore that you were almost sick for me . 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj they swore that you were well - nigh dead for me . 
▁ xxmaj bene . ' tis no such matter . xxmaj then you do not love me ? 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj no , truly , but in friendly recompense . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj come , cousin , i am sure you love the gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj claud . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be sworn upon't that he loves her ; 
▁ xxmaj for here 's a paper written in his hand , 
▁ a halting sonnet of his own pure brain , 
▁ xxmaj fashion'd to xxmaj beatrice . 
▁ xxmaj hero . xxmaj and here 's another , 
▁ xxmaj writ in my cousin 's hand , stol'n from her pocket , 
▁ xxmaj containing her affection unto xxmaj benedick . 
▁ xxmaj bene . a miracle ! xxmaj here 's our own hands against our hearts . 
▁ xxmaj come , i will have thee ; but , by this light , i take thee for pity . 
▁ xxmaj beat . i would not deny you ; but , by this good day , i yield upon 
▁ great persuasion , and partly to save your life , for i was told 
▁ you were in a consumption . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj peace ! i will stop your mouth . [ kisses her . ] 
▁ xxmaj beat . xxmaj i 'll tell thee what , xxmaj prince : a college of wit - crackers can not 
▁ flout me out of my humour . xxmaj dost thou think i care for a satire or 
▁ an epigram ? xxmaj no . xxmaj if a man will be beaten with brains , ' a shall 
▁ wear nothing handsome about him . xxmaj in brief , since i do purpose to 
▁ marry , i will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say 
▁ against it ; and therefore never flout at me for what i have said 
▁ against it ; for man is a giddy thing , and this is my conclusion . 
▁ xxmaj for thy part , xxmaj claudio , i did think to have beaten thee ; but in 
▁ that thou art like to be my kinsman , live unbruis'd , and love my 
▁ cousin . 
▁ xxmaj claud . i had well hop'd thou wouldst have denied xxmaj beatrice , that i 
▁ might have cudgell'd thee out of thy single life , to make thee a 
▁ double - dealer , which out of question thou wilt be if my cousin do 
▁ not look exceeding narrowly to thee . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj come , come , we are friends . xxmaj let 's have a dance ere we are 
▁ married , that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives ' heels . 
▁ xxmaj leon . xxmaj we 'll have dancing afterward . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj first , of my word ! xxmaj therefore play , music . xxmaj prince , thou art 
▁ sad . xxmaj get thee a wife , get thee a wife ! xxmaj there is no staff more 
▁ reverent than one tipp'd with horn . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxmaj mess . xxmaj my lord , your brother xxmaj john is ta'en in flight , 
▁ xxmaj and brought with armed men back to xxmaj messina . 
▁ xxmaj bene . xxmaj think not on him till to - morrow . xxmaj i 'll devise thee brave 
▁ punishments for him . xxmaj strike up , pipers ! 
▁ xxmaj dance . [ exeunt . ] 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1605 


 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup othello , xxup moor xxup of xxup venice 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup othello , the xxmaj moor , general of the xxmaj venetian forces 
▁ xxup desdemona , his wife 
▁ xxup iago , ensign to xxmaj othello 
▁ xxup emilia , his wife , lady - in - waiting to xxmaj desdemona 
▁ xxup cassio , lieutenant to xxmaj othello 
▁ xxup the xxup duke xxup of xxup venice 
▁ xxup brabantio , xxmaj venetian xxmaj senator , father of xxmaj desdemona 
▁ xxup gratiano , nobleman of xxmaj venice , brother of xxmaj brabantio 
▁ xxup lodovico , nobleman of xxmaj venice , kinsman of xxmaj brabantio 
▁ xxup roderigo , rejected suitor of xxmaj desdemona 
▁ xxup bianca , mistress of xxmaj cassio 
▁ xxup montano , a xxmaj cypriot official 
▁ a xxmaj clown in service to xxmaj othello 
▁ xxmaj senators , xxmaj sailors , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj officers , xxmaj gentlemen , xxmaj musicians , and 
▁ xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : xxmaj venice and xxmaj cyprus 

 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj venice . a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj roderigo and xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj tush , never tell me ! i take it much unkindly 
▁ xxmaj that thou , xxmaj iago , who hast had my purse 
▁ xxmaj as if the strings were thine , shouldst know of this . 
▁ xxup iago . ' sblood , but you will not hear me . 
▁ xxmaj if ever i did dream of such a matter , 
▁ xxmaj abhor me . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj despise me , if i do not . xxmaj three great ones of the city , 
▁ xxmaj in personal suit to make me his lieutenant , 
▁ xxmaj off - capp'd to him ; and , by the faith of man , 
▁ i know my price , i am worth no worse a place . 
▁ xxmaj but he , as loving his own pride and purposes , 
▁ xxmaj evades them , with a bumbast circumstance 
▁ xxmaj horribly stuff'd with epithets of war , 
▁ xxmaj and , in conclusion , 
▁ xxmaj nonsuits my mediators ; for , " certes , " says he , 
▁ " i have already chose my officer . " 
▁ xxmaj and what was he ? 
▁ xxmaj forsooth , a great arithmetician , 
▁ xxmaj one xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio , a xxmaj florentine 
▁ ( a fellow almost damn'd in a fair wife ) 
▁ xxmaj that never set a squadron in the field , 
▁ xxmaj nor the division of a battle knows 
▁ xxmaj more than a spinster ; unless the bookish theoric , 
▁ xxmaj wherein the toged consuls can propose 
▁ xxmaj as masterly as he . xxmaj mere prattle without practice 
▁ xxmaj is all his soldiership . xxmaj but he , sir , had the election ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , of whom his eyes had seen the proof 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj rhodes , at xxmaj cyprus , and on other grounds 
▁ xxmaj christian and heathen , must be belee'd and calm'd 
▁ xxmaj by debitor and creditor . xxmaj this counter - caster , 
▁ xxmaj he , in good time , must his lieutenant be , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i- xxmaj god bless the mark!- his xxmaj moorship 's ancient . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj by heaven , i rather would have been his hangman . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , there 's no remedy . ' tis the curse of service , 
▁ xxmaj preferment goes by letter and affection , 
▁ xxmaj and not by old gradation , where each second 
▁ xxmaj stood heir to the first . xxmaj now , sir , be judge yourself 
▁ xxmaj whether i in any just term am affined 
▁ xxmaj to love the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i would not follow him then . 
▁ xxup iago . xxup o , sir , content you . 
▁ i follow him to serve my turn upon him : 
▁ xxmaj we can not all be masters , nor all masters 
▁ xxmaj can not be truly follow'd . xxmaj you shall mark 
▁ xxmaj many a duteous and knee - crooking knave , 
▁ xxmaj that doting on his own obsequious bondage 
▁ xxmaj wears out his time , much like his master 's ass , 
▁ xxmaj for nought but provender , and when he 's old , cashier'd . 
▁ xxmaj whip me such honest knaves . xxmaj others there are 
▁ xxmaj who , trimm'd in forms and visages of duty , 
▁ xxmaj keep yet their hearts attending on themselves , 
▁ xxmaj and throwing but shows of service on their lords 
▁ xxmaj do well thrive by them ; and when they have lined their coats 
▁ xxmaj do themselves homage . xxmaj these fellows have some soul , 
▁ xxmaj and such a one do i profess myself . 
▁ xxmaj for , sir , 
▁ xxmaj it is as sure as you are xxmaj roderigo , 
▁ xxmaj were i the xxmaj moor , i would not be xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxmaj in following him , i follow but myself ; 
▁ xxmaj heaven is my judge , not i for love and duty , 
▁ xxmaj but seeming so , for my peculiar end . 
▁ xxmaj for when my outward action doth demonstrate 
▁ xxmaj the native act and figure of my heart 
▁ xxmaj in complement extern , ' tis not long after 
▁ xxmaj but i will wear my heart upon my sleeve 
▁ xxmaj for daws to peck at : i am not what i am . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj what a full fortune does the thick - lips owe , 
▁ xxmaj if he can carry't thus ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj call up her father , 
▁ xxmaj rouse him , make after him , poison his delight , 
▁ xxmaj proclaim him in the streets , incense her kinsmen , 
▁ xxmaj and , though he in a fertile climate dwell , 
▁ xxmaj plague him with flies . xxmaj though that his joy be joy , 
▁ xxmaj yet throw such changes of vexation on't 
▁ xxmaj as it may lose some color . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj here is her father 's house ; xxmaj i 'll call aloud . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj do , with like timorous accent and dire yell 
▁ xxmaj as when , by night and negligence , the fire 
▁ xxmaj is spied in populous cities . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj what , ho , xxmaj brabantio ! xxmaj signior xxmaj brabantio , ho ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj awake ! xxmaj what , ho , xxmaj brabantio ! xxmaj thieves ! xxmaj thieves ! xxmaj thieves ! 
▁ xxmaj look to your house , your daughter , and your bags ! 
▁ xxmaj thieves ! xxmaj thieves ! 

▁ xxmaj brabantio appears above , at a window . 

▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj what is the reason of this terrible summons ? 
▁ xxmaj what is the matter there ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj signior , is all your family within ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj are your doors lock'd ? 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj why ? xxmaj wherefore ask you this ? 
▁ xxup iago . ' zounds , sir , you 're robb'd ! xxmaj for shame , put on your gown ; 
▁ xxmaj your heart is burst , you have lost half your soul ; 
▁ xxmaj even now , now , very now , an old black ram 
▁ xxmaj is tupping your white ewe . xxmaj arise , arise ! 
▁ xxmaj awake the snorting citizens with the bell , 
▁ xxmaj or else the devil will make a grandsire of you . 
▁ xxmaj arise , i say ! 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj what , have you lost your wits ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj most reverend signior , do you know my voice ? 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj not xxup i. xxmaj what are you ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj my name is xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj the worser welcome . 
▁ i have charged thee not to haunt about my doors . 
▁ xxmaj in honest plainness thou hast heard me say 
▁ xxmaj my daughter is not for thee ; and now , in madness , 
▁ xxmaj being full of supper and distempering draughts , 
▁ xxmaj upon malicious bravery , dost thou come 
▁ xxmaj to start my quiet . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj sir , sir , sir- 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj but thou must needs be sure 
▁ xxmaj my spirit and my place have in them power 
▁ xxmaj to make this bitter to thee . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj patience , good sir . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj what tell'st thou me of robbing ? xxmaj this is xxmaj venice ; 
▁ xxmaj my house is not a grange . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj most grave xxmaj brabantio , 
▁ xxmaj in simple and pure soul i come to you . 
▁ xxup iago . ' zounds , sir , you are one of those that will not serve xxmaj god , 
▁ if the devil bid you . xxmaj because we come to do you service and you 
▁ think we are ruffians , you 'll have your daughter covered with a 
▁ xxmaj barbary horse ; you 'll have your nephews neigh to you ; you 'll have 
▁ coursers for cousins , and gennets for germans . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj what profane wretch art thou ? 
▁ xxup iago . i am one , sir , that comes to tell you your daughter and the 
▁ xxmaj moor are now making the beast with two backs . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj thou are a villain . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you are- a senator . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj this thou shalt answer ; i know thee , xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj sir , i will answer anything . xxmaj but , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj if't be your pleasure and most wise consent , 
▁ xxmaj as partly i find it is , that your fair daughter , 
▁ xxmaj at this odd - even and dull watch o ' the night , 
▁ xxmaj transported with no worse nor better guard 
▁ xxmaj but with a knave of common hire , a gondolier , 
▁ xxmaj to the gross clasps of a lascivious xxmaj moor- 
▁ xxmaj if this be known to you , and your allowance , 
▁ xxmaj we then have done you bold and saucy wrongs ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you know not this , my manners tell me 
▁ xxmaj we have your wrong rebuke . xxmaj do not believe 
▁ xxmaj that , from the sense of all civility , 
▁ i thus would play and trifle with your reverence . 
▁ xxmaj your daughter , if you have not given her leave , 
▁ i say again , hath made a gross revolt , 
▁ xxmaj tying her duty , beauty , wit , and fortunes 
▁ xxmaj in an extravagant and wheeling stranger 
▁ xxmaj of here and everywhere . xxmaj straight satisfy yourself : 
▁ xxmaj if she be in her chamber or your house , 
▁ xxmaj let loose on me the justice of the state 
▁ xxmaj for thus deluding you . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj strike on the tinder , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj give me a taper ! xxmaj call up all my people ! 
▁ xxmaj this accident is not unlike my dream ; 
▁ xxmaj belief of it oppresses me already . 
▁ xxmaj light , i say , light ! xxmaj exit above . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj farewell , for i must leave you . 
▁ xxmaj it seems not meet , nor wholesome to my place , 
▁ xxmaj to be produced- as , if i stay , i shall- 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj moor ; for i do know , the state , 
▁ xxmaj however this may gall him with some check , 
▁ xxmaj can not with safety cast him , for he 's embark'd 
▁ xxmaj with such loud reason to the xxmaj cyprus wars , 
▁ xxmaj which even now stands in act , that , for their souls , 
▁ xxmaj another of his fathom they have none 
▁ xxmaj to lead their business ; in which regard , 
▁ xxmaj though i do hate him as i do hell pains , 
▁ xxmaj yet for necessity of present life , 
▁ i must show out a flag and sign of love , 
▁ xxmaj which is indeed but sign . xxmaj that you shall surely find him , 
▁ xxmaj lead to the xxmaj sagittary the raised search , 
▁ xxmaj and there will i be with him . xxmaj so farewell . xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj enter , below , xxmaj brabantio , in his nightgown , and 
▁ xxmaj servants with torches . 

▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj it is too true an evil : gone she is , 
▁ xxmaj and what 's to come of my despised time 
▁ xxmaj is nought but bitterness . xxmaj now , xxmaj roderigo , 
▁ xxmaj where didst thou see her ? o unhappy girl ! 
▁ xxmaj with the xxmaj moor , say'st thou ? xxmaj who would be a father ! 
▁ xxmaj how didst thou know ' twas she ? xxup o , she deceives me 
▁ xxmaj past thought ! xxmaj what said she to you ? xxmaj get more tapers . 
▁ xxmaj raise all my kindred . xxmaj are they married , think you ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj truly , i think they are . 
▁ xxup brabantio . o heaven ! xxmaj how got she out ? o treason of the blood ! 
▁ xxmaj fathers , from hence trust not your daughters ' minds 
▁ xxmaj by what you see them act . xxmaj is there not charms 
▁ xxmaj by which the property of youth and maidhood 
▁ xxmaj may be abused ? xxmaj have you not read , xxmaj roderigo , 
▁ xxmaj of some such thing ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj yes , sir , i have indeed . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj call up my brother . xxup o , would you had had her ! 
▁ xxmaj some one way , some another . xxmaj do you know 
▁ xxmaj where we may apprehend her and the xxmaj moor ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . i think i can discover him , if you please 
▁ xxmaj to get good guard and go along with me . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj pray you , lead on . xxmaj at every house xxmaj i 'll call ; 
▁ i may command at most . xxmaj get weapons , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj and raise some special officers of night . 
▁ xxmaj on , good xxmaj roderigo , xxmaj i 'll deserve your pains . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj another street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello , xxmaj iago , and xxmaj attendants with torches . 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj though in the trade of war i have slain men , 
▁ xxmaj yet do i hold it very stuff o ' the conscience 
▁ xxmaj to do no contrived murther . i lack iniquity 
▁ xxmaj sometimes to do me service . xxmaj nine or ten times 
▁ i had thought to have yerk'd him here under the ribs . 
▁ xxup othello . ' tis better as it is . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nay , but he prated 
▁ xxmaj and spoke such scurvy and provoking terms 
▁ xxmaj against your honor 
▁ xxmaj that , with the little godliness i have , 
▁ i did full hard forbear him . xxmaj but i pray you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj are you fast married ? xxmaj be assured of this , 
▁ xxmaj that the magnifico is much beloved , 
▁ xxmaj and hath in his effect a voice potential 
▁ xxmaj as double as the xxmaj duke 's . xxmaj he will divorce you , 
▁ xxmaj or put upon you what restraint and grievance 
▁ xxmaj the law , with all his might to enforce it on , 
▁ xxmaj will give him cable . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj let him do his spite . 
▁ xxmaj my services , which i have done the signiory , 
▁ xxmaj shall out - tongue his complaints . ' tis yet to know- 
▁ xxmaj which , when i know that boasting is an honor , 
▁ i shall promulgate- i fetch my life and being 
▁ xxmaj from men of royal siege , and my demerits 
▁ xxmaj may speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune 
▁ xxmaj as this that i have reach'd . xxmaj for know , xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj but that i love the gentle xxmaj desdemona , 
▁ i would not my unhoused free condition 
▁ xxmaj put into circumscription and confine 
▁ xxmaj for the sea 's worth . xxmaj but , look ! xxmaj what lights come yond ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj those are the raised father and his friends . 
▁ xxmaj you were best go in . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj not xxup i ; i must be found . 
▁ xxmaj my parts , my title , and my perfect soul 
▁ xxmaj shall manifest me rightly . xxmaj is it they ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj by xxmaj janus , i think no . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassio and certain xxmaj officers with torches . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the servants of the xxmaj duke ? xxmaj and my lieutenant ? 
▁ xxmaj the goodness of the night upon you , friends ! 
▁ xxmaj what is the news ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj the xxmaj duke does greet you , general , 
▁ xxmaj and he requires your haste - post - haste appearance , 
▁ xxmaj even on the instant . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what is the matter , think you ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj something from xxmaj cyprus , as i may divine ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a business of some heat . xxmaj the galleys 
▁ xxmaj have sent a dozen sequent messengers 
▁ xxmaj this very night at one another 's heels ; 
▁ xxmaj and many of the consuls , raised and met , 
▁ xxmaj are at the xxmaj duke 's already . xxmaj you have been hotly call'd for , 
▁ xxmaj when , being not at your lodging to be found , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj senate hath sent about three several quests 
▁ xxmaj to search you out . 
▁ xxup othello . ' tis well i am found by you . 
▁ i will but spend a word here in the house 
▁ xxmaj and go with you . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj ancient , what makes he here ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj faith , he tonight hath boarded a land carack ; 
▁ xxmaj if it prove lawful prize , he 's made forever . 
▁ xxup cassio . i do not understand . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj he 's married . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj to who ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj othello . 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj marry , to- xxmaj come , captain , will you go ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj have with you . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj here comes another troop to seek for you . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj it is xxmaj brabantio . xxmaj general , be advised , 
▁ xxmaj he comes to bad intent . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj brabantio , xxmaj roderigo , and xxmaj officers with torches 
▁ and weapons . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj holla ! xxmaj stand there ! 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj signior , it is the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj down with him , thief ! 
▁ xxmaj they draw on both sides . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you , xxmaj roderigo ! xxmaj come , sir , i am for you . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj keep up your bright swords , for the dew will rust them . 
▁ xxmaj good signior , you shall more command with years 
▁ xxmaj than with your weapons . 
▁ xxup brabantio . o thou foul thief , where hast thou stow'd my daughter ? 
▁ xxmaj damn'd as thou art , thou hast enchanted her , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj i 'll refer me to all things of sense , 
▁ xxmaj if she in chains of magic were not bound , 
▁ xxmaj whether a maid so tender , fair , and happy , 
▁ xxmaj so opposite to marriage that she shunn'd 
▁ xxmaj the wealthy , curled darlings of our nation , 
▁ xxmaj would ever have , to incur a general mock , 
▁ xxmaj run from her guardage to the sooty bosom 
▁ xxmaj of such a thing as thou- to fear , not to delight . 
▁ xxmaj judge me the world , if ' tis not gross in sense 
▁ xxmaj that thou hast practiced on her with foul charms , 
▁ xxmaj abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals 
▁ xxmaj that weaken motion . xxmaj i 'll have't disputed on ; 
▁ ' tis probable , and palpable to thinking . 
▁ i therefore apprehend and do attach thee 
▁ xxmaj for an abuser of the world , a practicer 
▁ xxmaj of arts inhibited and out of warrant . 
▁ xxmaj lay hold upon him . xxmaj if he do resist , 
▁ xxmaj subdue him at his peril . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj hold your hands , 
▁ xxmaj both you of my inclining and the rest . 
▁ xxmaj were it my cue to fight , i should have known it 
▁ xxmaj without a prompter . xxmaj where will you that i go 
▁ xxmaj to answer this your charge ? 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj to prison , till fit time 
▁ xxmaj of law and course of direct session 
▁ xxmaj call thee to answer . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what if i do obey ? 
▁ xxmaj how may the xxmaj duke be therewith satisfied , 
▁ xxmaj whose messengers are here about my side , 
▁ xxmaj upon some present business of the state 
▁ xxmaj to bring me to him ? 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . ' tis true , most worthy signior ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke 's in council , and your noble self , 
▁ i am sure , is sent for . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj how ? xxmaj the xxmaj duke in council ? 
▁ xxmaj in this time of the night ? xxmaj bring him away ; 
▁ xxmaj mine 's not an idle cause . xxmaj the xxmaj duke himself , 
▁ xxmaj or any of my brothers of the state , 
▁ xxmaj can not but feel this wrong as ' twere their own ; 
▁ xxmaj for if such actions may have passage free , 
▁ xxmaj bond slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a council chamber . xxmaj the xxmaj duke and xxmaj senators sitting at a table ; 
 xxmaj officers attending . 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there is no composition in these news 
▁ xxmaj that gives them credit . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj indeed they are disproportion'd ; 
▁ xxmaj my letters say a hundred and seven galleys . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and mine , a hundred and forty . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj and mine , two hundred . 
▁ xxmaj but though they jump not on a just account- 
▁ xxmaj as in these cases , where the aim reports , 
▁ ' tis oft with difference- yet do they all confirm 
▁ a xxmaj turkish fleet , and bearing up to xxmaj cyprus . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj nay , it is possible enough to judgement . 
▁ i do not so secure me in the error , 
▁ xxmaj but the main article i do approve 
▁ xxmaj in fearful sense . 
▁ xxup sailor . [ within . ] xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj what , ho ! 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . a messenger from the galleys . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj sailor . 
▁
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj now , what 's the business ? 
▁ xxup sailor . xxmaj the xxmaj turkish preparation makes for xxmaj rhodes , 
▁ xxmaj so was i bid report here to the state 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj signior xxmaj angelo . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how say you by this change ? 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj this can not be , 
▁ xxmaj by no assay of reason ; ' tis a pageant 
▁ xxmaj to keep us in false gaze . xxmaj when we consider 
▁ xxmaj the importancy of xxmaj cyprus to the xxmaj turk , 
▁ xxmaj and let ourselves again but understand 
▁ xxmaj that as it more concerns the xxmaj turk than xxmaj rhodes , 
▁ xxmaj so may he with more facile question bear it , 
▁ xxmaj for that it stands not in such warlike brace , 
▁ xxmaj but altogether lacks the abilities 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj rhodes is dress'd in . xxmaj if we make thought of this , 
▁ xxmaj we must not think the xxmaj turk is so unskillful 
▁ xxmaj to leave that latest which concerns him first , 
▁ xxmaj neglecting an attempt of ease and gain , 
▁ xxmaj to wake and wage a danger profitless . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj nay , in all confidence , he 's not for xxmaj rhodes . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj here is more news . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxmaj messenger . 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the xxmaj ottomites , reverend and gracious , 
▁ xxmaj steering with due course toward the isle of xxmaj rhodes , 
▁ xxmaj have there injointed them with an after fleet . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj ay , so i thought . xxmaj how many , as you guess ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj of thirty sail ; and now they do re - stem 
▁ xxmaj their backward course , bearing with frank appearance 
▁ xxmaj their purposes toward xxmaj cyprus . xxmaj signior xxmaj montano , 
▁ xxmaj your trusty and most valiant servitor , 
▁ xxmaj with his free duty recommends you thus , 
▁ xxmaj and prays you to believe him . 
▁ xxup duke . ' tis certain then for xxmaj cyprus . 
▁ xxmaj marcus xxmaj luccicos , is not he in town ? 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj he 's now in xxmaj florence . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj write from us to him , post - post - haste dispatch . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj here comes xxmaj brabantio and the valiant xxmaj moor . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj brabantio , xxmaj othello , xxmaj iago , xxmaj roderigo , and xxmaj officers . 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj valiant xxmaj othello , we must straight employ you 
▁ xxmaj against the general enemy xxmaj ottoman . 
▁ [ to xxmaj brabantio . ] i did not see you ; welcome , gentle signior ; 
▁ xxmaj we lack'd your counsel and your help tonight . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj so did i yours . xxmaj good your xxmaj grace , pardon me : 
▁ xxmaj neither my place nor aught i heard of business 
▁ xxmaj hath raised me from my bed , nor doth the general care 
▁ xxmaj take hold on me ; for my particular grief 
▁ xxmaj is of so flood - gate and o'erbearing nature 
▁ xxmaj that it engluts and swallows other sorrows , 
▁ xxmaj and it is still itself . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj my daughter ! xxup o , my daughter ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj dead ? 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj ay , to me . 
▁ xxmaj she is abused , stol'n from me and corrupted 
▁ xxmaj by spells and medicines bought of mountebanks ; 
▁ xxmaj for nature so preposterously to err , 
▁ xxmaj being not deficient , blind , or lame of sense , 
▁ xxmaj sans witchcraft could not . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding 
▁ xxmaj hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself 
▁ xxmaj and you of her , the bloody book of law 
▁ xxmaj you shall yourself read in the bitter letter 
▁ xxmaj after your own sense , yea , though our proper son 
▁ xxmaj stood in your action . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj humbly i thank your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxmaj here is the man , this xxmaj moor , whom now , it seems , 
▁ xxmaj your special mandate for the state affairs 
▁ xxmaj hath hither brought . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj we are very sorry for't . 
▁ xxup duke . [ to xxmaj othello . ] xxmaj what in your own part can you say to this ? 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj nothing , but this is so . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj most potent , grave , and reverend signiors , 
▁ xxmaj my very noble and approved good masters , 
▁ xxmaj that i have ta'en away this old man 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj it is most true ; true , i have married her ; 
▁ xxmaj the very head and front of my offending 
▁ xxmaj hath this extent , no more . xxmaj rude am i in my speech , 
▁ xxmaj and little blest with the soft phrase of peace ; 
▁ xxmaj for since these arms of mine had seven years ' pith , 
▁ xxmaj till now some nine moons wasted , they have used 
▁ xxmaj their dearest action in the tented field , 
▁ xxmaj and little of this great world can i speak , 
▁ xxmaj more than pertains to feats of broil and battle ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore little shall i grace my cause 
▁ xxmaj in speaking for myself . xxmaj yet , by your gracious patience , 
▁ i will a round unvarnish'd tale deliver 
▁ xxmaj of my whole course of love : what drugs , what charms , 
▁ xxmaj what conjuration , and what mighty magic- 
▁ xxmaj for such proceeding i am charged withal- 
▁ i won his daughter . 
▁ xxup brabantio . a maiden never bold , 
▁ xxmaj of spirit so still and quiet that her motion 
▁ xxmaj blush'd at herself ; and she- in spite of nature , 
▁ xxmaj of years , of country , credit , everything- 
▁ xxmaj to fall in love with what she fear'd to look on ! 
▁ xxmaj it is judgement maim'd and most imperfect , 
▁ xxmaj that will confess perfection so could err 
▁ xxmaj against all rules of nature , and must be driven 
▁ xxmaj to find out practices of cunning hell 
▁ xxmaj why this should be . i therefore vouch again 
▁ xxmaj that with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood , 
▁ xxmaj or with some dram conjured to this effect , 
▁ xxmaj he wrought upon her . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj to vouch this is no proof , 
▁ xxmaj without more certain and more overt test 
▁ xxmaj than these thin habits and poor likelihoods 
▁ xxmaj of modern seeming do prefer against him . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj but , xxmaj othello , speak . 
▁ xxmaj did you by indirect and forced courses 
▁ xxmaj subdue and poison this young maid 's affections ? 
▁ xxmaj or came it by request , and such fair question 
▁ xxmaj as soul to soul affordeth ? 
▁ xxup othello . i do beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj send for the lady to the xxmaj sagittary , 
▁ xxmaj and let her speak of me before her father . 
▁ xxmaj if you do find me foul in her report , 
▁ xxmaj the trust , the office i do hold of you , 
▁ xxmaj not only take away , but let your sentence 
▁ xxmaj even fall upon my life . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj fetch xxmaj desdemona hither . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ancient , conduct them ; you best know the place . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj iago and xxmaj attendants . 
▁ xxmaj and till she come , as truly as to heaven 
▁ i do confess the vices of my blood , 
▁ xxmaj so justly to your grave ears xxmaj i 'll present 
▁ xxmaj how i did thrive in this fair lady 's love 
▁ xxmaj and she in mine . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj say it , xxmaj othello . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj her father loved me , oft invited me , 
▁ xxmaj still question'd me the story of my life 
▁ xxmaj from year to year , the battles , sieges , fortunes , 
▁ xxmaj that i have pass'd . 
▁ i ran it through , even from my boyish days 
▁ xxmaj to the very moment that he bade me tell it : 
▁ xxmaj wherein i spake of most disastrous chances , 
▁ xxmaj of moving accidents by flood and field , 
▁ xxmaj of hair - breadth ' scapes i ' the imminent deadly breach , 
▁ xxmaj of being taken by the insolent foe 
▁ xxmaj and sold to slavery , of my redemption thence 
▁ xxmaj and portance in my travels ' history ; 
▁ xxmaj wherein of antres vast and deserts idle , 
▁ xxmaj rough quarries , rocks , and hills whose heads touch heaven , 
▁ xxmaj it was my hint to speak- such was the process- 
▁ xxmaj and of the xxmaj cannibals that each other eat , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj anthropophagi , and men whose heads 
▁ xxmaj do grow beneath their shoulders . xxmaj this to hear 
▁ xxmaj would xxmaj desdemona seriously incline ; 
▁ xxmaj but still the house affairs would draw her thence , 
▁ xxmaj which ever as she could with haste dispatch , 
▁ xxmaj she'ld come again , and with a greedy ear 
▁ xxmaj devour up my discourse ; which i observing , 
▁ xxmaj took once a pliant hour , and found good means 
▁ xxmaj to draw from her a prayer of earnest heart 
▁ xxmaj that i would all my pilgrimage dilate , 
▁ xxmaj whereof by parcels she had something heard , 
▁ xxmaj but not intentively . i did consent , 
▁ xxmaj and often did beguile her of her tears 
▁ xxmaj when i did speak of some distressful stroke 
▁ xxmaj that my youth suffer'd . xxmaj my story being done , 
▁ xxmaj she gave me for my pains a world of sighs ; 
▁ xxmaj she swore , in faith , ' twas strange , ' twas passing strange ; 
▁ ' twas pitiful , ' twas wondrous pitiful . 
▁ xxmaj she wish'd she had not heard it , yet she wish'd 
▁ xxmaj that heaven had made her such a man ; she thank'd me , 
▁ xxmaj and bade me , if i had a friend that loved her , 
▁ i should but teach him how to tell my story , 
▁ xxmaj and that would woo her . xxmaj upon this hint i spake : 
▁ xxmaj she loved me for the dangers i had pass'd , 
▁ xxmaj and i loved her that she did pity them . 
▁ xxmaj this only is the witchcraft i have used . 
▁ xxmaj here comes the lady ; let her witness it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj desdemona , xxmaj iago , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup duke . i think this tale would win my daughter too . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj brabantio , 
▁ xxmaj take up this mangled matter at the best : 
▁ xxmaj men do their broken weapons rather use 
▁ xxmaj than their bare hands . 
▁ xxup brabantio . i pray you , hear her speak . 
▁ xxmaj if she confess that she was half the wooer , 
▁ xxmaj destruction on my head , if my bad blame 
▁ xxmaj light on the man ! xxmaj come hither , gentle mistress . 
▁ xxmaj do you perceive in all this noble company 
▁ xxmaj where most you owe obedience ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my noble father , 
▁ i do perceive here a divided duty . 
▁ xxmaj to you i am bound for life and education ; 
▁ xxmaj my life and education both do learn me 
▁ xxmaj how to respect you ; you are the lord of duty , 
▁ i am hitherto your daughter . xxmaj but here 's my husband , 
▁ xxmaj and so much duty as my mother show'd 
▁ xxmaj to you , preferring you before her father , 
▁ xxmaj so much i challenge that i may profess 
▁ xxmaj due to the xxmaj moor , my lord . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj god be with you ! i have done . 
▁ xxmaj please it your xxmaj grace , on to the state affairs ; 
▁ i had rather to adopt a child than get it . 
▁ xxmaj come hither , xxmaj moor . 
▁ i here do give thee that with all my heart 
▁ xxmaj which , but thou hast already , with all my heart 
▁ i would keep from thee . xxmaj for your sake , jewel , 
▁ i am glad at soul i have no other child ; 
▁ xxmaj for thy escape would teach me tyranny , 
▁ xxmaj to hang clogs on them . i have done , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj let me speak like yourself , and lay a sentence 
▁ xxmaj which , as a grise or step , may help these lovers 
▁ xxmaj into your favor . 
▁ xxmaj when remedies are past , the griefs are ended 
▁ xxmaj by seeing the worst , which late on hopes depended . 
▁ xxmaj to mourn a mischief that is past and gone 
▁ xxmaj is the next way to draw new mischief on . 
▁ xxmaj what can not be preserved when xxmaj fortune takes , 
▁ xxmaj patience her injury a mockery makes . 
▁ xxmaj the robb'd that smiles steals something from the thief ; 
▁ xxmaj he robs himself that spends a bootless grief . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj so let the xxmaj turk of xxmaj cyprus us beguile ; 
▁ xxmaj we lose it not so long as we can smile . 
▁ xxmaj he bears the sentence well , that nothing bears 
▁ xxmaj but the free comfort which from thence he hears ; 
▁ xxmaj but he bears both the sentence and the sorrow 
▁ xxmaj that , to pay grief , must of poor patience borrow . 
▁ xxmaj these sentences , to sugar or to gall , 
▁ xxmaj being strong on both sides , are equivocal . 
▁ xxmaj but words are words ; i never yet did hear 
▁ xxmaj that the bruised heart was pierced through the ear . 
▁ i humbly beseech you , proceed to the affairs of state . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the xxmaj turk with a most mighty preparation makes for xxmaj cyprus . 
▁ xxmaj othello , the fortitude of the place is best known to you ; and 
▁ though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency , 
▁ yet opinion , a sovereign mistress of effects , throws a more safer 
▁ voice on you . xxmaj you must therefore be content to slubber the gloss 
▁ of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boisterous 
▁ expedition . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the tyrant custom , most grave senators , 
▁ xxmaj hath made the flinty and steel couch of war 
▁ xxmaj my thrice - driven bed of down . i do agnize 
▁ a natural and prompt alacrity 
▁ i find in hardness and do undertake 
▁ xxmaj these present wars against the xxmaj ottomites . 
▁ xxmaj most humbly therefore bending to your state , 
▁ i crave fit disposition for my wife , 
▁ xxmaj due reference of place and exhibition , 
▁ xxmaj with such accommodation and besort 
▁ xxmaj as levels with her breeding . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj if you please , 
▁ xxmaj be't at her father 's . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj i 'll not have it so . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj nor xxup i. i would not there reside 
▁ xxmaj to put my father in impatient thoughts 
▁ xxmaj by being in his eye . xxmaj most gracious xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj to my unfolding lend your prosperous ear , 
▁ xxmaj and let me find a charter in your voice 
▁ xxmaj to assist my simpleness . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what would you , xxmaj desdemona ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj that i did love the xxmaj moor to live with him , 
▁ xxmaj my downright violence and storm of fortunes 
▁ xxmaj may trumpet to the world . xxmaj my heart 's subdued 
▁ xxmaj even to the very quality of my lord . 
▁ i saw xxmaj othello 's visage in his mind , 
▁ xxmaj and to his honors and his valiant parts 
▁ xxmaj did i my soul and fortunes consecrate . 
▁ xxmaj so that , dear lords , if i be left behind , 
▁ a moth of peace , and he go to the war , 
▁ xxmaj the rites for which i love him are bereft me , 
▁ xxmaj and i a heavy interim shall support 
▁ xxmaj by his dear absence . xxmaj let me go with him . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj let her have your voices . 
▁ xxmaj vouch with me , heaven , i therefore beg it not 
▁ xxmaj to please the palate of my appetite , 
▁ xxmaj nor to comply with heat- the young affects 
▁ xxmaj in me defunct- and proper satisfaction ; 
▁ xxmaj but to be free and bounteous to her mind . 
▁ xxmaj and heaven defend your good souls , that you think 
▁ i will your serious and great business scant 
▁ xxmaj for she is with me . xxmaj no , when light - wing'd toys 
▁ xxmaj of feather'd xxmaj cupid seel with wanton dullness 
▁ xxmaj my speculative and officed instruments , 
▁ xxmaj that my disports corrupt and taint my business , 
▁ xxmaj let housewives make a skillet of my helm , 
▁ xxmaj and all indign and base adversities 
▁ xxmaj make head against my estimation ! 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be it as you shall privately determine , 
▁ xxmaj either for her stay or going . xxmaj the affair cries haste , 
▁ xxmaj and speed must answer't : you must hence tonight . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj tonight , my lord ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this night . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj with all my heart . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj at nine i ' the morning here we 'll meet again . 
▁ xxmaj othello , leave some officer behind , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall our commission bring to you , 
▁ xxmaj with such things else of quality and respect 
▁ xxmaj as doth import you . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj so please your xxmaj grace , my ancient ; 
▁ a man he is of honesty and trust . 
▁ xxmaj to his conveyance i assign my wife , 
▁ xxmaj with what else needful your good xxmaj grace shall think 
▁ xxmaj to be sent after me . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj let it be so . 
▁ xxmaj good night to everyone . [ to xxmaj brabantio . ] xxmaj and , noble signior , 
▁ xxmaj if virtue no delighted beauty lack , 
▁ xxmaj your son - in - law is far more fair than black . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj adieu , brave xxmaj moor , use xxmaj desdemona well . 
▁ xxup brabantio . xxmaj look to her , xxmaj moor , if thou hast eyes to see ; 
▁ xxmaj she has deceived her father , and may thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj duke , xxmaj senators , and xxmaj officers . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj my life upon her faith ! xxmaj honest xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj desdemona must i leave to thee . 
▁ i prithee , let thy wife attend on her , 
▁ xxmaj and bring them after in the best advantage . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj desdemona , i have but an hour 
▁ xxmaj of love , of worldly matters and direction , 
▁ xxmaj to spend with thee . xxmaj we must obey the time . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj othello and xxmaj desdemona . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj iago ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what say'st thou , noble heart ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj what will i do , thinkest thou ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , go to bed and sleep . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i will incontinently drown myself . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj if thou dost , i shall never love thee after . 
▁ xxmaj why , thou silly gentleman ! 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj it is silliness to live when to live is torment , and then 
▁ have we a prescription to die when death is our physician . 
▁ xxup iago . o villainous ! i have looked upon the world for four times 
▁ seven years , and since i could distinguish betwixt a benefit and 
▁ an injury , i never found man that knew how to love himself . xxmaj ere i 
▁ would say i would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen , i 
▁ would change my humanity with a baboon . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj what should i do ? i confess it is my shame to be so fond , 
▁ but it is not in my virtue to amend it . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj virtue ? a fig ! ' tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus . 
▁ xxmaj our bodies are gardens , to the which our wills are gardeners ; so 
▁ that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce , set hyssop and weed 
▁ up thyme , supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with 
▁ many , either to have it sterile with idleness or manured with 
▁ industry , why , the power and corrigible authority of this lies in 
▁ our wills . xxmaj if the balance of our lives had not one scale of 
▁ reason to poise another of sensuality , the blood and baseness of 
▁ our natures would conduct us to most preposterous conclusions . 
▁ xxmaj but we have reason to cool our raging motions , our carnal stings , 
▁ our unbitted lusts ; whereof i take this , that you call love , to 
▁ be a sect or scion . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj it can not be . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj it is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the 
▁ will . xxmaj come , be a man ! xxmaj drown thyself ? xxmaj drown cats and blind 
▁ puppies . i have professed me thy friend , and i confess me knit to 
▁ thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness ; i could never 
▁ better stead thee than now . xxmaj put money in thy purse ; follow thou 
▁ the wars ; defeat thy favor with an usurped beard . i say , put 
▁ money in thy purse . xxmaj it can not be that xxmaj desdemona should long 
▁ continue her love to the xxmaj moor- put money in thy purse- nor he his 
▁ to her . xxmaj it was a violent commencement , and thou shalt see an 
▁ answerable sequestration- put but money in thy purse . xxmaj these xxmaj moors 
▁ are changeable in their wills- fill thy purse with money . xxmaj the 
▁ food that to him now is as luscious as locusts , shall be to him 
▁ shortly as acerb as the coloquintida . xxmaj she must change for youth ; 
▁ when she is sated with his body , she will find the error of her 
▁ choice . xxmaj she must have change , she must ; therefore put money in 
▁ thy purse . xxmaj if thou wilt needs damn thyself , do it a more delicate 
▁ way than drowning . xxmaj make all the money thou canst . xxmaj if sanctimony 
▁ and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and a supersubtle 
▁ xxmaj venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell , 
▁ thou shalt enjoy her- therefore make money . a pox of drowning 
▁ thyself ! xxmaj it is clean out of the way . xxmaj seek thou rather to be 
▁ hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without 
▁ her . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj wilt thou be fast to my hopes , if i depend on the issue ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj thou art sure of me- go , make money . i have told thee often , 
▁ and i retell thee again and again , i hate the xxmaj moor . xxmaj my cause is 
▁ hearted ; thine hath no less reason . xxmaj let us be conjunctive in our 
▁ revenge against him . xxmaj if thou canst cuckold him , thou dost thyself 
▁ a pleasure , me a sport . xxmaj there are many events in the womb of time 
▁ which will be delivered . xxmaj traverse , go , provide thy money . xxmaj we will 
▁ have more of this tomorrow . xxmaj adieu . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj where shall we meet i ' the morning ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj at my lodging . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj i 'll be with thee betimes . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj go to , farewell . xxmaj do you hear , xxmaj roderigo ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj what say you ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj no more of drowning , do you hear ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . i am changed ; xxmaj i 'll go sell all my land . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj thus do i ever make my fool my purse ; 
▁ xxmaj for i mine own gain'd knowledge should profane 
▁ xxmaj if i would time expend with such a snipe 
▁ xxmaj but for my sport and profit . i hate the xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj and it is thought abroad that ' twixt my sheets 
▁ xxmaj he has done my office . i know not if't be true , 
▁ xxmaj but i for mere suspicion in that kind 
▁ xxmaj will do as if for surety . xxmaj he holds me well , 
▁ xxmaj the better shall my purpose work on him . 
▁ xxmaj cassio 's a proper man . xxmaj let me see now- 
▁ xxmaj to get his place , and to plume up my will 
▁ xxmaj in double knavery- xxmaj how , how?- xxmaj let 's see- 
▁ xxmaj after some time , to abuse xxmaj othello 's ear 
▁ xxmaj that he is too familiar with his wife . 
▁ xxmaj he hath a person and a smooth dispose 
▁ xxmaj to be suspected- framed to make women false . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj moor is of a free and open nature , 
▁ xxmaj that thinks men honest that but seem to be so , 
▁ xxmaj and will as tenderly be led by the nose 
▁ xxmaj as asses are . 
▁ i have't . xxmaj it is engender'd . xxmaj hell and night 
▁ xxmaj must bring this monstrous birth to the world 's light . 
▁ xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a seaport in xxmaj cyprus . xxmaj an open place near the quay . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj montano and two xxmaj gentlemen . 

▁ xxup montano . xxmaj what from the cape can you discern at sea ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj nothing at all . xxmaj it is a high - wrought flood ; 
▁ i can not , ' twixt the heaven and the main , 
▁ xxmaj descry a sail . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land ; 
▁ a fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements . 
▁ xxmaj if it hath ruffian'd so upon the sea , 
▁ xxmaj what ribs of oak , when mountains melt on them , 
▁ xxmaj can hold the mortise ? xxmaj what shall we hear of this ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . a segregation of the xxmaj turkish fleet . 
▁ xxmaj for do but stand upon the foaming shore , 
▁ xxmaj the chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds ; 
▁ xxmaj the wind - shaked surge , with high and monstrous mane , 
▁ xxmaj seems to cast water on the burning bear , 
▁ xxmaj and quench the guards of the ever - fixed pole . 
▁ i never did like molestation view 
▁ xxmaj on the enchafed flood . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj if that the xxmaj turkish fleet 
▁ xxmaj be not enshelter'd and embay'd , they are drown'd ; 
▁ xxmaj it is impossible to bear it out . 

▁ xxmaj enter a third xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj news , lads ! xxmaj our wars are done . 
▁ xxmaj the desperate tempest hath so bang'd the xxmaj turks , 
▁ xxmaj that their designment halts . a noble ship of xxmaj venice 
▁ xxmaj hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance 
▁ xxmaj on most part of their fleet . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj how ? xxmaj is this true ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj the ship is here put in , 
▁ a xxmaj veronesa . xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj lieutenant to the warlike xxmaj moor , xxmaj othello , 
▁ xxmaj is come on shore ; the xxmaj moor himself at sea , 
▁ xxmaj and is in full commission here for xxmaj cyprus . 
▁ xxup montano . i am glad on't ; ' tis a worthy governor . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj but this same xxmaj cassio , though he speak of comfort 
▁ xxmaj touching the xxmaj turkish loss , yet he looks sadly 
▁ xxmaj and prays the xxmaj moor be safe ; for they were parted 
▁ xxmaj with foul and violent tempest . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj pray heavens he be , 
▁ xxmaj for i have served him , and the man commands 
▁ xxmaj like a full soldier . xxmaj let 's to the seaside , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj as well to see the vessel that 's come in 
▁ xxmaj as to throw out our eyes for brave xxmaj othello , 
▁ xxmaj even till we make the main and the aerial blue 
▁ xxmaj an indistinct regard .