xxbos xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj come , let 's do so , 
▁ xxmaj for every minute is expectancy 
▁ xxmaj of more arrivance . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassio . 

▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj thanks , you the valiant of this warlike isle , 
▁ xxmaj that so approve the xxmaj moor ! xxup o , let the heavens 
▁ xxmaj give him defense against the elements , 
▁ xxmaj for i have lost him on a dangerous sea . 
▁ xxup montano . i she well shipp'd ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj his bark is stoutly timber'd , and his pilot 
▁ xxmaj of very expert and approved allowance ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore my hopes , not surfeited to death , 
▁ xxmaj stand in bold cure . 
▁ a cry within , " a sail , a sail , a sail ! " 

▁ xxmaj enter a fourth xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj what noise ? 
▁ xxup fourth xxup gentleman . xxmaj the town is empty ; on the brow o ' the sea 
▁ xxmaj stand ranks of people , and they cry , " a sail ! " 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj my hopes do shape him for the governor . 
▁ xxmaj guns heard . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj they do discharge their shot of courtesy- 
▁ xxmaj our friends at least . 
▁ xxup cassio . i pray you , sir , go forth , 
▁ xxmaj and give us truth who ' tis that is arrived . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i shall . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj but , good lieutenant , is your general wived ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj most fortunately : he hath achieved a maid 
▁ xxmaj that paragons description and wild fame , 
▁ xxmaj one that excels the quirks of blazoning pens , 
▁ xxmaj and in the essential vesture of creation 
▁ xxmaj does tire the ingener . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter second xxmaj gentleman . 

▁ xxmaj how now ! who has put in ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . ' tis one xxmaj iago , ancient to the general . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj he has had most favorable and happy speed : 
▁ xxmaj tempests themselves , high seas , and howling winds , 
▁ xxmaj the gutter'd rocks , and congregated sands , 
▁ xxmaj traitors ensteep'd to clog the guiltless keel , 
▁ xxmaj as having sense of beauty , do omit 
▁ xxmaj their mortal natures , letting go safely by 
▁ xxmaj the divine xxmaj desdemona . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj what is she ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj she that i spake of , our great captain 's captain , 
▁ xxmaj left in the conduct of the bold xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj whose footing here anticipates our thoughts 
▁ a se'nnight 's speed . xxmaj great xxmaj jove , xxmaj othello guard , 
▁ xxmaj and swell his sail with thine own powerful breath , 
▁ xxmaj that he may bless this bay with his tall ship , 
▁ xxmaj make love 's quick pants in xxmaj desdemona 's arms , 
▁ xxmaj give renew'd fire to our extincted spirits , 
▁ xxmaj and bring all xxmaj cyprus comfort . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj desdemona , xxmaj emilia xxmaj iago , xxmaj roderigo , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup o , behold , 
▁ xxmaj the riches of the ship is come on shore ! 
▁ xxmaj ye men of xxmaj cyprus , let her have your knees . 
▁ xxmaj hall to thee , lady ! xxmaj and the grace of heaven , 
▁ xxmaj before , behind thee , and on every hand , 
▁ xxmaj enwheel thee round ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . i thank you , valiant xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxmaj what tidings can you tell me of my lord ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj he is not yet arrived , nor know i aught 
▁ xxmaj but that he 's well and will be shortly here . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , but i fear- xxmaj how lost you company ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj the great contention of the sea and skies 
▁ xxmaj parted our fellowship- xxmaj but , hark ! a sail . 
▁ a cry within , " a sail , a sail ! " xxmaj guns heard . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj they give their greeting to the citadel ; 
▁ xxmaj this likewise is a friend . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj see for the news . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj good ancient , you are welcome . [ to xxmaj emilia . ] xxmaj welcome , mistress . 
▁ xxmaj let it not gall your patience , good xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj that i extend my manners ; ' tis my breeding 
▁ xxmaj that gives me this bold show of courtesy . xxmaj kisses her . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj sir , would she give you so much of her lips 
▁ xxmaj as of her tongue she oft bestows on me , 
▁ xxmaj you'ld have enough . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas , she has no speech . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj in faith , too much ; 
▁ i find it still when i have list to sleep . 
▁ xxmaj marry , before your ladyship i grant , 
▁ xxmaj she puts her tongue a little in her heart 
▁ xxmaj and chides with thinking . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj you have little cause to say so . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj come on , come on . xxmaj you are pictures out of doors , 
▁ xxmaj bells in your parlors , wildcats in your kitchens , 
▁ xxmaj saints in your injuries , devils being offended , 
▁ xxmaj players in your housewifery , and housewives in your beds . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , fie upon thee , slanderer ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nay , it is true , or else i am a xxmaj turk : 
▁ xxmaj you rise to play , and go to bed to work . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj you shall not write my praise . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj no , let me not . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj what wouldst thou write of me , if thou shouldst 
▁ praise me ? 
▁ xxup iago . o gentle lady , do not put me to't , 
▁ xxmaj for i am nothing if not critical . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj come on , assay- xxmaj there 's one gone to the harbor ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ay , madam . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i am not merry , but i do beguile 
▁ xxmaj the thing i am by seeming otherwise . 
▁ xxmaj come , how wouldst thou praise me ? 
▁ xxup iago . i am about it , but indeed my invention 
▁ xxmaj comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze ; 
▁ xxmaj it plucks out brains and all . xxmaj but my xxmaj muse labors , 
▁ xxmaj and thus she is deliver'd . 
▁ xxmaj if she be fair and wise , fairness and wit , 
▁ xxmaj the one 's for use , the other useth it . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj well praised ! xxmaj how if she be black and witty ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj if she be black , and thereto have a wit , 
▁ xxmaj she 'll find a white that shall her blackness fit . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj worse and worse . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj how if fair and foolish ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj she never yet was foolish that was fair , 
▁ xxmaj for even her folly help'd her to an heir . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj these are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i ' the 
▁ alehouse . xxmaj what miserable praise hast thou for her that 's foul and 
▁ foolish ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj there 's none so foul and foolish thereunto , 
▁ xxmaj but does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do . 
▁ xxup desdemona . o heavy ignorance ! xxmaj thou praisest the worst best . xxmaj but what 
▁ praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed , one that 
▁ in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very 
▁ malice itself ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj she that was ever fair and never proud , 
▁ xxmaj had tongue at will and yet was never loud , 
▁ xxmaj never lack'd gold and yet went never gay , 
▁ xxmaj fled from her wish and yet said , " now i may " ; 
▁ xxmaj she that , being anger'd , her revenge being nigh , 
▁ xxmaj bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly ; 
▁ xxmaj she that in wisdom never was so frail 
▁ xxmaj to change the cod 's head for the salmon 's tail ; 
▁ xxmaj she that could think and ne'er disclose her mind , 
▁ xxmaj see suitors following and not look behind ; 
▁ xxmaj she was a wight , if ever such wight were- 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj to do what ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj to suckle fools and chronicle small beer . 
▁ xxup desdemona . o most lame and impotent conclusion ! xxmaj do not learn of him , 
▁ xxmaj emilia , though he be thy husband . xxmaj how say you , xxmaj cassio ? xxmaj is he not 
▁ a most profane and liberal counselor ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj he speaks home , madam . xxmaj you may relish him more in the 
▁ soldier than in the scholar . 
▁ xxup iago . [ aside . ] xxmaj he takes her by the palm ; ay , well said , whisper . 
▁ xxmaj with as little a web as this will i ensnare as great a fly as 
▁ xxmaj cassio . xxmaj ay , smile upon her , do ; i will gyve thee in thine own 
▁ courtship . xxmaj you say true ; ' tis so , indeed . xxmaj if such tricks as these 
▁ strip you out of your lieutenantry , it had been better you had 
▁ not kissed your three fingers so oft , which now again you are 
▁ most apt to play the sir in . xxmaj very good . xxmaj well kissed ! an excellent 
▁ courtesy ! ' tis so , indeed . xxmaj yet again your fingers to your lips ? 
▁ xxmaj would they were clyster - pipes for your sake ! [ trumpet within . ] 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj moor ! i know his trumpet . 
▁ xxup cassio . ' tis truly so . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj let 's meet him and receive him . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj lo , where he comes ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj othello and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup othello . o my fair warrior ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my dear xxmaj othello ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj it gives me wonder great as my content 
▁ xxmaj to see you here before me . o my soul 's joy ! 
▁ xxmaj if after every tempest come such calms , 
▁ xxmaj may the winds blow till they have waken'd death ! 
▁ xxmaj and let the laboring bark climb hills of seas 
▁ xxmaj olympus - high , and duck again as low 
▁ xxmaj as hell 's from heaven ! xxmaj if it were now to die , 
▁ ' twere now to be most happy ; for i fear 
▁ xxmaj my soul hath her content so absolute 
▁ xxmaj that not another comfort like to this 
▁ xxmaj succeeds in unknown fate . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj the heavens forbid 
▁ xxmaj but that our loves and comforts should increase , 
▁ xxmaj even as our days do grow ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj amen to that , sweet powers ! 
▁ i can not speak enough of this content ; 
▁ xxmaj it stops me here ; it is too much of joy . 
▁ xxmaj and this , and this , the greatest discords be xxmaj kisses her . 
▁ xxmaj that e'er our hearts shall make ! 
▁ xxup iago . [ aside . ] xxup o , you are well tuned now ! 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll set down the pegs that make this music , 
▁ xxmaj as honest as i am . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj come , let us to the castle . 
▁ xxmaj news , friends : our wars are done , the xxmaj turks are drown'd . 
▁ xxmaj how does my old acquaintance of this isle ? 
▁ xxmaj honey , you shall be well desired in xxmaj cyprus ; 
▁ i have found great love amongst them . o my sweet , 
▁ i prattle out of fashion , and i dote 
▁ xxmaj in mine own comforts . i prithee , good xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj go to the bay and disembark my coffers . 
▁ xxmaj bring thou the master to the citadel ; 
▁ xxmaj he is a good one , and his worthiness 
▁ xxmaj does challenge much respect . xxmaj come , xxmaj desdemona , 
▁ xxmaj once more well met at xxmaj cyprus . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj iago and xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj do thou meet me presently at the harbor . xxmaj come hither . xxmaj if thou 
▁ be'st valiant- as they say base men being in love have then a 
▁ nobility in their natures more than is native to them- list me . 
▁ xxmaj the lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard . xxmaj first , i 
▁ must tell thee this : xxmaj desdemona is directly in love with him . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj with him ? xxmaj why , ' tis not possible . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj lay thy finger thus , and let thy soul be instructed . xxmaj mark me 
▁ with what violence she first loved the xxmaj moor , but for bragging and 
▁ telling her fantastical lies . xxmaj and will she love him still for 
▁ prating ? xxmaj let not thy discreet heart think it . xxmaj her eye must be 
▁ fed ; and what delight shall she have to look on the devil ? xxmaj when 
▁ the blood is made dull with the act of sport , there should be , 
▁ again to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite , 
▁ loveliness in favor , sympathy in years , manners , and beauties- 
▁ all which the xxmaj moor is defective in . xxmaj now , for want of these 
▁ required conveniences , her delicate tenderness will find itself 
▁ abused , begin to heave the gorge , disrelish and abhor the xxmaj moor ; 
▁ very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second 
▁ choice . xxmaj now sir , this granted- as it is a most pregnant and 
▁ unforced position- who stands so eminently in the degree of this 
▁ fortune as xxmaj cassio does ? a knave very voluble ; no further 
▁ conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane 
▁ seeming , for the better compass of his salt and most hidden loose 
▁ affection ? xxmaj why , none , why , none- a slipper and subtle knave , a 
▁ finder out of occasions , that has an eye can stamp and 
▁ counterfeit advantages , though true advantage never present 
▁ itself- a devilish knave ! xxmaj besides , the knave is handsome , young , 
▁ and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds 
▁ look after- a pestilent complete knave , and the woman hath found 
▁ him already . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i can not believe that in her ; she 's full of most blest 
▁ condition . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj blest fig's - end ! xxmaj the wine she drinks is made of grapes . xxmaj if 
▁ she had been blest , she would never have loved the xxmaj moor . xxmaj blest 
▁ pudding ! xxmaj didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand ? 
▁ xxmaj didst not mark that ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj yes , that i did ; but that was but courtesy . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj lechery , by this hand ; an index and obscure prologue to the 
▁ history of lust and foul thoughts . xxmaj they met so near with their 
▁ lips that their breaths embraced together . xxmaj villainous thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj roderigo ! xxmaj when these mutualities so marshal the way , hard at hand 
▁ comes the master and main exercise , the incorporate conclusion . 
▁ xxmaj pish ! xxmaj but , sir , be you ruled by me . i have brought you from 
▁ xxmaj venice . xxmaj watch you tonight ; for the command , xxmaj i 'll lay't upon you . 
▁ xxmaj cassio knows you not . xxmaj i 'll not be far from you . xxmaj do you find some 
▁ occasion to anger xxmaj cassio , either by speaking too loud , or 
▁ tainting his discipline , or from what other course you please , 
▁ which the time shall more favorably minister . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj well . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj sir , he is rash and very sudden in choler , and haply may 
▁ strike at you . xxmaj provoke him , that he may ; for even out of that 
▁ will i cause these of xxmaj cyprus to mutiny , whose qualification shall 
▁ come into no true taste again but by the displanting of xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxmaj so shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means 
▁ i shall then have to prefer them , and the impediment most 
▁ profitably removed , without the which there were no expectation 
▁ of our prosperity . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i will do this , if i can bring it to any opportunity . 
▁ xxup iago . i warrant thee . xxmaj meet me by and by at the citadel . i must 
▁ fetch his necessaries ashore . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj adieu . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj that xxmaj cassio loves her , i do well believe it ; 
▁ xxmaj that she loves him , ' tis apt and of great credit . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj moor , howbeit that i endure him not , 
▁ xxmaj is of a constant , loving , noble nature , 
▁ xxmaj and i dare think he 'll prove to xxmaj desdemona 
▁ a most dear husband . xxmaj now , i do love her too , 
▁ xxmaj not out of absolute lust , though peradventure 
▁ i stand accountant for as great a sin , 
▁ xxmaj but partly led to diet my revenge , 
▁ xxmaj for that i do suspect the lusty xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj hath leap'd into my seat ; the thought whereof 
▁ xxmaj doth like a poisonous mineral gnaw my inwards , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing can or shall content my soul 
▁ xxmaj till i am even'd with him , wife for wife . 
▁ xxmaj or failing so , yet that i put the xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj at least into a jealousy so strong 
▁ xxmaj that judgement can not cure . xxmaj which thing to do , 
▁ xxmaj if this poor trash of xxmaj venice , whom i trace 
▁ xxmaj for his quick hunting , stand the putting on , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have our xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio on the hip , 
▁ xxmaj abuse him to the xxmaj moor in the rank garb 
▁ ( for i fear xxmaj cassio with my nightcap too ) , 
▁ xxmaj make the xxmaj moor thank me , love me , and reward me 
▁ xxmaj for making him egregiously an ass 
▁ xxmaj and practicing upon his peace and quiet 
▁ xxmaj even to madness . ' tis here , but yet confused : 
▁ xxmaj knavery 's plain face is never seen till used . xxmaj exit . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a street . 

 xxmaj enter a xxmaj herald with a proclamation ; people following . 

▁ xxup herald . xxmaj it is xxmaj othello 's pleasure , our noble and valiant general , 
▁ that upon certain tidings now arrived , importing the mere 
▁ perdition of the xxmaj turkish fleet , every man put himself into 
▁ triumph ; some to dance , some to make bonfires , each man to what 
▁ sport and revels his addiction leads him ; for besides these 
▁ beneficial news , it is the celebration of his nuptial . xxmaj so much 
▁ was his pleasure should be proclaimed . xxmaj all offices are open , and 
▁ there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five 
▁ till the bell have told eleven . xxmaj heaven bless the isle of xxmaj cyprus 
▁ and our noble general xxmaj othello ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a hall in the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello , xxmaj desdemona , xxmaj cassio , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj good xxmaj michael , look you to the guard tonight . 
▁ xxmaj let 's teach ourselves that honorable stop , 
▁ xxmaj not to outsport discretion . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj iago hath direction what to do ; 
▁ xxmaj but notwithstanding with my personal eye 
▁ xxmaj will i look to't . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj iago is most honest . 
▁ xxmaj michael , good night . xxmaj tomorrow with your earliest 
▁ xxmaj let me have speech with you . xxmaj come , my dear love , 
▁ xxmaj the purchase made , the fruits are to ensue ; 
▁ xxmaj that profit 's yet to come ' tween me and you . 
▁ xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj othello , xxmaj desdemona , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj welcome , xxmaj iago ; we must to the watch . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj not this hour , lieutenant ; ' tis not yet ten o ' the clock . xxmaj our 
▁ general cast us thus early for the love of his xxmaj desdemona ; who let 
▁ us not therefore blame . xxmaj he hath not yet made wanton the night 
▁ with her , and she is sport for xxmaj jove . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj she 's a most exquisite lady . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and , xxmaj i 'll warrant her , full of game . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj indeed she 's a most fresh and delicate creature . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what an eye she has ! xxmaj methinks it sounds a parley to 
▁ provocation . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj an inviting eye ; and yet methinks right modest . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and when she speaks , is it not an alarum to love ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj she is indeed perfection . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj well , happiness to their sheets ! xxmaj come , lieutenant , i have a 
▁ stope of wine , and here without are a brace of xxmaj cyprus gallants 
▁ that would fain have a measure to the health of black xxmaj othello . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj not tonight , good xxmaj iago . i have very poor and unhappy brains 
▁ for drinking . i could well wish courtesy would invent some other 
▁ custom of entertainment . 
▁ xxup iago . xxup o , they are our friends ! xxmaj but one cup ; xxmaj i 'll drink for you . 
▁ xxup cassio . i have drunk but one cup tonight , and that was craftily 
▁ qualified too , and behold what innovation it makes here . i am 
▁ unfortunate in the infirmity , and dare not task my weakness with 
▁ any more . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what , man ! ' tis a night of revels , the gallants desire it . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj where are they ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj here at the door ; i pray you , call them in . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj i 'll do't , but it dislikes me . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj if i can fasten but one cup upon him , 
▁ xxmaj with that which he hath drunk tonight already , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll be as full of quarrel and offense 
▁ xxmaj as my young mistress ' dog . xxmaj now my sick fool xxmaj roderigo , 
▁ xxmaj whom love hath turn'd almost the wrong side out , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj desdemona hath tonight caroused 
▁ xxmaj potations pottle - deep ; and he 's to watch . 
▁ xxmaj three lads of xxmaj cyprus , noble swelling spirits , 
▁ xxmaj that hold their honors in a wary distance , 
▁ xxmaj the very elements of this warlike isle , 
▁ xxmaj have i tonight fluster'd with flowing cups , 
▁ xxmaj and they watch too . xxmaj now , ' mongst this flock of drunkards , 
▁ xxmaj am i to put our xxmaj cassio in some action 
▁ xxmaj that may offend the isle . xxmaj but here they come . 
▁ xxmaj if consequence do but approve my dream , 
▁ xxmaj my boat sails freely , both with wind and stream . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj cassio ; with him xxmaj montano and xxmaj gentlemen ; 
▁ xxmaj servants following with wine . 

▁ xxup cassio . ' fore xxmaj god , they have given me a rouse already . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj good faith , a little one ; not past a pint , as i am a 
▁ soldier . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj some wine , ho ! 

▁ [ sings . ] " and let me the canakin clink , clink ; 
▁ xxmaj and let me the canakin clink . 
▁ a soldier 's a man ; 
▁ xxup o , man 's life 's but a span ; 
▁ xxmaj why then let a soldier drink . " 

▁ xxmaj some wine , boys ! 
▁ xxup cassio . ' fore xxmaj god , an excellent song . 
▁ xxup iago . i learned it in xxmaj england , where indeed they are most potent in 
▁ potting . xxmaj your xxmaj dane , your xxmaj german , and your swag - bellied xxmaj hollander- 
▁ xxmaj drink , ho!- are nothing to your xxmaj english . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj is your xxmaj englishman so expert in his drinking ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , he drinks you with facility your xxmaj dane dead drunk ; he 
▁ sweats not to overthrow your xxmaj almain ; he gives your xxmaj hollander a 
▁ vomit ere the next pottle can be filled . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj to the health of our general ! 
▁ xxup montano . i am for it , lieutenant , and xxmaj i 'll do you justice . 
▁ xxup iago . o sweet xxmaj england ! 

▁ [ sings . ] " king xxmaj stephen was and - a worthy peer , 
▁ xxmaj his breeches cost him but a crown ; 
▁ xxmaj he held them sixpence all too dear , 
▁ xxmaj with that he call'd the tailor lown . 

▁ " he was a wight of high renown , 
▁ xxmaj and thou art but of low degree . 
▁ ' tis pride that pulls the country down ; 
▁ xxmaj then take thine auld cloak about thee . " 

▁ xxmaj some wine , ho ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj why , this is a more exquisite song than the other . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj will you hear't again ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj no , for i hold him to be unworthy of his place that does 
▁ those things . xxmaj well , xxmaj god 's above all , and there be souls must be 
▁ saved , and there be souls must not be saved . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj it 's true , good lieutenant . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj for mine own part- no offense to the general , nor any man 
▁ of quality- i hope to be saved . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and so do i too , lieutenant . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj ay , but , by your leave , not before me ; the lieutenant is to 
▁ be saved before the ancient . xxmaj let 's have no more of this ; let 's to 
▁ our affairs . xxmaj god forgive us our sins ! xxmaj gentlemen , let 's look to 
▁ our business . xxmaj do not think , gentlemen , i am drunk : this is my 
▁ ancient , this is my right hand , and this is my left . i am not 
▁ drunk now ; i can stand well enough , and i speak well enough . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj excellent well . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj why , very well then ; you must not think then that i am 
▁ drunk . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj to the platform , masters ; come , let 's set the watch . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you see this fellow that is gone before ; 
▁ xxmaj he is a soldier fit to stand by xxmaj caesar 
▁ xxmaj and give direction . xxmaj and do but see his vice ; 
▁ ' tis to his virtue a just equinox , 
▁ xxmaj the one as long as the other . ' tis pity of him . 
▁ i fear the trust xxmaj othello puts him in 
▁ xxmaj on some odd time of his infirmity 
▁ xxmaj will shake this island . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj but is he often thus ? 
▁ xxup iago . ' tis evermore the prologue to his sleep . 
▁ xxmaj he 'll watch the horologe a double set , 
▁ xxmaj if drink rock not his cradle . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj it were well 
▁ xxmaj the general were put in mind of it . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps he sees it not , or his good nature 
▁ xxmaj prizes the virtue that appears in xxmaj cassio 
▁ xxmaj and looks not on his evils . xxmaj is not this true ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj roderigo . 

▁ xxup iago . [ aside to him . ] xxmaj how now , xxmaj roderigo ! 
▁ i pray you , after the lieutenant ; go . xxmaj exit xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj and ' tis great pity that the noble xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj should hazard such a place as his own second 
▁ xxmaj with one of an ingraft infirmity . 
▁ xxmaj it were an honest action to say 
▁ xxmaj so to the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj not xxup i , for this fair island . 
▁ i do love xxmaj cassio well , and would do much 
▁ xxmaj to cure him of this evil- xxmaj but , hark ! xxmaj what noise ? 
▁ a cry within , " help , help ! " 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj cassio , driving in xxmaj roderigo . 

▁ xxup cassio . ' zounds ! xxmaj you rogue ! xxmaj you rascal ! 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj what 's the matter , lieutenant ? 
▁ xxup cassio . a knave teach me my duty ! xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll beat the knave into a 
▁ twiggen bottle . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj beat me ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj dost thou prate , rogue ? xxmaj strikes xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj nay , good lieutenant ; i pray you , sir , hold your hand . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj let me go , sir , or xxmaj i 'll knock you o'er the mazzard . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj come , come , you 're drunk . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj drunk ? xxmaj they fight . 
▁ xxup iago . [ aside to xxmaj roderigo . ] xxmaj away , i say ; go out and cry a mutiny . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxmaj nay , good lieutenant ! xxmaj god 's will , gentlemen ! 
▁ xxmaj help , ho!- xxmaj lieutenant- sir- xxmaj montano- sir- 
▁ xxmaj help , masters!- xxmaj here 's a goodly watch indeed ! 
▁ a bell rings . 
▁ xxmaj who 's that that rings the bell?- xxmaj diablo , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj the town will rise . xxmaj god 's will , lieutenant , hold ! 
▁ xxmaj you will be shamed forever . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj othello and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what is the matter here ? 
▁ xxup montano . ' zounds , i bleed still ; i am hurt to the death . 
▁ xxmaj faints . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj hold , for your lives ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj hold , ho ! xxmaj lieutenant- sir- xxmaj montano- gentlemen- 
▁ xxmaj have you forgot all place of sense and duty ? 
▁ xxmaj hold ! the general speaks to you ! xxmaj hold , hold , for shame ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why , how now , ho ! from whence ariseth this ? 
▁ xxmaj are we turn'd xxmaj turks , and to ourselves do that 
▁ xxmaj which heaven hath forbid the xxmaj ottomites ? 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj christian shame , put by this barbarous brawl . 
▁ xxmaj he that stirs next to carve for his own rage 
▁ xxmaj holds his soul light ; he dies upon his motion . 
▁ xxmaj silence that dreadful bell ; it frights the isle 
▁ xxmaj from her propriety . xxmaj what is the matter , masters ? 
▁ xxmaj honest xxmaj iago , that look'st dead with grieving , 
▁ xxmaj speak : who began this ? xxmaj on thy love , i charge thee . 
▁ xxup iago . i do not know . xxmaj friends all but now , even now , 
▁ xxmaj in quarter , and in terms like bride and groom 
▁ xxmaj devesting them for bed ; and then , but now 
▁ ( as if some planet had unwitted men ) , 
▁ xxmaj swords out , and tilting one at other 's breast , 
▁ xxmaj in opposition bloody . i can not speak 
▁ xxmaj any beginning to this peevish odds ; 
▁ xxmaj and would in action glorious i had lost 
▁ xxmaj those legs that brought me to a part of it ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj how comes it , xxmaj michael , you are thus forgot ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i pray you , pardon me ; i can not speak . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj worthy xxmaj montano , you were wo nt be civil ; 
▁ xxmaj the gravity and stillness of your youth 
▁ xxmaj the world hath noted , and your name is great 
▁ xxmaj in mouths of wisest censure . xxmaj what 's the matter , 
▁ xxmaj that you unlace your reputation thus , 
▁ xxmaj and spend your rich opinion for the name 
▁ xxmaj of a night - brawler ? xxmaj give me answer to it . 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj worthy xxmaj othello , i am hurt to danger . 
▁ xxmaj your officer , xxmaj iago , can inform you- 
▁ xxmaj while i spare speech , which something now offends me- 
▁ xxmaj of all that i do know . xxmaj nor know i aught 
▁ xxmaj by me that 's said or done amiss this night , 
▁ xxmaj unless self - charity be sometimes a vice , 
▁ xxmaj and to defend ourselves it be a sin 
▁ xxmaj when violence assails us . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj now , by heaven , 
▁ xxmaj my blood begins my safer guides to rule , 
▁ xxmaj and passion , having my best judgement collied , 
▁ xxmaj assays to lead the way . xxmaj if i once stir , 
▁ xxmaj or do but lift this arm , the best of you 
▁ xxmaj shall sink in my rebuke . xxmaj give me to know 
▁ xxmaj how this foul rout began , who set it on , 
▁ xxmaj and he that is approved in this offense , 
▁ xxmaj though he had twinn'd with me , both at a birth , 
▁ xxmaj shall lose me . xxmaj what ! in a town of war , 
▁ xxmaj yet wild , the people 's hearts brimful of fear , 
▁ xxmaj to manage private and domestic quarrel , 
▁ xxmaj in night , and on the court and guard of safety ! 
▁ ' tis monstrous . xxmaj iago , who began't ? 
▁ xxup montano . xxmaj if partially affined , or leagued in office , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost deliver more or less than truth , 
▁ xxmaj thou art no soldier . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj touch me not so near : 
▁ i had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth 
▁ xxmaj than it should do offense to xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , i persuade myself , to speak the truth 
▁ xxmaj shall nothing wrong him . xxmaj thus it is , general . 
▁ xxmaj montano and myself being in speech , 
▁ xxmaj there comes a fellow crying out for help , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cassio following him with determined sword , 
▁ xxmaj to execute upon him . xxmaj sir , this gentleman 
▁ xxmaj steps in to xxmaj cassio and entreats his pause . 
▁ xxmaj myself the crying fellow did pursue , 
▁ xxmaj lest by his clamor- as it so fell out- 
▁ xxmaj the town might fall in fright . xxmaj he , swift of foot , 
▁ xxmaj outran my purpose ; and i return'd the rather 
▁ xxmaj for that i heard the clink and fall of swords , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cassio high in oath , which till tonight 
▁ i ne'er might say before . xxmaj when i came back- 
▁ xxmaj for this was brief- i found them close together , 
▁ xxmaj at blow and thrust , even as again they were 
▁ xxmaj when you yourself did part them . 
▁ xxmaj more of this matter can not i report . 
▁ xxmaj but men are men ; the best sometimes forget . 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj cassio did some little wrong to him , 
▁ xxmaj as men in rage strike those that wish them best , 
▁ xxmaj yet surely xxmaj cassio , i believe , received 
▁ xxmaj from him that fled some strange indignity , 
▁ xxmaj which patience could not pass . 
▁ xxup othello . i know , xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj thy honesty and love doth mince this matter , 
▁ xxmaj making it light to xxmaj cassio . xxmaj cassio , i love thee , 
▁ xxmaj but never more be officer of mine . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj desdemona , attended . 

▁ xxmaj look , if my gentle love be not raised up ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make thee an example . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj all 's well now , sweeting ; come away to bed . 
▁ xxmaj sir , for your hurts , myself will be your surgeon . 
▁ xxmaj lead him off . xxmaj exit xxmaj montano , attended . 
▁ xxmaj iago , look with care about the town , 
▁ xxmaj and silence those whom this vile brawl distracted . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj desdemona , ' tis the soldiers ' life . 
▁ xxmaj to have their balmy slumbers waked with strife . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj iago and xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what , are you hurt , lieutenant ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj ay , past all surgery . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj marry , heaven forbid ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj reputation , reputation , reputation ! xxup o , i have lost my 
▁ reputation ! i have lost the immortal part of myself , and what 
▁ remains is bestial . xxmaj my reputation , xxmaj iago , my reputation ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj as i am an honest man , i thought you had received some bodily 
▁ wound ; there is more sense in that than in reputation . xxmaj reputation 
▁ is an idle and most false imposition ; oft got without merit and 
▁ lost without deserving . xxmaj you have lost no reputation at all , 
▁ unless you repute yourself such a loser . xxmaj what , man ! there are 
▁ ways to recover the general again . xxmaj you are but now cast in his 
▁ mood , a punishment more in policy than in malice ; even so as one 
▁ would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion . xxmaj sue 
▁ to him again , and he 's yours . 
▁ xxup cassio . i will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a 
▁ commander with so slight , so drunken , and so indiscreet an 
▁ officer . xxmaj drunk ? and speak parrot ? and squabble ? swagger ? swear ? 
▁ and discourse fustian with one 's own shadow ? o thou invisible 
▁ spirit of wine , if thou hast no name to be known by , let us call 
▁ thee devil ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what was he that you followed with your sword ? 
▁ xxmaj what had he done to you ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i know not . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i remember a mass of things , but nothing distinctly ; a 
▁ quarrel , but nothing wherefore . o xxmaj god , that men should put an 
▁ enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains ! that we should , 
▁ with joy , pleasance , revel , and applause , transform ourselves 
▁ into beasts ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , but you are now well enough . xxmaj how came you thus 
▁ recovered ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj it hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the 
▁ devil wrath : one unperfectness shows me another , to make me 
▁ frankly despise myself . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj come , you are too severe a moraler . xxmaj as the time , the place , 
▁ and the condition of this country stands , i could heartily wish 
▁ this had not befallen ; but since it is as it is , mend it for your 
▁ own good . 
▁ xxup cassio . i will ask him for my place again ; he shall tell me i am a 
▁ drunkard ! xxmaj had i as many mouths as xxmaj hydra , such an answer would 
▁ stop them all . xxmaj to be now a sensible man , by and by a fool , and 
▁ presently a beast ! o strange ! xxmaj every inordinate cup is unblest , 
▁ and the ingredient is a devil . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj come , come , good wine is a good familiar creature , if it be 
▁ well used . xxmaj exclaim no more against it . xxmaj and , good lieutenant , i 
▁ think you think i love you . 
▁ xxup cassio . i have well approved it , sir . i drunk ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you or any man living may be drunk at some time , man . xxmaj i 'll 
▁ tell you what you shall do . xxmaj our general 's wife is now the 
▁ general . i may say so in this respect , for that he hath devoted 
▁ and given up himself to the contemplation , mark , and denotement 
▁ of her parts and graces . xxmaj confess yourself freely to her ; 
▁ importune her help to put you in your place again . xxmaj she is of so 
▁ free , so kind , so apt , so blessed a disposition , she holds it a 
▁ vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested . xxmaj this 
▁ broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter ; 
▁ and , my fortunes against any lay worth naming , this crack of your 
▁ love shall grow stronger than it was before . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj you advise me well . 
▁ xxup iago . i protest , in the sincerity of love and honest kindness . 
▁ xxup cassio . i think it freely ; and betimes in the morning i will beseech 
▁ the virtuous xxmaj desdemona to undertake for me . i am desperate of my 
▁ fortunes if they check me here . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you are in the right . xxmaj good night , lieutenant , i must to the 
▁ watch . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj good night , honest xxmaj iago . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and what 's he then that says i play the villain ? 
▁ xxmaj when this advice is free i give and honest , 
▁ xxmaj probal to thinking , and indeed the course 
▁ xxmaj to win the xxmaj moor again ? xxmaj for ' tis most easy 
▁ xxmaj the inclining xxmaj desdemona to subdue 
▁ xxmaj in any honest suit . xxmaj she 's framed as fruitful 
▁ xxmaj as the free elements . xxmaj and then for her 
▁ xxmaj to win the xxmaj moor , were't to renounce his baptism , 
▁ xxmaj all seals and symbols of redeemed sin , 
▁ xxmaj his soul is so enfetter'd to her love , 
▁ xxmaj that she may make , unmake , do what she list , 
▁ xxmaj even as her appetite shall play the god 
▁ xxmaj with his weak function . xxmaj how am i then a villain 
▁ xxmaj to counsel xxmaj cassio to this parallel course , 
▁ xxmaj directly to his good ? xxmaj divinity of hell ! 
▁ xxmaj when devils will the blackest sins put on , 
▁ xxmaj they do suggest at first with heavenly shows , 
▁ xxmaj as i do now . xxmaj for whiles this honest fool 
▁ xxmaj plies xxmaj desdemona to repair his fortune , 
▁ xxmaj and she for him pleads strongly to the xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll pour this pestilence into his ear , 
▁ xxmaj that she repeals him for her body 's lust ; 
▁ xxmaj and by how much she strives to do him good , 
▁ xxmaj she shall undo her credit with the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxmaj so will i turn her virtue into pitch , 
▁ xxmaj and out of her own goodness make the net 
▁ xxmaj that shall enmesh them all . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj roderigo . 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj roderigo ! 
▁ xxup roderigo . i do follow here in the chase , not like a hound that 
▁ hunts , but one that fills up the cry . xxmaj my money is almost spent ; i 
▁ have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled ; and i think the 
▁ issue will be , i shall have so much experience for my pains ; and 
▁ so , with no money at all and a little more wit , return again to 
▁ xxmaj venice . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj how poor are they that have not patience ! 
▁ xxmaj what wound did ever heal but by degrees ? 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft , 
▁ xxmaj and wit depends on dilatory time . 
▁ xxmaj does't not go well ? xxmaj cassio hath beaten thee , 
▁ xxmaj and thou by that small hurt hast cashier'd xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxmaj though other things grow fair against the sun , 
▁ xxmaj yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe . 
▁ xxmaj content thyself awhile . xxmaj by the mass , ' tis morning ; 
▁ xxmaj pleasure and action make the hours seem short . 
▁ xxmaj retire thee ; go where thou art billeted . 
▁ xxmaj away , i say . xxmaj thou shalt know more hereafter . 
▁ xxmaj nay , get thee gone . [ exit xxmaj roderigo . ] xxmaj two things are to be done : 
▁ xxmaj my wife must move for xxmaj cassio to her mistress- 
▁ xxmaj i 'll set her on ; 
▁ xxmaj myself the while to draw the xxmaj moor apart , 
▁ xxmaj and bring him jump when he may xxmaj cassio find 
▁ xxmaj soliciting his wife . xxmaj ay , that 's the way ; 
▁ xxmaj dull not device by coldness and delay . xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj before the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj cassio and some xxmaj musicians . 

▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj masters , play here , i will content your pains ; xxmaj something 
▁ that 's brief ; and bid " good morrow , general . " 
▁ xxmaj music . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj clown . 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj why , masters , have your instruments been in xxmaj naples , that 
▁ they speak i ' the nose thus ? 
▁ xxup first xxup musician . xxmaj how , sir , how ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj are these , i pray you , wind instruments ? 
▁ xxup first xxup musician . xxmaj ay , marry , are they , sir . 
▁ xxup clown . xxup o , thereby hangs a tail . 
▁ xxup first xxup musician . xxmaj whereby hangs a tale , sir ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj marry , sir , by many a wind instrument that i know . xxmaj but , 
▁ masters , here 's money for you ; and the general so likes your 
▁ music , that he desires you , for love 's sake , to make no more 
▁ noise with it . 
▁ xxup first xxup musician . xxmaj well , sir , we will not . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj if you have any music that may not be heard , to't again ; 
▁ but , as they say , to hear music the general does not greatly 
▁ care . 
▁ xxup first xxup musician . xxmaj we have none such , sir . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj then put up your pipes in your bag , for xxmaj i 'll away . 
▁ xxmaj go , vanish into air , away ! xxmaj exeunt xxmaj musicians . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj dost thou hear , my honest friend ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no , i hear not your honest friend ; i hear you . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj prithee , keep up thy quillets . xxmaj there 's a poor piece of gold 
▁ for thee . xxmaj if the gentlewoman that attends the general 's wife be 
▁ stirring , tell her there 's one xxmaj cassio entreats her a little favor 
▁ of speech . xxmaj wilt thou do this ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj she is stirring , sir . xxmaj if she will stir hither , i shall seem 
▁ to notify unto her . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj do , good my friend . xxmaj exit xxmaj clown . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxmaj in happy time , xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you have not been abed , then ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj why , no ; the day had broke 
▁ xxmaj before we parted . i have made bold , xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj to send in to your wife . xxmaj my suit to her 
▁ xxmaj is that she will to virtuous xxmaj desdemona 
▁ xxmaj procure me some access . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj i 'll send her to you presently ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll devise a mean to draw the xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj out of the way , that your converse and business 
▁ xxmaj may be more free . 
▁ xxup cassio . i humbly thank you for't . [ exit xxmaj iago . ] i never knew 
▁ a xxmaj florentine more kind and honest . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj good morrow , good lieutenant . i am sorry 
▁ xxmaj for your displeasure , but all will sure be well . 
▁ xxmaj the general and his wife are talking of it , 
▁ xxmaj and she speaks for you stoutly . xxmaj the xxmaj moor replies 
▁ xxmaj that he you hurt is of great fame in xxmaj cyprus 
▁ xxmaj and great affinity and that in wholesome wisdom 
▁ xxmaj he might not but refuse you ; but he protests he loves you 
▁ xxmaj and needs no other suitor but his likings 
▁ xxmaj to take the safest occasion by the front 
▁ xxmaj to bring you in again . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj yet , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj if you think fit , or that it may be done , 
▁ xxmaj give me advantage of some brief discourse 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj desdemona alone . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj pray you , come in . 
▁ i will bestow you where you shall have time 
▁ xxmaj to speak your bosom freely . 
▁ xxup cassio . i am much bound to you . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a room in the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello , xxmaj iago , and xxmaj gentlemen . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj these letters give , xxmaj iago , to the pilot , 
▁ xxmaj and by him do my duties to the xxmaj senate . 
▁ xxmaj that done , i will be walking on the works ; 
▁ xxmaj repair there to me . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj well , my good lord , xxmaj i 'll do't . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj this fortification , gentlemen , shall we see't ? 
▁ xxup gentlemen . xxmaj we 'll wait upon your lordship . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the garden of the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj desdemona , xxmaj cassio , and xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj be thou assured , good xxmaj cassio , i will do 
▁ xxmaj all my abilities in thy behalf . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj good madam , do . i warrant it grieves my husband 
▁ xxmaj as if the cause were his . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , that 's an honest fellow . xxmaj do not doubt , xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj but i will have my lord and you again 
▁ xxmaj as friendly as you were . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj bounteous madam , 
▁ xxmaj whatever shall become of xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj he 's never anything but your true servant . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i know't : i thank you . xxmaj you do love my lord : 
▁ xxmaj you have known him long ; and be you well assured 
▁ xxmaj he shall in strangeness stand no farther off 
▁ xxmaj than in a politic distance . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj ay , but , lady , 
▁ xxmaj that policy may either last so long , 
▁ xxmaj or feed upon such nice and waterish diet , 
▁ xxmaj or breed itself so out of circumstances , 
▁ xxmaj that i being absent and my place supplied , 
▁ xxmaj my general will forget my love and service . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj do not doubt that . xxmaj before xxmaj emilia here 
▁ i give thee warrant of thy place , assure thee , 
▁ xxmaj if i do vow a friendship , xxmaj i 'll perform it 
▁ xxmaj to the last article . xxmaj my lord shall never rest ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience ; 
▁ xxmaj his bed shall seem a school , his board a shrift ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll intermingle everything he does 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj cassio 's suit . xxmaj therefore be merry , xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj for thy solicitor shall rather die 
▁ xxmaj than give thy cause away . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj othello and xxmaj iago , at a distance . 

▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj madam , here comes my lord . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj madam , xxmaj i 'll take my leave . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj nay , stay and hear me speak . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj madam , not now . i am very ill at ease , 
▁ xxmaj unfit for mine own purposes . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj well , do your discretion . xxmaj exit xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ha ! i like not that . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what dost thou say ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nothing , my lord ; or if- i know not what . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj was not that xxmaj cassio parted from my wife ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj cassio , my lord ! xxmaj no , sure , i can not think it , 
▁ xxmaj that he would steal away so guilty - like , 
▁ xxmaj seeing you coming . 
▁ xxup othello . i do believe ' twas he . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj how now , my lord ! 
▁ i have been talking with a suitor here , 
▁ a man that languishes in your displeasure . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj who is't you mean ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why , your lieutenant , xxmaj cassio . xxmaj good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj if i have any grace or power to move you , 
▁ xxmaj his present reconciliation take ; 
▁ xxmaj for if he be not one that truly loves you , 
▁ xxmaj that errs in ignorance and not in cunning , 
▁ i have no judgement in an honest face . 
▁ i prithee , call him back . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj went he hence now ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj ay , sooth ; so humbled 
▁ xxmaj that he hath left part of his grief with me 
▁ xxmaj to suffer with him . xxmaj good love , call him back . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj not now , sweet xxmaj desdemona ; some other time . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj but shall't be shortly ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the sooner , sweet , for you . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj shall't be tonight at supper ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj no , not tonight . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj tomorrow dinner then ? 
▁ xxup othello . i shall not dine at home ; 
▁ i meet the captains at the citadel . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why then tomorrow night , or xxmaj tuesday morn , 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj tuesday noon , or night , on xxmaj wednesday morn . 
▁ i prithee , name the time , but let it not 
▁ xxmaj exceed three days . xxmaj in faith , he 's penitent ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet his trespass , in our common reason- 
▁ xxmaj save that , they say , the wars must make example 
▁ xxmaj out of their best- is not almost a fault 
▁ xxmaj to incur a private check . xxmaj when shall he come ? 
▁ xxmaj tell me , xxmaj othello . i wonder in my soul , 
▁ xxmaj what you would ask me , that i should deny , 
▁ xxmaj or stand so mammering on . xxmaj what ? xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj that came awooing with you , and so many a time 
▁ xxmaj when i have spoke of you dispraisingly 
▁ xxmaj hath ta'en your part- to have so much to do 
▁ xxmaj to bring him in ! xxmaj trust me , i could do much- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj prithee , no more . xxmaj let him come when he will ; 
▁ i will deny thee nothing . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why , this is not a boon ; 
▁ ' tis as i should entreat you wear your gloves , 
▁ xxmaj or feed on nourishing dishes , or keep you warm , 
▁ xxmaj or sue to you to do a peculiar profit 
▁ xxmaj to your own person . xxmaj nay , when i have a suit 
▁ xxmaj wherein i mean to touch your love indeed , 
▁ xxmaj it shall be full of poise and difficult weight , 
▁ xxmaj and fearful to be granted . 
▁ xxup othello . i will deny thee nothing , 
▁ xxmaj whereon , i do beseech thee , grant me this , 
▁ xxmaj to leave me but a little to myself . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj shall i deny you ? xxmaj no . xxmaj farewell , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj farewell , my xxmaj desdemona ; xxmaj i 'll come to thee straight . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj emilia , come . xxmaj be as your fancies teach you ; 
▁ xxmaj whate'er you be , i am obedient . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj desdemona and xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj excellent wretch ! xxmaj perdition catch my soul , 
▁ xxmaj but i do love thee ! and when i love thee not , 
▁ xxmaj chaos is come again . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj my noble lord- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what dost thou say , xxmaj iago ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj did xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio , when you woo'd my lady , 
▁ xxmaj know of your love ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj he did , from first to last . xxmaj why dost thou ask ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj but for a satisfaction of my thought ; 
▁ xxmaj no further harm . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why of thy thought , xxmaj iago ? 
▁ xxup iago . i did not think he had been acquainted with her . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , yes , and went between us very oft . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj indeed ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj indeed ? ay , indeed . xxmaj discern'st thou aught in that ? 
▁ xxmaj is he not honest ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj honest , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj honest ? xxmaj ay , honest . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj my lord , for aught i know . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what dost thou think ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj think , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj think , my lord ? xxmaj by heaven , he echoes me , 
▁ xxmaj as if there were some monster in his thought 
▁ xxmaj too hideous to be shown . xxmaj thou dost mean something . 
▁ i heard thee say even now , thou like'st not that , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj cassio left my wife . xxmaj what didst not like ? 
▁ xxmaj and when i told thee he was of my counsel 
▁ xxmaj in my whole course of wooing , thou criedst , " indeed ! " 
▁ xxmaj and didst contract and purse thy brow together , 
▁ xxmaj as if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain 
▁ xxmaj some horrible conceit . xxmaj if thou dost love me , 
▁ xxmaj show me thy thought . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj my lord , you know i love you . 
▁ xxup othello . i think thou dost ; 
▁ xxmaj and for i know thou'rt full of love and honesty 
▁ xxmaj and weigh'st thy words before thou givest them breath , 
▁ xxmaj therefore these stops of thine fright me the more ; 
▁ xxmaj for such things in a false disloyal knave 
▁ xxmaj are tricks of custom ; but in a man that 's just 
▁ xxmaj they 're close dilations , working from the heart , 
▁ xxmaj that passion can not rule . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj for xxmaj michael xxmaj cassio , 
▁ i dare be sworn i think that he is honest . 
▁ xxup othello . i think so too . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj men should be what they seem ; 
▁ xxmaj or those that be not , would they might seem none ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj certain , men should be what they seem . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why then i think xxmaj cassio 's an honest man . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nay , yet there 's more in this . 
▁ i prithee , speak to me as to thy thinkings , 
▁ xxmaj as thou dost ruminate , and give thy worst of thoughts 
▁ xxmaj the worst of words . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj good my lord , pardon me ; 
▁ xxmaj though i am bound to every act of duty , 
▁ i am not bound to that all slaves are free to . 
▁ xxmaj utter my thoughts ? xxmaj why , say they are vile and false ; 
▁ xxmaj as where 's that palace whereinto foul things 
▁ xxmaj sometimes intrude not ? xxmaj who has a breast so pure , 
▁ xxmaj but some uncleanly apprehensions 
▁ xxmaj keep leets and law - days , and in session sit