xxbos xxmaj with meditations lawful ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj thou dost conspire against thy friend , xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj if thou but think'st him wrong'd and makest his ear 
▁ a stranger to thy thoughts . 
▁ xxup iago . i do beseech you- 
▁ xxmaj though i perchance am vicious in my guess , 
▁ xxmaj as , i confess , it is my nature 's plague 
▁ xxmaj to spy into abuses , and oft my jealousy 
▁ xxmaj shapes faults that are not- that your wisdom yet , 
▁ xxmaj from one that so imperfectly conceits , 
▁ xxmaj would take no notice , nor build yourself a trouble 
▁ xxmaj out of his scattering and unsure observance . 
▁ xxmaj it were not for your quiet nor your good , 
▁ xxmaj nor for my manhood , honesty , or wisdom , 
▁ xxmaj to let you know my thoughts . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what dost thou mean ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj good name in man and woman , dear my lord , 
▁ xxmaj is the immediate jewel of their souls . 
▁ xxmaj who steals my purse steals trash ; ' tis something , nothing ; 
▁ ' twas mine , ' tis his , and has been slave to thousands ; 
▁ xxmaj but he that filches from me my good name 
▁ xxmaj robs me of that which not enriches him 
▁ xxmaj and makes me poor indeed . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj i 'll know thy thoughts . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you can not , if my heart were in your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj nor shall not , whilst ' tis in my custody . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxup o , beware , my lord , of jealousy ! 
▁ xxmaj it is the green - eyed monster , which doth mock 
▁ xxmaj the meat it feeds on . xxmaj that cuckold lives in bliss 
▁ xxmaj who , certain of his fate , loves not his wronger ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxup o , what damned minutes tells he o'er 
▁ xxmaj who dotes , yet doubts , suspects , yet strongly loves ! 
▁ xxup othello . o misery ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj poor and content is rich , and rich enough ; 
▁ xxmaj but riches fineless is as poor as winter 
▁ xxmaj to him that ever fears he shall be poor . 
▁ xxmaj good heaven , the souls of all my tribe defend 
▁ xxmaj from jealousy ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why , why is this ? 
▁ xxmaj think'st thou xxmaj i'ld make a life of jealousy , 
▁ xxmaj to follow still the changes of the moon 
▁ xxmaj with fresh suspicions ? xxmaj no ! xxmaj to be once in doubt 
▁ xxmaj is once to be resolved . xxmaj exchange me for a goat 
▁ xxmaj when i shall turn the business of my soul 
▁ xxmaj to such exsufflicate and blown surmises , 
▁ xxmaj matching thy inference . ' tis not to make me jealous 
▁ xxmaj to say my wife is fair , feeds well , loves company , 
▁ xxmaj is free of speech , sings , plays , and dances well ; 
▁ xxmaj where virtue is , these are more virtuous . 
▁ xxmaj nor from mine own weak merits will i draw 
▁ xxmaj the smallest fear or doubt of her revolt ; 
▁ xxmaj for she had eyes and chose me . xxmaj no , xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll see before i doubt ; when i doubt , prove ; 
▁ xxmaj and on the proof , there is no more but this- 
▁ xxmaj away at once with love or jealousy ! 
▁ xxup iago . i am glad of it , for now i shall have reason 
▁ xxmaj to show the love and duty that i bear you 
▁ xxmaj with franker spirit . xxmaj therefore , as i am bound , 
▁ xxmaj receive it from me . i speak not yet of proof . 
▁ xxmaj look to your wife ; observe her well with xxmaj cassio ; 
▁ xxmaj wear your eye thus , not jealous nor secure . 
▁ i would not have your free and noble nature 
▁ xxmaj out of self - bounty be abused . xxmaj look to't . 
▁ i know our country disposition well ; 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj venice they do let heaven see the pranks 
▁ xxmaj they dare not show their husbands ; their best conscience 
▁ xxmaj is not to leave't undone , but keep't unknown . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj dost thou say so ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj she did deceive her father , marrying you ; 
▁ xxmaj and when she seem'd to shake and fear your looks , 
▁ xxmaj she loved them most . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj and so she did . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , go to then . 
▁ xxmaj she that so young could give out such a seeming , 
▁ xxmaj to seel her father 's eyes up close as oak- 
▁ xxmaj he thought ' twas witchcraft- but i am much to blame ; 
▁ i humbly do beseech you of your pardon 
▁ xxmaj for too much loving you . 
▁ xxup othello . i am bound to thee forever . 
▁ xxup iago . i see this hath a little dash'd your spirits . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj not a jot , not a jot . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj i'faith , i fear it has . 
▁ i hope you will consider what is spoke 
▁ xxmaj comes from my love . xxmaj but i do see you 're moved ; 
▁ i am to pray you not to strain my speech 
▁ xxmaj to grosser issues nor to larger reach 
▁ xxmaj than to suspicion . 
▁ xxup othello . i will not . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj should you do so , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj my speech should fall into such vile success 
▁ xxmaj which my thoughts aim not at . xxmaj cassio 's my worthy friend- 
▁ xxmaj my lord , i see you 're moved . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj no , not much moved . 
▁ i do not think but xxmaj desdemona 's honest . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj long live she so ! and long live you to think so ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj and yet , how nature erring from itself- 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ay , there 's the point , as- to be bold with you- 
▁ xxmaj not to affect many proposed matches 
▁ xxmaj of her own clime , complexion , and degree , 
▁ xxmaj whereto we see in all things nature tends- 
▁ xxmaj foh , one may smell in such a will most rank , 
▁ xxmaj foul disproportion , thoughts unnatural . 
▁ xxmaj but pardon me . i do not in position 
▁ xxmaj distinctly speak of her ; though i may fear , 
▁ xxmaj her will , recoiling to her better judgement , 
▁ xxmaj may fall to match you with her country forms , 
▁ xxmaj and happily repent . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj farewell , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj if more thou dost perceive , let me know more ; 
▁ xxmaj set on thy wife to observe . xxmaj leave me , xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxup iago . [ going . ] xxmaj my lord , i take my leave . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why did i marry ? xxmaj this honest creature doubtless 
▁ xxmaj sees and knows more , much more , than he unfolds . 
▁ xxup iago . [ returning . ] xxmaj my lord , i would i might entreat your honor 
▁ xxmaj to scan this thing no further ; leave it to time . 
▁ xxmaj though it be fit that xxmaj cassio have his place , 
▁ xxmaj for sure he fills it up with great ability , 
▁ xxmaj yet , if you please to hold him off awhile , 
▁ xxmaj you shall by that perceive him and his means . 
▁ xxmaj note if your lady strain his entertainment 
▁ xxmaj with any strong or vehement importunity ; 
▁ xxmaj much will be seen in that . xxmaj in the meantime , 
▁ xxmaj let me be thought too busy in my fears- 
▁ xxmaj as worthy cause i have to fear i am- 
▁ xxmaj and hold her free , i do beseech your honor . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj fear not my government . 
▁ xxup iago . i once more take my leave . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj this fellow 's of exceeding honesty , 
▁ xxmaj and knows all qualities , with a learned spirit , 
▁ xxmaj of human dealings . xxmaj if i do prove her haggard , 
▁ xxmaj though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings , 
▁ xxmaj i'ld whistle her off and let her down the wind 
▁ xxmaj to prey at fortune . xxmaj haply , for i am black 
▁ xxmaj and have not those soft parts of conversation 
▁ xxmaj that chamberers have , or for i am declined 
▁ xxmaj into the vale of years- yet that 's not much- 
▁ xxmaj she 's gone . i am abused , and my relief 
▁ xxmaj must be to loathe her . o curse of marriage , 
▁ xxmaj that we can call these delicate creatures ours , 
▁ xxmaj and not their appetites ! i had rather be a toad , 
▁ xxmaj and live upon the vapor of a dungeon , 
▁ xxmaj than keep a corner in the thing i love 
▁ xxmaj for others ' uses . xxmaj yet , ' tis the plague of great ones : 
▁ xxmaj prerogatived are they less than the base ; 
▁ ' tis destiny unshunnable , like death . 
▁ xxmaj even then this forked plague is fated to us 
▁ xxmaj when we do quicken . xxmaj desdemona comes : 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj desdemona and xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxmaj if she be false , xxup o , then heaven mocks itself ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not believe't . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj how now , my dear xxmaj othello ! 
▁ xxmaj your dinner , and the generous islanders 
▁ xxmaj by you invited , do attend your presence . 
▁ xxup othello . i am to blame . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why do you speak so faintly ? 
▁ xxmaj are you not well ? 
▁ xxup othello . i have a pain upon my forehead here . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj faith , that 's with watching ; ' twill away again . 
▁ xxmaj let me but bind it hard , within this hour 
▁ xxmaj it will be well . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj your napkin is too little ; 
▁ xxmaj he puts the handkerchief from him , and she drops it . 
▁ xxmaj let it alone . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll go in with you . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i am very sorry that you are not well . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj othello and xxmaj desdemona . 
▁ xxup emilia . i am glad i have found this napkin ; 
▁ xxmaj this was her first remembrance from the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxmaj my wayward husband hath a hundred times 
▁ xxmaj woo'd me to steal it ; but she so loves the token , 
▁ xxmaj for he conjured her she should ever keep it , 
▁ xxmaj that she reserves it evermore about her 
▁ xxmaj to kiss and talk to . xxmaj i 'll have the work ta'en out , 
▁ xxmaj and give't xxmaj iago . xxmaj what he will do with it 
▁ xxmaj heaven knows , not xxup i ; 
▁ i nothing but to please his fantasy . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj how now , what do you here alone ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj do not you chide ; i have a thing for you . 
▁ xxup iago . a thing for me ? xxmaj it is a common thing- 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj to have a foolish wife . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxup o , is that all ? xxmaj what will you give me now 
▁ xxmaj for that same handkerchief ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what handkerchief ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj what handkerchief ? 
▁ xxmaj why , that the xxmaj moor first gave to xxmaj desdemona , 
▁ xxmaj that which so often you did bid me steal . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj hast stol'n it from her ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj no , faith ; she let it drop by negligence , 
▁ xxmaj and , to the advantage , i being here took't up . 
▁ xxmaj look , here it is . 
▁ xxup iago . a good wench ; give it me . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj what will you do with't , that you have been so earnest 
▁ xxmaj to have me filch it ? 
▁ xxup iago . [ snatching it . ] xxmaj why , what is that to you ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj if't be not for some purpose of import , 
▁ xxmaj give't me again . xxmaj poor lady , she 'll run mad 
▁ xxmaj when she shall lack it . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj be not acknown on't ; i have use for it . 
▁ xxmaj go , leave me . xxmaj exit xxmaj emilia . 
▁ i will in xxmaj cassio 's lodging lose this napkin , 
▁ xxmaj and let him find it . xxmaj trifles light as air 
▁ xxmaj are to the jealous confirmations strong 
▁ xxmaj as proofs of holy writ ; this may do something . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj moor already changes with my poison : 
▁ xxmaj dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons , 
▁ xxmaj which at the first are scarce found to distaste , 
▁ xxmaj but with a little act upon the blood 
▁ xxmaj burn like the mines of sulphur . i did say so . 
▁ xxmaj look , where he comes ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj othello . 

▁ xxmaj not poppy , nor mandragora , 
▁ xxmaj nor all the drowsy syrups of the world , 
▁ xxmaj shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep 
▁ xxmaj which thou owedst yesterday . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ha , ha , false to me ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , how now , general ! xxmaj no more of that . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj avaunt ! be gone ! xxmaj thou hast set me on the rack . 
▁ i swear ' tis better to be much abused 
▁ xxmaj than but to know't a little . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj how now , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what sense had i of her stol'n hours of lust ? 
▁ i saw't not , thought it not , it harm'd not me ; 
▁ i slept the next night well , was free and merry ; 
▁ i found not xxmaj cassio 's kisses on her lips . 
▁ xxmaj he that is robb'd , not wanting what is stol'n , 
▁ xxmaj let him not know't and he 's not robb'd at all . 
▁ xxup iago . i am sorry to hear this . 
▁ xxup othello . i had been happy if the general camp , 
▁ xxmaj pioners and all , had tasted her sweet body , 
▁ xxmaj so i had nothing known . xxup o , now forever 
▁ xxmaj farewell the tranquil mind ! xxmaj farewell content ! 
▁ xxmaj farewell the plumed troop and the big wars 
▁ xxmaj that make ambition virtue ! xxup o , farewell , 
▁ xxmaj farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump , 
▁ xxmaj the spirit - stirring drum , the ear - piercing fife , 
▁ xxmaj the royal banner , and all quality , 
▁ xxmaj pride , pomp , and circumstance of glorious war ! 
▁ xxmaj and o you mortal engines , whose rude throats 
▁ xxmaj the immortal xxmaj jove 's dread clamors counterfeit , 
▁ xxmaj farewell ! xxmaj othello 's occupation 's gone ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj is't possible , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj villain , be sure thou prove my love a whore ; 
▁ xxmaj be sure of it . xxmaj give me the ocular proof ; 
▁ xxmaj or , by the worth of man 's eternal soul , 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst been better have been born a dog 
▁ xxmaj than answer my waked wrath ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj is't come to this ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj make me to see't ; or at the least so prove it , 
▁ xxmaj that the probation bear no hinge nor loop 
▁ xxmaj to hang a doubt on ; or woe upon thy life ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj my noble lord- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj if thou dost slander her and torture me , 
▁ xxmaj never pray more ; abandon all remorse ; 
▁ xxmaj on horror 's head horrors accumulate ; 
▁ xxmaj do deeds to make heaven weep , all earth amazed ; 
▁ xxmaj for nothing canst thou to damnation add 
▁ xxmaj greater than that . 
▁ xxup iago . o grace ! o heaven defend me ! 
▁ xxmaj are you a man ? have you a soul or sense ? 
▁ xxmaj god be wi ' you ; take mine office . o wretched fool , 
▁ xxmaj that livest to make thine honesty a vice ! 
▁ o monstrous world ! xxmaj take note , take note , o world , 
▁ xxmaj to be direct and honest is not safe . 
▁ i thank you for this profit , and from hence 
▁ xxmaj i 'll love no friend sith love breeds such offense . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nay , stay ; thou shouldst be honest . 
▁ xxup iago . i should be wise ; for honesty 's a fool , 
▁ xxmaj and loses that it works for . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj by the world , 
▁ i think my wife be honest , and think she is not ; 
▁ i think that thou art just , and think thou art not . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have some proof . xxmaj her name , that was as fresh 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj dian 's visage , is now begrimed and black 
▁ xxmaj as mine own face . xxmaj if there be cords or knives , 
▁ xxmaj poison or fire , or suffocating streams , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not endure it . xxmaj would i were satisfied ! 
▁ xxup iago . i see , sir , you are eaten up with passion ; 
▁ i do repent me that i put it to you . 
▁ xxmaj you would be satisfied ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj would ? xxmaj nay , i will . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and may . xxmaj but , how ? how satisfied , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj would you , the supervisor , grossly gape on ? 
▁ xxmaj behold her topp'd ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj death and damnation ! xxup o ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj it were a tedious difficulty , i think , 
▁ xxmaj to bring them to that prospect . xxmaj damn them then , 
▁ xxmaj if ever mortal eyes do see them bolster 
▁ xxmaj more than their own ! xxmaj what then ? how then ? 
▁ xxmaj what shall i say ? xxmaj where 's satisfaction ? 
▁ xxmaj it is impossible you should see this 
▁ xxmaj were they as prime as goats , as hot as monkeys , 
▁ xxmaj as salt as wolves in pride , and fools as gross 
▁ xxmaj as ignorance made drunk . xxmaj but yet , i say , 
▁ xxmaj if imputation and strong circumstances , 
▁ xxmaj which lead directly to the door of truth , 
▁ xxmaj will give you satisfaction , you may have't . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj give me a living reason she 's disloyal . 
▁ xxup iago . i do not like the office ; 
▁ xxmaj but sith i am enter'd in this cause so far , 
▁ xxmaj prick'd to't by foolish honesty and love , 
▁ i will go on . i lay with xxmaj cassio lately 
▁ xxmaj and , being troubled with a raging tooth , 
▁ i could not sleep . 
▁ xxmaj there are a kind of men so loose of soul , 
▁ xxmaj that in their sleeps will mutter their affairs ; 
▁ xxmaj one of this kind is xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxmaj in sleep i heard him say , " sweet xxmaj desdemona , 
▁ xxmaj let us be wary , let us hide our loves " ; 
▁ xxmaj and then , sir , would he gripe and wring my hand , 
▁ xxmaj cry , " o sweet creature ! " and then kiss me hard , 
▁ xxmaj as if he pluck'd up kisses by the roots , 
▁ xxmaj that grew upon my lips ; then laid his leg 
▁ xxmaj over my thigh , and sigh'd and kiss'd ; and then 
▁ xxmaj cried , " cursed fate that gave thee to the xxmaj moor ! " 
▁ xxup othello . o monstrous ! monstrous ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nay , this was but his dream . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj but this denoted a foregone conclusion . 
▁ ' tis a shrewd doubt , though it be but a dream . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and this may help to thicken other proofs 
▁ xxmaj that do demonstrate thinly . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj i 'll tear her all to pieces . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nay , but be wise ; yet we see nothing done ; 
▁ xxmaj she may be honest yet . xxmaj tell me but this ; 
▁ xxmaj have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief 
▁ xxmaj spotted with strawberries in your wife 's hand ? 
▁ xxup othello . i gave her such a one ; ' twas my first gift . 
▁ xxup iago . i know not that ; but such a handkerchief- 
▁ i am sure it was your wife's- did i today 
▁ xxmaj see xxmaj cassio wipe his beard with . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj if it be that- 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj if it be that , or any that was hers , 
▁ xxmaj it speaks against her with the other proofs . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , that the slave had forty thousand lives ! 
▁ xxmaj one is too poor , too weak for my revenge . 
▁ xxmaj now do i see ' tis true . xxmaj look here , xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj all my fond love thus do i blow to heaven . 
▁ ' tis gone . 
▁ xxmaj arise , black vengeance , from thy hollow hell ! 
▁ xxmaj yield up , o love , thy crown and hearted throne 
▁ xxmaj to tyrannous hate ! xxmaj swell , bosom , with thy fraught , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis of aspics ' tongues ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj yet be content . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , blood , blood , blood ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj patience , i say ; your mind perhaps may change . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj never , xxmaj iago . xxmaj like to the xxmaj pontic xxmaj sea , 
▁ xxmaj whose icy current and compulsive course 
▁ xxmaj ne'er feels retiring ebb , but keeps due on 
▁ xxmaj to the xxmaj propontic and the xxmaj hellespont , 
▁ xxmaj even so my bloody thoughts , with violent pace , 
▁ xxmaj shall ne'er look back , ne'er ebb to humble love , 
▁ xxmaj till that a capable and wide revenge 
▁ xxmaj swallow them up . xxmaj now , by yond marble heaven , 
▁ xxmaj in the due reverence of a sacred vow xxmaj kneels . 
▁ i here engage my words . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj do not rise yet . xxmaj kneels . 
▁ xxmaj witness , you ever - burning lights above , 
▁ xxmaj you elements that clip us round about , 
▁ xxmaj witness that here xxmaj iago doth give up 
▁ xxmaj the execution of his wit , hands , heart , 
▁ xxmaj to wrong'd xxmaj othello 's service ! xxmaj let him command , 
▁ xxmaj and to obey shall be in me remorse , 
▁ xxmaj what bloody business ever . xxmaj they rise . 
▁ xxup othello . i greet thy love , 
▁ xxmaj not with vain thanks , but with acceptance bounteous , 
▁ xxmaj and will upon the instant put thee to't : 
▁ xxmaj within these three days let me hear thee say 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj cassio 's not alive . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj my friend is dead , ' tis done at your request ; 
▁ xxmaj but let her live . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj damn her , lewd minx ! xxup o , damn her ! 
▁ xxmaj come , go with me apart ; i will withdraw , 
▁ xxmaj to furnish me with some swift means of death 
▁ xxmaj for the fair devil . xxmaj now art thou my lieutenant . 
▁ xxup iago . i am your own forever . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj before the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj desdemona , xxmaj emilia , and xxmaj clown . 

▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj do you know , sirrah , where xxmaj lieutenant xxmaj cassio lies ? 
▁ xxup clown . i dare not say he lies anywhere . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why , man ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj he 's a soldier ; and for one to say a soldier lies , is 
▁ stabbing . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj go to ! xxmaj where lodges he ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj to tell you where he lodges , is to tell you where i lie . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj can anything be made of this ? 
▁ xxup clown . i know not where he lodges , and for me to devise a lodging , 
▁ and say he lies here or he lies there , were to lie in mine own 
▁ throat . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj can you inquire him out and be edified by report ? 
▁ xxup clown . i will catechize the world for him ; that is , make questions 
▁ and by them answer . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj seek him , bid him come hither . xxmaj tell him i have moved my 
▁ lord on his behalf and hope all will be well . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj to do this is within the compass of man 's wit , and therefore 
▁ i will attempt the doing it . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj where should i lose that handkerchief , xxmaj emilia ? 
▁ xxup emilia . i know not , madam . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj believe me , i had rather have lost my purse 
▁ xxmaj full of crusadoes ; and , but my noble xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj is true of mind and made of no such baseness 
▁ xxmaj as jealous creatures are , it were enough 
▁ xxmaj to put him to ill thinking . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj is he not jealous ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj who , he ? i think the sun where he was born 
▁ xxmaj drew all such humors from him . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj look , where he comes . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i will not leave him now till xxmaj cassio 
▁ xxmaj be call'd to him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj othello . 

▁ xxmaj how is't with you , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj well , my good lady . [ aside . ] xxup o , hardness to dissemble ! 
▁ xxmaj how do you , xxmaj desdemona ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj well , my good lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj give me your hand . xxmaj this hand is moist , my lady . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj it yet has felt no age nor known no sorrow . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj this argues fruitfulness and liberal heart ; 
▁ xxmaj hot , hot , and moist . xxmaj this hand of yours requires 
▁ a sequester from liberty , fasting , and prayer , 
▁ xxmaj much castigation , exercise devout , 
▁ xxmaj for here 's a young and sweating devil here 
▁ xxmaj that commonly rebels . ' tis a good hand , 
▁ a frank one . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj you may , indeed , say so ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' twas that hand that gave away my heart . 
▁ xxup othello . a liberal hand . xxmaj the hearts of old gave hands ; 
▁ xxmaj but our new heraldry is hands , not hearts . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i can not speak of this . xxmaj come now , your promise . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what promise , chuck ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . i have sent to bid xxmaj cassio come speak with you . 
▁ xxup othello . i have a salt and sorry rheum offends me ; 
▁ xxmaj lend me thy handkerchief . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj here , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that which i gave you . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i have it not about me . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj not ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj no , faith , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that 's a fault . xxmaj that handkerchief 
▁ xxmaj did an xxmaj egyptian to my mother give ; 
▁ xxmaj she was a charmer , and could almost read 
▁ xxmaj the thoughts of people . xxmaj she told her , while she kept it , 
▁ ' twould make her amiable and subdue my father 
▁ xxmaj entirely to her love , but if she lost it 
▁ xxmaj or made a gift of it , my father 's eye 
▁ xxmaj should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt 
▁ xxmaj after new fancies . xxmaj she dying gave it me , 
▁ xxmaj and bid me , when my fate would have me wive , 
▁ xxmaj to give it her . i did so , and take heed on't ; 
▁ xxmaj make it a darling like your precious eye ; 
▁ xxmaj to lose't or give't away were such perdition 
▁ xxmaj as nothing else could match . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxup othello . ' tis true ; there 's magic in the web of it . 
▁ a sibyl , that had number'd in the world 
▁ xxmaj the sun to course two hundred compasses , 
▁ xxmaj in her prophetic fury sew'd the work ; 
▁ xxmaj the worms were hallow'd that did breed the silk , 
▁ xxmaj and it was dyed in mummy which the skillful 
▁ xxmaj conserved of maiden 's hearts . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj indeed ! is't true ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj most veritable ; therefore look to't well . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj then would to xxmaj god that i had never seen't ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ha ! wherefore ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why do you speak so startingly and rash ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj is't lost ? is't gone ? speak , is it out o ' the way ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj heaven bless us ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj say you ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj it is not lost ; but what an if it were ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj how ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . i say , it is not lost . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj fetch't , let me see it . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why , so i can , sir , but i will not now . 
▁ xxmaj this is a trick to put me from my suit . 
▁ xxmaj pray you , let xxmaj cassio be received again . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj fetch me the handkerchief , my mind misgives . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj come , come , 
▁ xxmaj you 'll never meet a more sufficient man . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the handkerchief ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . i pray , talk me of xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the handkerchief ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . a man that all his time 
▁ xxmaj hath founded his good fortunes on your love , 
▁ xxmaj shared dangers with you- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the handkerchief ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj in sooth , you are to blame . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj away ! xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj is not this man jealous ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . i ne'er saw this before . 
▁ xxmaj sure there 's some wonder in this handkerchief ; 
▁ i am most unhappy in the loss of it . 
▁ xxup emilia . ' tis not a year or two shows us a man . 
▁ xxmaj they are all but stomachs and we all but food ; 
▁ xxmaj they eat us hungerly , and when they are full 
▁ xxmaj they belch us . xxmaj look you ! xxmaj cassio and my husband . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassio and xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj there is no other way ; ' tis she must do't . 
▁ xxmaj and , lo , the happiness ! xxmaj go and importune her . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj how now , good xxmaj cassio ! xxmaj what 's the news with you ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj madam , my former suit : i do beseech you 
▁ xxmaj that by your virtuous means i may again 
▁ xxmaj exist and be a member of his love 
▁ xxmaj whom i with all the office of my heart 
▁ xxmaj entirely honor . i would not be delay'd . 
▁ xxmaj if my offense be of such mortal kind 
▁ xxmaj that nor my service past nor present sorrows 
▁ xxmaj nor purposed merit in futurity 
▁ xxmaj can ransom me into his love again , 
▁ xxmaj but to know so must be my benefit ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall i clothe me in a forced content 
▁ xxmaj and shut myself up in some other course 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj fortune 's alms . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas , thrice - gentle xxmaj cassio ! 
▁ xxmaj my advocation is not now in tune ; 
▁ xxmaj my lord is not my lord , nor should i know him 
▁ xxmaj were he in favor as in humor alter'd . 
▁ xxmaj so help me every spirit sanctified , 
▁ xxmaj as i have spoken for you all my best 
▁ xxmaj and stood within the blank of his displeasure 
▁ xxmaj for my free speech ! xxmaj you must awhile be patient . 
▁ xxmaj what i can do i will ; and more i will 
▁ xxmaj than for myself i dare . xxmaj let that suffice you . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj is my lord angry ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj he went hence but now , 
▁ xxmaj and certainly in strange unquietness . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj can he be angry ? i have seen the cannon , 
▁ xxmaj when it hath blown his ranks into the air 
▁ xxmaj and , like the devil , from his very arm 
▁ xxmaj puff'd his own brother . xxmaj and can he be angry ? 
▁ xxmaj something of moment then . i will go meet him . 
▁ xxmaj there 's matter in't indeed if he be angry . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i prithee , do so . xxmaj exit xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxmaj something sure of state , 
▁ xxmaj either from xxmaj venice or some unhatch'd practice 
▁ xxmaj made demonstrable here in xxmaj cyprus to him , 
▁ xxmaj hath puddled his clear spirit ; and in such cases 
▁ xxmaj men 's natures wrangle with inferior things , 
▁ xxmaj though great ones are their object . ' tis even so ; 
▁ xxmaj for let our finger ache , and it indues 
▁ xxmaj our other healthful members even to that sense 
▁ xxmaj of pain . xxmaj nay , we must think men are not gods , 
▁ xxmaj nor of them look for such observancy 
▁ xxmaj as fits the bridal . xxmaj beshrew me much , xxmaj emilia , 
▁ i was , unhandsome warrior as i am , 
▁ xxmaj arraigning his unkindness with my soul ; 
▁ xxmaj but now i find i had suborn'd the witness , 
▁ xxmaj and he 's indicted falsely . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj pray heaven it be state matters , as you think , 
▁ xxmaj and no conception nor no jealous toy 
▁ xxmaj concerning you . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas the day , i never gave him cause ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj but jealous souls will not be answer'd so ; 
▁ xxmaj they are not ever jealous for the cause , 
▁ xxmaj but jealous for they are jealous . ' tis a monster 
▁ xxmaj begot upon itself , born on itself . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj heaven keep that monster from xxmaj othello 's mind ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj lady , amen . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i will go seek him . xxmaj cassio , walk hereabout . 
▁ xxmaj if i do find him fit , xxmaj i 'll move your suit , 
▁ xxmaj and seek to effect it to my uttermost . 
▁ xxup cassio . i humbly thank your ladyship . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj desdemona and xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj bianca . 

▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj save you , friend xxmaj cassio ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj what make you from home ? 
▁ xxmaj how is it with you , my most fair xxmaj bianca ? 
▁ xxmaj i'faith , sweet love , i was coming to your house . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj and i was going to your lodging , xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxmaj what , keep a week away ? seven days and nights ? 
▁ xxmaj eight score eight hours ? and lovers ' absent hours , 
▁ xxmaj more tedious than the dial eight score times ? 
▁ o weary reckoning ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj bianca . 
▁ i have this while with leaden thoughts been press'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but i shall in a more continuate time 
▁ xxmaj strike off this score of absence . xxmaj sweet xxmaj bianca , 
▁ xxmaj gives her xxmaj desdemona 's handkerchief . 
▁ xxmaj take me this work out . 
▁ xxup bianca . o xxmaj cassio , whence came this ? 
▁ xxmaj this is some token from a newer friend . 
▁ xxmaj to the felt absence now i feel a cause . 
▁ xxmaj is't come to this ? xxmaj well , well . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj go to , woman ! 
▁ xxmaj throw your vile guesses in the devil 's teeth , 
▁ xxmaj from whence you have them . xxmaj you are jealous now 
▁ xxmaj that this is from some mistress , some remembrance . 
▁ xxmaj no , by my faith , xxmaj bianca . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj why , whose is it ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i know not , sweet . i found it in my chamber . 
▁ i like the work well . xxmaj ere it be demanded- 
▁ xxmaj as like enough it will- xxmaj i'ld have it copied . 
▁ xxmaj take it , and do't ; and leave me for this time . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj leave you ! wherefore ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i do attend here on the general ; 
▁ xxmaj and think it no addition , nor my wish , 
▁ xxmaj to have him see me woman'd . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj why , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj not that i love you not . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj but that you do not love me . 
▁ i pray you , bring me on the way a little , 
▁ xxmaj and say if i shall see you soon at night . 
▁ xxup cassio . ' tis but a little way that i can bring you , 
▁ xxmaj for i attend here , but xxmaj i 'll see you soon . 
▁ xxup bianca . ' tis very good ; i must be circumstanced . xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj cyprus . xxmaj before the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello and xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj will you think so ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj think so , xxmaj iago ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what , 
▁ xxmaj to kiss in private ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj an unauthorized kiss . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj or to be naked with her friend in bed 
▁ xxmaj an hour or more , not meaning any harm ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj naked in bed , xxmaj iago , and not mean harm ! 
▁ xxmaj it is hypocrisy against the devil . 
▁ xxmaj they that mean virtuously and yet do so , 
▁ xxmaj the devil their virtue tempts and they tempt heaven . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj so they do nothing , ' tis a venial slip . 
▁ xxmaj but if i give my wife a handkerchief- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , then , ' tis hers , my lord , and being hers , 
▁ xxmaj she may , i think , bestow't on any man . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj she is protectress of her honor too . 
▁ xxmaj may she give that ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj her honor is an essence that 's not seen ; 
▁ xxmaj they have it very oft that have it not . 
▁ xxmaj but for the handkerchief- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj by heaven , i would most gladly have forgot it . 
▁ xxmaj thou said'st- xxup o , it comes o'er my memory , 
▁ xxmaj as doth the raven o'er the infected house , 
▁ xxmaj boding to all- he had my handkerchief . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ay , what of that ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that 's not so good now . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what , 
▁ xxmaj if i had said i had seen him do you wrong ? 
▁ xxmaj or heard him say- as knaves be such abroad , 
▁ xxmaj who having , by their own importunate suit , 
▁ xxmaj or voluntary dotage of some mistress , 
▁ xxmaj convinced or supplied them , can not choose 
▁ xxmaj but they must blab- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj hath he said anything ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj he hath , my lord ; but be you well assured , 
▁ xxmaj no more than he 'll unswear . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what hath he said ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj faith , that he did- i know not what he did . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what ? what ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj lie- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj with her ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj with her , on her , what you will . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj lie with her ! lie on her ! xxmaj we say lie on her , when they 
▁ belie her . xxmaj lie with her ! ' zounds , that 's fulsome ! xxmaj handkerchief- 
▁ confessions- handkerchief ! xxmaj to confess and be hanged for his labor- 
▁ first , to be hanged , and then to confess . i tremble at it . 
▁ xxmaj nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without 
▁ some instruction . xxmaj it is not words that shakes me thus . xxmaj pish ! 
▁ xxmaj noses , ears , and lips . xxmaj is't possible ? xxmaj confess ? xxmaj handkerchief ? o 
▁ devil ! 
▁ xxmaj falls in a trance . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj work on , 
▁ xxmaj my medicine , work ! xxmaj thus credulous fools are caught , 
▁ xxmaj and many worthy and chaste dames even thus , 
▁ xxmaj all guiltless , meet reproach . xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj my lord , i say ! xxmaj othello ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassio . 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj cassio ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj my lord is fall'n into an epilepsy . 
▁ xxmaj this is his second fit ; he had one yesterday . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj rub him about the temples . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj no , forbear ; 
▁ xxmaj the lethargy must have his quiet course . 
▁ xxmaj if not , he foams at mouth , and by and by 
▁ xxmaj breaks out to savage madness . xxmaj look , he stirs . 
▁ xxmaj do you withdraw yourself a little while , 
▁ xxmaj he will recover straight . xxmaj when he is gone , 
▁ i would on great occasion speak with you . xxmaj exit xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxmaj how is it , general ? xxmaj have you not hurt your head ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj dost thou mock me ? 
▁ xxup iago . i mock you ? xxmaj no , by heaven . 
▁ xxmaj would you would bear your fortune like a man ! 
▁ xxup othello . a horned man 's a monster and a beast . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj there 's many a beast then in a populous city , 
▁ xxmaj and many a civil monster . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj did he confess it ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj good sir , be a man ; 
▁ xxmaj think every bearded fellow that 's but yoked 
▁ xxmaj may draw with you . xxmaj there 's millions now alive 
▁ xxmaj that nightly lie in those unproper beds 
▁ xxmaj which they dare swear peculiar . xxmaj your case is better . 
▁ xxup o , ' tis the spite of hell , the fiend 's arch - mock , 
▁ xxmaj to lip a wanton in a secure couch , 
▁ xxmaj and to suppose her chaste ! xxmaj no , let me know , 
▁ xxmaj and knowing what i am , i know what she shall be . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , thou art wise ; ' tis certain . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj stand you awhile apart , 
▁ xxmaj confine yourself but in a patient list . 
▁ xxmaj whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief- 
▁ a passion most unsuiting such a man- 
▁ xxmaj cassio came hither . i shifted him away , 
▁ xxmaj and laid good ' scuse upon your ecstasy ; 
▁ xxmaj bade him anon return and here speak with me 
▁ xxmaj the which he promised . xxmaj do but encave yourself 
▁ xxmaj and mark the fleers , the gibes , and notable scorns , 
▁ xxmaj that dwell in every region of his face ; 
▁ xxmaj for i will make him tell the tale anew , 
▁ xxmaj where , how , how oft , how long ago , and when 
▁ xxmaj he hath and is again to cope your wife . 
▁ i say , but mark his gesture . xxmaj marry , patience , 
▁ xxmaj or i shall say you are all in all in spleen , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing of a man . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj dost thou hear , xxmaj iago ? 
▁ i will be found most cunning in my patience ; 
▁ xxmaj but ( dost thou hear ? ) most bloody . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj that 's not amiss ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet keep time in all . xxmaj will you withdraw ? 
▁ xxmaj othello retires . 
▁ xxmaj now will i question xxmaj cassio of xxmaj bianca , 
▁ a housewife that by selling her desires 
▁ xxmaj buys herself bread and clothes . xxmaj it is a creature 
▁ xxmaj that dotes on xxmaj cassio , as ' tis the strumpet 's plague 
▁ xxmaj to beguile many and be beguiled by one . 
▁ xxmaj he , when he hears of her , can not refrain 
▁ xxmaj from the excess of laughter . xxmaj here he comes . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj cassio . 

▁ xxmaj as he shall smile , xxmaj othello shall go mad ; 
▁ xxmaj and his unbookish jealousy must construe 
▁ xxmaj poor xxmaj cassio 's smiles , gestures , and light behavior 
▁ xxmaj quite in the wrong . xxmaj how do you now , lieutenant ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj the worser that you give me the addition 
▁ xxmaj whose want even kills me . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ply xxmaj desdemona well , and you are sure on't . 
▁ xxmaj now , if this suit lay in xxmaj bianco 's power , 
▁ xxmaj how quickly should you speed ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj alas , poor caitiff ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj look , how he laughs already ! 
▁ xxup iago . i never knew a woman love man so . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj alas , poor rogue ! i think , i'faith , she loves me . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj now he denies it faintly and laughs it out . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj do you hear , xxmaj cassio ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj now he importunes him 
▁ xxmaj to tell it o'er . xxmaj go to ; well said , well said . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj she gives it out that you shall marry her . 
▁ xxmaj do you intend it ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj do you triumph , xxmaj roman ? xxmaj do you triumph ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i marry her ! xxmaj what ? a customer ! i prithee , bear some charity 
▁ to my wit ; do not think it so unwholesome . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj so , so , so , so . xxmaj they laugh that win . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj faith , the cry goes that you shall marry her . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj prithee , say true . 
▁ xxup iago . i am a very villain else . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj have you scored me ? xxmaj well . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj this is the monkey 's own giving out . xxmaj she is persuaded i 
▁ will marry her , out of her own love and flattery , not out of my 
▁ promise . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj iago beckons me ; now he begins the story . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj she was here even now ; she haunts me in every place . i was 
▁ the other day talking on the sea bank with certain xxmaj venetians , and 
▁ thither comes the bauble , and , by this hand , she falls me thus 
▁ about my neck- 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj crying , " o dear xxmaj cassio ! " as it were ; his gesture imports 
▁ it . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj so hangs and lolls and weeps upon me ; so hales and pulls 
▁ me . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber . xxup o , i see 
▁ that nose of yours , but not that dog i shall throw it to . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj well , i must leave her company . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj before me ! look where she comes . 
▁ xxup cassio . ' tis such another fitchew ! marry , a perfumed one . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj bianca . 

▁ xxmaj what do you mean by this haunting of me ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj let the devil and his dam haunt you ! xxmaj what did you mean by 
▁ that same handkerchief you gave me even now ? i was a fine fool to 
▁ take it . i must take out the work ? a likely piece of work that 
▁ you should find it in your chamber and not know who left it 
▁ there ! xxmaj this is some minx 's token , and i must take out the work ? 
▁ xxmaj there , give it your hobbyhorse . xxmaj wheresoever you had it , xxmaj i 'll take 
▁ out no work on't . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj how now , my sweet xxmaj bianca ! how now ! how now ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj by heaven , that should be my handkerchief ! 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj an you 'll come to supper tonight , you may ; an you will not , 
▁ come when you are next prepared for . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj after her , after her . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj faith , i must ; she 'll rail i ' the street else . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj will you sup there ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj faith , i intend so . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj well , i may chance to see you , for i would very fain speak 
▁ with you . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj prithee , come ; will you ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj go to ; say no more . xxmaj exit xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup othello . [ advancing . ] xxmaj how shall i murther him , xxmaj iago ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj did you perceive how he laughed at his vice ? 
▁ xxup othello . o xxmaj iago ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and did you see the handkerchief ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj was that mine ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj yours , by this hand . xxmaj and to see how he prizes the foolish 
▁ woman your wife ! xxmaj she gave it him , and he hath given it his whore . 
▁ xxup othello . i would have him nine years akilling . a fine woman ! a fair 
▁ woman ! a sweet woman ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nay , you must forget that . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , let her rot , and perish , and be damned tonight , for 
▁ she shall not live . xxmaj no , my heart is turned to stone ; i strike it , 
▁ and it hurts my hand . xxup o , the world hath not a sweeter creature . 
▁ xxmaj she might lie by an emperor 's side , and command him tasks . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj nay , that 's not your way . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj hang her ! i do but say what she is . xxmaj so delicate with her 
▁ needle , an admirable musician . xxup o , she will sing the savageness 
▁ out of a bear . xxmaj of so high and plenteous wit and invention- 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj she 's the worse for all this . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , a thousand , a thousand times . xxmaj and then , of so gentle a 
▁ condition ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ay , too gentle . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nay , that 's certain . xxmaj but yet the pity of it , xxmaj iago ! 
▁ o xxmaj iago , the pity of it , xxmaj iago ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj if you are so fond over her iniquity , give her patent to 
▁ offend , for , if it touch not you , it comes near nobody . 
▁ xxup othello . i will chop her into messes . xxmaj cuckold me ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxup o , ' tis foul in her . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj with mine officer ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj that 's fouler . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj get me some poison , xxmaj iago , this night . xxmaj i 'll not expostulate 
▁ with her , lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again . xxmaj this 
▁ night , xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj do it not with poison , strangle her in her bed , even the bed 
▁ she hath contaminated . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj good , good , the justice of it pleases , very good . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and for xxmaj cassio , let me be his undertaker . xxmaj you shall hear more 
▁ by midnight . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj excellent good . [ a trumpet within . ] xxmaj what trumpet is that 
▁ same ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj something from xxmaj venice , sure . ' tis xxmaj lodovico 
▁ xxmaj come from the xxmaj duke . xxmaj and , see your wife is with him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lodovico , xxmaj desdemona , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj god save the worthy general ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj with all my heart , sir . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj the xxmaj duke and xxmaj senators of xxmaj venice greet you . 
▁ xxmaj gives him a letter . 
▁ xxup othello . i kiss the instrument of their pleasures . 
▁ xxmaj opens the letter , and reads . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj and what 's the news , good cousin xxmaj lodovico ? 
▁ xxup iago . i am very glad to see you , signior ; 
▁ xxmaj welcome to xxmaj cyprus . 
▁ xxup lodovico . i thank you . xxmaj how does xxmaj lieutenant xxmaj cassio ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj lives , sir . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj cousin , there 's fall'n between him and my lord 
▁ xxmaj an unkind breech ; but you shall make all well . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj are you sure of that ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . [ reads . ] " this fail you not to do , as you will- " 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj he did not call ; he 's busy in the paper . 
▁ xxmaj is there division ' twixt my lord and xxmaj cassio ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . a most unhappy one . i would do much 
▁ xxmaj to atone them , for the love i bear to xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj fire and brimstone ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj are you wise ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj what , is he angry ? 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj may be the letter moved him ; 
▁ xxmaj for , as i think , they do command him home , 
▁ xxmaj deputing xxmaj cassio in his government . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj by my troth , i am glad on't . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj indeed ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . i am glad to see you mad . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj why , sweet xxmaj othello ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj devil ! xxmaj strikes her . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i have not deserved this . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj my lord , this would not be believed in xxmaj venice , 
▁ xxmaj though i should swear i saw't . ' tis very much . 
▁ xxmaj make her amends ; she weeps . 
▁ xxup othello . o devil , devil ! 
▁ xxmaj if that the earth could teem with woman 's tears , 
▁ xxmaj each drop she falls would prove a crocodile . 
▁ xxmaj out of my sight ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . [ going . ] i will not stay to offend you . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj truly , an obedient lady . 
▁ i do beseech your lordship , call her back . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj mistress ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what would you with her , sir ? 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj who , xxup i , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , you did wish that i would make her turn . 
▁ xxmaj sir , she can turn and turn , and yet go on , 
▁ xxmaj and turn again ; and she can weep , sir , weep ; 
▁ xxmaj and she 's obedient , as you say , obedient , 
▁ xxmaj very obedient . xxmaj proceed you in your tears . 
▁ xxmaj concerning this , sir- o well - painted passion!- 
▁ i am commanded home . xxmaj get you away ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send for you anon . xxmaj sir , i obey the mandate , 
▁ xxmaj and will return to xxmaj venice . xxmaj hence , avaunt ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj desdemona . 
▁ xxmaj cassio shall have my place . xxmaj and , sir , tonight , 
▁ i do entreat that we may sup together . 
▁ xxmaj you are welcome , sir , to xxmaj cyprus . xxmaj goats and monkeys ! 
▁ xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj is this the noble xxmaj moor whom our full xxmaj senate 
▁ xxmaj call all in all sufficient ? xxmaj this the nature 
▁ xxmaj whom passion could not shake ? whose solid virtue 
▁ xxmaj the shot of accident nor dart of chance 
▁ xxmaj could neither graze nor pierce ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj he is much changed . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj are his wits safe ? xxmaj is he not light of brain ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj he 's that he is . i may not breathe my censure 
▁ xxmaj what he might be : if what he might he is not , 
▁ i would to heaven he were ! 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj what , strike his wife ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj faith , that was not so well ; yet would i knew 
▁ xxmaj that stroke would prove the worst ! 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj is it his use ? 
▁ xxmaj or did the letters work upon his blood , 
▁ xxmaj and new create this fault ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj alas , alas ! 
▁ xxmaj it is not honesty in me to speak 
▁ xxmaj what i have seen and known . xxmaj you shall observe him , 
▁ xxmaj and his own courses will denote him so 
▁ xxmaj that i may save my speech . xxmaj do but go after , 
▁ xxmaj and mark how he continues . 
▁ xxup lodovico . i am sorry that i am deceived in him . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a room in the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello and xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj you have seen nothing , then ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj nor ever heard , nor ever did suspect . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj yes , you have seen xxmaj cassio and she together . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj but then i saw no harm , and then i heard 
▁ xxmaj each syllable that breath made up between them . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what , did they never whisper ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj never , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nor send you out o ' the way ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj never . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj to fetch her fan , her gloves , her mask , nor nothing ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj never , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that 's strange . 
▁ xxup emilia . i durst , my lord , to wager she is honest , 
▁ xxmaj lay down my soul at stake . xxmaj if you think other , 
▁ xxmaj remove your thought ; it doth abuse your bosom . 
▁ xxmaj if any wretch have put this in your head , 
▁ xxmaj let heaven requite it with the serpent 's curse ! 
▁ xxmaj for if she be not honest , chaste , and true , 
▁ xxmaj there 's no man happy ; the purest of their wives 
▁ xxmaj is foul as slander . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj bid her come hither ; go . xxmaj exit xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxmaj she says enough ; yet she 's a simple bawd 
▁ xxmaj that can not say as much . xxmaj this is a subtle whore , 
▁ a closet lock and key of villainous secrets . 
▁ xxmaj and yet she 'll kneel and pray ; i have seen her do't . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj desdemona with xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my lord , what is your will ?