xxbos xxup othello . xxmaj pray , chuck , come hither . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj what is your pleasure ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj let me see your eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj look in my face . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj what horrible fancy 's this ? 
▁ xxup othello . [ to xxmaj emilia . ] xxmaj some of your function , mistress , 
▁ xxmaj leave procreants alone and shut the door ; 
▁ xxmaj cough , or cry " hem , " if anybody come . 
▁ xxmaj your mystery , your mystery ; nay , dispatch . xxmaj exit xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj upon my knees , what doth your speech import ? 
▁ i understand a fury in your words , 
▁ xxmaj but not the words . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why , what art thou ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj your wife , my lord , your true and loyal wife . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj come , swear it , damn thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj lest , being like one of heaven , the devils themselves 
▁ xxmaj should fear to seize thee . xxmaj therefore be double - damn'd ; 
▁ xxmaj swear thou art honest . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj heaven doth truly know it . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj to whom , my lord ? with whom ? how am i false ? 
▁ xxup othello . o xxmaj desdemona ! xxmaj away ! away ! away ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas the heavy day ! xxmaj why do you weep ? 
▁ xxmaj am i the motive of these tears , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj if haply you my father do suspect 
▁ xxmaj an instrument of this your calling back , 
▁ xxmaj lay not your blame on me . xxmaj if you have lost him , 
▁ xxmaj why , i have lost him too . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj had it pleased heaven 
▁ xxmaj to try me with affliction , had they rain'd 
▁ xxmaj all kinds of sores and shames on my bare head , 
▁ xxmaj steep'd me in poverty to the very lips , 
▁ xxmaj given to captivity me and my utmost hopes , 
▁ i should have found in some place of my soul 
▁ a drop of patience ; but , alas , to make me 
▁ a fixed figure for the time of scorn 
▁ xxmaj to point his slow unmoving finger at ! 
▁ xxmaj yet could i bear that too , well , very well ; 
▁ xxmaj but there , where i have garner'd up my heart , 
▁ xxmaj where either i must live or bear no life ; 
▁ xxmaj the fountain from the which my current runs , 
▁ xxmaj or else dries up ; to be discarded thence ! 
▁ xxmaj or keep it as a cistern for foul toads 
▁ xxmaj to knot and gender in ! xxmaj turn thy complexion there , 
▁ xxmaj patience , thou young and rose - lipp'd cherubin , 
▁ xxmaj ay , there , look grim as hell ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . i hope my noble lord esteems me honest . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , ay , as summer flies are in the shambles , 
▁ xxmaj that quicken even with blowing . o thou weed , 
▁ xxmaj who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet 
▁ xxmaj that the sense aches at thee , would thou hadst ne'er been born ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas , what ignorant sin have i committed ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj was this fair paper , this most goodly book , 
▁ xxmaj made to write " whore " upon ? xxmaj what committed ? 
▁ xxmaj committed ? o thou public commoner ! 
▁ i should make very forges of my cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj that would to cinders burn up modesty , 
▁ xxmaj did i but speak thy deeds . xxmaj what committed ! 
▁ xxmaj heaven stops the nose at it , and the moon winks ; 
▁ xxmaj the bawdy wind , that kisses all it meets , 
▁ xxmaj is hush'd within the hollow mine of earth , 
▁ xxmaj and will not hear it . xxmaj what committed ? 
▁ xxmaj impudent strumpet ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj by heaven , you do me wrong . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj are not you a strumpet ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj no , as i am a xxmaj christian . 
▁ xxmaj if to preserve this vessel for my lord 
▁ xxmaj from any other foul unlawful touch 
▁ xxmaj be not to be a strumpet , i am none . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what , not a whore ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj no , as i shall be saved . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , heaven forgive us ! 
▁ xxup othello . i cry you mercy then ; 
▁ i took you for that cunning whore of xxmaj venice 
▁ xxmaj that married with xxmaj othello . [ raises his voice . ] xxmaj you , mistress , 
▁ xxmaj that have the office opposite to xxmaj saint xxmaj peter , 
▁ xxmaj and keep the gate of hell ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxmaj you , you , ay , you ! 
▁ xxmaj we have done our course ; there 's money for your pains . 
▁ i pray you , turn the key , and keep our counsel . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj alas , what does this gentleman conceive ? 
▁ xxmaj how do you , madam ? xxmaj how do you , my good lady ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj faith , half asleep . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj good madam , what 's the matter with my lord ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj with who ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj why , with my lord , madam . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj who is thy lord ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj he that is yours , sweet lady . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i have none . xxmaj do not talk to me , xxmaj emilia ; 
▁ i can not weep , nor answer have i none 
▁ xxmaj but what should go by water . xxmaj prithee , tonight 
▁ xxmaj lay on my bed my wedding sheets . xxmaj remember , 
▁ xxmaj and call thy husband hither . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj here 's a change indeed ! 
▁ xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxup desdemona . ' tis meet i should be used so , very meet . 
▁ xxmaj how have i been behaved , that he might stick 
▁ xxmaj the small'st opinion on my least misuse ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj emilia with xxmaj iago . 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what is your pleasure , madam ? xxmaj how is't with you ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . i can not tell . xxmaj those that do teach young babes 
▁ xxmaj do it with gentle means and easy tasks . 
▁ xxmaj he might have chid me so , for in good faith , 
▁ i am a child to chiding . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what 's the matter , lady ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj alas , xxmaj iago , my lord hath so bewhored her , 
▁ xxmaj thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her , 
▁ xxmaj as true hearts can not bear . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj am i that name , xxmaj iago ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what name , fair lady ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj such as she says my lord did say i was . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj he call'd her whore ; a beggar in his drink 
▁ xxmaj could not have laid such terms upon his callet . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why did he so ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . i do not know ; i am sure i am none such . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj do not weep , do not weep . xxmaj alas the day ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj hath she forsook so many noble matches , 
▁ xxmaj her father and her country and her friends , 
▁ xxmaj to be call'd whore ? xxmaj would it not make one weep ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj it is my wretched fortune . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj beshrew him for't ! 
▁ xxmaj how comes this trick upon him ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj nay , heaven doth know . 
▁ xxup emilia . i will be hang'd , if some eternal villain , 
▁ xxmaj some busy and insinuating rogue , 
▁ xxmaj some cogging , cozening slave , to get some office , 
▁ xxmaj have not devised this slander ; xxmaj i 'll be hang'd else . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj fie , there is no such man ; it is impossible . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj if any such there be , heaven pardon him ! 
▁ xxup emilia . a halter pardon him ! xxmaj and hell gnaw his bones ! 
▁ xxmaj why should he call her whore ? xxmaj who keeps her company ? 
▁ xxmaj what place ? xxmaj what time ? xxmaj what form ? xxmaj what likelihood ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj moor 's abused by some most villainous knave , 
▁ xxmaj some base notorious knave , some scurvy fellow . 
▁ o heaven , that such companions thou'ldst unfold , 
▁ xxmaj and put in every honest hand a whip 
▁ xxmaj to lash the rascals naked through the world 
▁ xxmaj even from the east to the west ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj speak within door . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxup o , fie upon them ! xxmaj some such squire he was 
▁ xxmaj that turn'd your wit the seamy side without , 
▁ xxmaj and made you to suspect me with the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you are a fool ; go to . 
▁ xxup desdemona . o good xxmaj iago , 
▁ xxmaj what shall i do to win my lord again ? 
▁ xxmaj good friend , go to him , for by this light of heaven , 
▁ i know not how i lost him . xxmaj here i kneel : 
▁ xxmaj if e'er my will did trespass ' gainst his love 
▁ xxmaj either in discourse of thought or actual deed , 
▁ xxmaj or that mine eyes , mine ears , or any sense , 
▁ xxmaj delighted them in any other form , 
▁ xxmaj or that i do not yet , and ever did , 
▁ xxmaj and ever will , though he do shake me off 
▁ xxmaj to beggarly divorcement , love him dearly , 
▁ xxmaj comfort forswear me ! xxmaj unkindness may do much , 
▁ xxmaj and his unkindness may defeat my life , 
▁ xxmaj but never taint my love . i can not say " whore . " 
▁ xxmaj it doth abhor me now i speak the word ; 
▁ xxmaj to do the act that might the addition earn 
▁ xxmaj not the world 's mass of vanity could make me . 
▁ xxup iago . i pray you , be content ; ' tis but his humor : 
▁ xxmaj the business of the state does him offense , 
▁ xxmaj and he does chide with you . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj if ' twere no other- 
▁ xxup iago . ' tis but so , i warrant . xxmaj trumpets within . 
▁ xxmaj hark , how these instruments summon to supper ! 
▁ xxmaj the messengers of xxmaj venice stay the meat . 
▁ xxmaj go in , and weep not ; all things shall be well . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj desdemona and xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj roderigo . 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj roderigo ! 
▁ xxup roderigo . i do not find that thou dealest justly with me . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what in the contrary ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj every day thou daffest me with some device , xxmaj iago ; and 
▁ rather , as it seems to me now , keepest from me all conveniency 
▁ than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope . i will indeed 
▁ no longer endure it ; nor am i yet persuaded to put up in peace 
▁ what already i have foolishly suffered . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj will you hear me , xxmaj roderigo ? 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj faith , i have heard too much , for your words and 
▁ performances are no kin together . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you charge me most unjustly . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj with nought but truth . i have wasted myself out of my 
▁ means . xxmaj the jewels you have had from me to deliver to xxmaj desdemona 
▁ would half have corrupted a votarist . xxmaj you have told me she hath 
▁ received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden 
▁ respect and acquaintance ; but i find none . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj well , go to , very well . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj very well ! go to ! i can not go to , man ; nor ' tis not very 
▁ well . xxmaj by this hand , i say ' tis very scurvy , and begin to find 
▁ myself fopped in it . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj very well . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i tell you ' tis not very well . i will make myself known 
▁ to xxmaj desdemona . xxmaj if she will return me my jewels , i will give over 
▁ my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation ; if not , assure 
▁ yourself i will seek satisfaction of you . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj you have said now . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj ay , and said nothing but what i protest intendment of 
▁ doing . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , now i see there 's mettle in thee ; and even from this 
▁ instant do build on thee a better opinion than ever before . xxmaj give 
▁ me thy hand , xxmaj roderigo . xxmaj thou hast taken against me a most just 
▁ exception ; but yet , i protest , have dealt most directly in thy 
▁ affair . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj it hath not appeared . 
▁ xxup iago . i grant indeed it hath not appeared , and your suspicion is 
▁ not without wit and judgement . xxmaj but , xxmaj roderigo , if thou hast that 
▁ in thee indeed , which i have greater reason to believe now than 
▁ ever , i mean purpose , courage , and valor , this night show it ; if 
▁ thou the next night following enjoy not xxmaj desdemona , take me from 
▁ this world with treachery and devise engines for my life . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj well , what is it ? xxmaj is it within reason and compass ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj sir , there is especial commission come from xxmaj venice to depute 
▁ xxmaj cassio in xxmaj othello 's place . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj is that true ? xxmaj why then xxmaj othello and xxmaj desdemona return again 
▁ to xxmaj venice . 
▁ xxup iago . xxup o , no ; he goes into xxmaj mauritania , and takes away with him the 
▁ fair xxmaj desdemona , unless his abode be lingered here by some 
▁ accident ; wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of 
▁ xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj how do you mean , removing of him ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj why , by making him uncapable of xxmaj othello 's place ; knocking out 
▁ his brains . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj and that you would have me to do ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj ay , if you dare do yourself a profit and a right . xxmaj he sups 
▁ tonight with a harlotry , and thither will i go to him . xxmaj he knows 
▁ not yet of his honorable fortune . xxmaj if you will watch his going 
▁ thence , which his will fashion to fall out between twelve and 
▁ one , you may take him at your pleasure ; i will be near to second 
▁ your attempt , and he shall fall between us . xxmaj come , stand not 
▁ amazed at it , but go along with me ; i will show you such a 
▁ necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put 
▁ it on him . xxmaj it is now high supper - time , and the night grows to 
▁ waste . xxmaj about it . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i will hear further reason for this . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj and you shall be satisfied . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj another room in the castle . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello , xxmaj lodovico , xxmaj desdemona , xxmaj emilia , and xxmaj attendants . 

▁ xxup lodovico . i do beseech you , sir , trouble yourself no further . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o , pardon me ; ' twill do me good to walk . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj madam , good night ; i humbly thank your ladyship . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj your honor is most welcome . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj will you walk , sir ? 
▁ xxup o- xxmaj desdemona- 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj get you to bed on the instant ; i will be returned 
▁ forthwith . xxmaj dismiss your attendant there ; look it be done . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i will , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj othello , xxmaj lodovico , and xxmaj attendants . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj how goes it now ? xxmaj he looks gentler than he did . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj he says he will return incontinent . 
▁ xxmaj he hath commanded me to go to bed , 
▁ xxmaj and bade me to dismiss you . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj dismiss me ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj it was his bidding ; therefore , good xxmaj emilia , 
▁ xxmaj give me my nightly wearing , and adieu . 
▁ xxmaj we must not now displease him . 
▁ xxup emilia . i would you had never seen him ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj so would not xxup i. xxmaj my love doth so approve him , 
▁ xxmaj that even his stubbornness , his checks , his frowns- 
▁ xxmaj prithee , unpin me- have grace and favor in them . 
▁ xxup emilia . i have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj all 's one . xxmaj good faith , how foolish are our minds ! 
▁ xxmaj if i do die before thee , prithee shroud me 
▁ xxmaj in one of those same sheets . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj come , come , you talk . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj my mother had a maid call'd xxmaj barbary ; 
▁ xxmaj she was in love , and he she loved proved mad 
▁ xxmaj and did forsake her . xxmaj she had a song of " willow " ; 
▁ xxmaj an old thing ' twas , but it express'd her fortune , 
▁ xxmaj and she died singing it . xxmaj that song tonight 
▁ xxmaj will not go from my mind ; i have much to do 
▁ xxmaj but to go hang my head all at one side 
▁ xxmaj and sing it like poor xxmaj barbary . xxmaj prithee , dispatch . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj shall i go fetch your nightgown ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj no , unpin me here . 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj lodovico is a proper man . 
▁ xxup emilia . a very handsome man . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj he speaks well . 
▁ xxup emilia . i know a lady in xxmaj venice would have walked barefoot to 
▁ xxmaj palestine for a touch of his nether lip . 
▁ xxup desdemona . [ sings . ] 

▁ " the poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree , 
▁ xxmaj sing all a green willow ; 
▁ xxmaj her hand on her bosom , her head on her knee , 
▁ xxmaj sing willow , willow , willow . 
▁ xxmaj the fresh streams ran by her , and murmur'd her moans , 
▁ xxmaj sing willow , willow , willow ; 
▁ xxmaj her salt tears fell from her , and soften'd the stones- " 

▁ xxmaj lay be these- 

▁ [ sings . ] " sing willow , willow , willow- " 
▁
▁ xxmaj prithee , hie thee ; he 'll come anon- 
▁ [ sings . ] " sing all a green willow must be my garland . 
▁ xxmaj let nobody blame him ; his scorn i approve- " 

▁ xxmaj nay , that 's not next . xxmaj hark , who is't that knocks ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj it 's the wind . 
▁ xxup desdemona . [ sings . ] 

▁ " i call'd my love false love ; but what said he then ? 
▁ xxmaj sing willow , willow , willow . 
▁ xxmaj if i court moe women , you 'll couch with moe men- " 

▁ xxmaj so get thee gone ; good night . xxmaj mine eyes do itch ; 
▁ xxmaj doth that bode weeping ? 
▁ xxup emilia . ' tis neither here nor there . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i have heard it said so . xxup o , these men , these men ! 
▁ xxmaj dost thou in conscience think- tell me , xxmaj emilia- 
▁ xxmaj that there be women do abuse their husbands 
▁ xxmaj in such gross kind ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj there be some such , no question . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj why , would not you ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj no , by this heavenly light ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj nor i neither by this heavenly light ; i might do't as well 
▁ i ' the dark . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj the world 's a huge thing ; it is a great price 
▁ xxmaj for a small vice . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj in troth , i think thou wouldst not . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj in troth , i think i should , and undo't when i had done . 
▁ xxmaj marry , i would not do such a thing for a joint - ring , nor for 
▁ measures of lawn , nor for gowns , petticoats , nor caps , nor any 
▁ petty exhibition ; but , for the whole world- why , who would not 
▁ make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch ? i should 
▁ venture purgatory for't . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj beshrew me , if i would do such a wrong 
▁ xxmaj for the whole world . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj why , the wrong is but a wrong i ' the world ; and having the 
▁ world for your labor , ' tis a wrong in your own world , and you 
▁ might quickly make it right . 
▁ xxup desdemona . i do not think there is any such woman . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj yes , a dozen , and as many to the vantage as would store the 
▁ world they played for . 
▁ xxmaj but i do think it is their husbands ' faults 
▁ xxmaj if wives do fall ; say that they slack their duties 
▁ xxmaj and pour our treasures into foreign laps , 
▁ xxmaj or else break out in peevish jealousies , 
▁ xxmaj throwing restraint upon us , or say they strike us , 
▁ xxmaj or scant our former having in despite , 
▁ xxmaj why , we have galls , and though we have some grace , 
▁ xxmaj yet have we some revenge . xxmaj let husbands know 
▁ xxmaj their wives have sense like them ; they see and smell 
▁ xxmaj and have their palates both for sweet and sour , 
▁ xxmaj as husbands have . xxmaj what is it that they do 
▁ xxmaj when they change us for others ? xxmaj is it sport ? 
▁ i think it is . xxmaj and doth affection breed it ? 
▁ i think it doth . xxmaj is't frailty that thus errs ? 
▁ xxmaj it is so too . xxmaj and have not we affections , 
▁ xxmaj desires for sport , and frailty , as men have ? 
▁ xxmaj then let them use us well ; else let them know , 
▁ xxmaj the ills we do , their ills instruct us so . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj good night , good night . xxmaj heaven me such uses send , 
▁ xxmaj not to pick bad from bad , but by bad mend ! xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj cyprus . a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj iago and xxmaj roderigo : 

▁ xxup iago . xxmaj here , stand behind this bulk ; straight will he come . 
▁ xxmaj wear thy good rapier bare , and put it home . 
▁ xxmaj quick , quick ; fear nothing ; xxmaj i 'll be at thy elbow . 
▁ xxmaj it makes us , or it mars us ; think on that , 
▁ xxmaj and fix most firm thy resolution . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj be near at hand ; i may miscarry in't . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj here , at thy hand , be bold , and take thy stand . 
▁ xxmaj retires . 
▁ xxup roderigo . i have no great devotion to the deed ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet he hath given me satisfying reasons . 
▁ ' tis but a man gone . xxmaj forth , my sword ; he dies . 
▁ xxup iago . i have rubb'd this young quat almost to the sense , 
▁ xxmaj and he grows angry . xxmaj now , whether he kill xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj cassio him , or each do kill the other , 
▁ xxmaj every way makes my gain . xxmaj live xxmaj roderigo , 
▁ xxmaj he calls me to a restitution large 
▁ xxmaj of gold and jewels that i bobb'd from him , 
▁ xxmaj as gifts to xxmaj desdemona ; 
▁ xxmaj it must not be . xxmaj if xxmaj cassio do remain , 
▁ xxmaj he hath a daily beauty in his life 
▁ xxmaj that makes me ugly ; and besides , the xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj may unfold me to him ; there stand i in much peril . 
▁ xxmaj no , he must die . xxmaj be't so . i hear him coming . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj cassio . 

▁ xxup roderigo . i know his gait ; ' tis he . xxmaj villain , thou diest ! 
▁ xxmaj makes a pass at xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj that thrust had been mine enemy indeed , 
▁ xxmaj but that my coat is better than thou know'st ; 
▁ i will make proof of thine . xxmaj draws , and wounds xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxup o , i am slain ! 
▁ xxmaj iago from behind wounds xxmaj cassio in the leg , and exit . 
▁ xxup cassio . i am maim'd forever . xxmaj help , ho ! xxmaj murther ! xxmaj murther ! 
▁ xxmaj falls . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj othello . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj the voice of xxmaj cassio ; xxmaj iago keeps his word . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxup o , villain that i am ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj it is even so . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxup o , help , ho ! xxmaj light ! a surgeon ! 
▁ xxup othello . ' tis he . o brave xxmaj iago , honest and just , 
▁ xxmaj that hast such noble sense of thy friend 's wrong ! 
▁ xxmaj thou teachest me . xxmaj minion , your dear lies dead , 
▁ xxmaj and your unblest fate hies . xxmaj strumpet , i come ! 
▁ xxmaj forth of my heart those charms , thine eyes , are blotted ; 
▁ xxmaj thy bed lust - stain'd shall with lust 's blood be spotted . 
▁ xxmaj exit . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lodovico and xxmaj gratiano . 

▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj no watch ? xxmaj no passage ? xxmaj murther ! xxmaj murther ! 
▁ xxup gratiano . ' tis some mischance ; the cry is very direful . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxup o , help ! 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj hark ! 
▁ xxup roderigo . o wretched villain ! 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj two or three groan ; it is a heavy night . 
▁ xxmaj these may be counterfeits ; let 's think't unsafe 
▁ xxmaj to come in to the cry without more help . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxmaj nobody come ? xxmaj then shall i bleed to death . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj hark ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj iago , with a light . 

▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj here 's one comes in his shirt , with light and weapons . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj whose noise is this that cries on murther ? 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj we do not know . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj did not you hear a cry ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj here , here ! for heaven 's sake , help me ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj this is xxmaj othello 's ancient , as i take it . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj the same indeed ; a very valiant fellow . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what are you here that cry so grievously ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj iago ? xxup o , i am spoil'd , undone by villains ! 
▁ xxmaj give me some help . 
▁ xxup iago . o me , lieutenant ! xxmaj what villains have done this ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i think that one of them is hereabout , 
▁ xxmaj and can not make away . 
▁ xxup iago . o treacherous villains ! 
▁ [ to xxmaj lodovico and xxmaj gratiano . ] xxmaj what are you there ? 
▁ xxmaj come in and give some help . 
▁ xxup roderigo . xxup o , help me here ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj that 's one of them . 
▁ xxup iago . o murtherous slave ! o villain ! 
▁ xxmaj stabs xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup roderigo . o damn'd xxmaj iago ! o inhuman dog ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj kill men i ' the dark ! xxmaj where be these bloody thieves ? 
▁ xxmaj how silent is this town ! xxmaj ho ! xxmaj murther ! xxmaj murther ! 
▁ xxmaj what may you be ? xxmaj are you of good or evil ? 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj as you shall prove us , praise us . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj signior xxmaj lodovico ? 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj he , sir . 
▁ xxup iago . i cry you mercy . xxmaj here 's xxmaj cassio hurt by villains . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj cassio ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj how is't , brother ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj my leg is cut in two . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj marry , heaven forbid ! 
▁ xxmaj light , gentlemen ; xxmaj i 'll bind it with my shirt . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj bianca . 

▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj what is the matter , ho ? xxmaj who is't that cried ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj who is't that cried ? 
▁ xxup bianca . o my dear xxmaj cassio , my sweet xxmaj cassio ! o xxmaj cassio , xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj cassio ! 
▁ xxup iago . o notable strumpet ! xxmaj cassio , may you suspect 
▁ xxmaj who they should be that have thus mangled you ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup gratiano . i am sorry to find you thus ; i have been to seek you . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj lend me a garter . xxmaj so . xxup o , for a chair , 
▁ xxmaj to bear him easily hence ! 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj alas , he faints ! o xxmaj cassio , xxmaj cassio , xxmaj cassio ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj gentlemen all , i do suspect this trash 
▁ xxmaj to be a party in this injury . 
▁ xxmaj patience awhile , good xxmaj cassio . xxmaj come , come ; 
▁ xxmaj lend me a light . xxmaj know we this face or no ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , my friend and my dear countryman 
▁ xxmaj roderigo ? xxmaj no- yes , sure . o heaven ! xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj what , of xxmaj venice ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj even he , sir . xxmaj did you know him ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj know him ! ay . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj signior xxmaj gratiano ? i cry you gentle pardon ; 
▁ xxmaj these bloody accidents must excuse my manners , 
▁ xxmaj that so neglected you . 
▁ xxup gratiano . i am glad to see you . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj how do you , xxmaj cassio ? xxup o , a chair , a chair ! 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj roderigo ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj he , he , ' tis he . [ a chair brought in . ] xxup o , that 's well said : 
▁ the chair . 
▁ xxmaj some good man bear him carefully from hence ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fetch the general 's surgeon . [ to xxmaj bianca . ] xxmaj for you , mistress , 
▁ xxmaj save you your labor . xxmaj he that lies slain here , xxmaj cassio , 
▁ xxmaj was my dear friend ; what malice was between you ? 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj none in the world ; nor do i know the man . 
▁ xxup iago . [ to xxmaj bianca . ] xxmaj what , look you pale ? xxup o , bear him out o ' the air . 
▁ xxmaj cassio and xxmaj roderigo are borne off . 
▁ xxmaj stay you , good gentlemen . xxmaj look you pale , mistress ? 
▁ xxmaj do you perceive the gastness of her eye ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , if you stare , we shall hear more anon . 
▁ xxmaj behold her well ; i pray you , look upon her . 
▁ xxmaj do you see , gentlemen ? xxmaj nay , guiltiness will speak , 
▁ xxmaj though tongues were out of use . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxup emilia . ' las , what 's the matter ? xxmaj what 's the matter , husband ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj cassio hath here been set on in the dark 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj roderigo , and fellows that are ' scaped ; 
▁ xxmaj he 's almost slain , and xxmaj roderigo dead . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj alas , good gentleman ! alas , good xxmaj cassio ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj this is the fruit of whoring . xxmaj prithee , xxmaj emilia , 
▁ xxmaj go know of xxmaj cassio where he supp'd tonight . 
▁ xxmaj what , do you shake at that ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj he supp'd at my house ; but i therefore shake not . 
▁ xxup iago . xxup o , did he so ? i charge you , go with me . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj fie , fie upon thee , strumpet ! 
▁ xxup bianca . i am no strumpet , but of life as honest 
▁ xxmaj as you that thus abuse me . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj as xxup i ! foh ! fie upon thee ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj kind gentlemen , let 's go see poor xxmaj cassio dress'd . 
▁ xxmaj come , mistress , you must tell 's another tale . 
▁ xxmaj emilia , run you to the citadel , 
▁ xxmaj and tell my lord and lady what hath happ'd ! 
▁ xxmaj will you go on ? [ aside . ] xxmaj this is the night 
▁ xxmaj that either makes me or fordoes me quite . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a bedchamber in the castle . xxmaj desdemona in bed asleep ; a light burning . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj othello . 

▁ xxup othello . xxmaj it is the cause , it is the cause , my soul . 
▁ xxmaj let me not name it to you , you chaste stars ! 
▁ xxmaj it is the cause . xxmaj yet xxmaj i 'll not shed her blood , 
▁ xxmaj nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow 
▁ xxmaj and smooth as monumental alabaster . 
▁ xxmaj yet she must die , else she 'll betray more men . 
▁ xxmaj put out the light , and then put out the light . 
▁ xxmaj if i quench thee , thou flaming minister , 
▁ i can again thy former light restore , 
▁ xxmaj should i repent me ; but once put out thy light , 
▁ xxmaj thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature , 
▁ i know not where is that xxmaj promethean heat 
▁ xxmaj that can thy light relume . xxmaj when i have pluck'd the rose , 
▁ i can not give it vital growth again , 
▁ xxmaj it must needs wither ; xxmaj i 'll smell it on the tree . xxmaj kisses her . 
▁ xxup o , balmy breath , that dost almost persuade 
▁ xxmaj justice to break her sword ! xxmaj one more , one more ; 
▁ xxmaj be thus when thou art dead , and i will kill thee , 
▁ xxmaj and love thee after . xxmaj one more , and this the last ; 
▁ xxmaj so sweet was ne'er so fatal . i must weep , 
▁ xxmaj but they are cruel tears ; this sorrow 's heavenly , 
▁ xxmaj it strikes where it doth love . xxmaj she wakes . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj othello ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , xxmaj desdemona . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj will you come to bed , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj have you pray'd tonight , xxmaj desdemona ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj if you bethink yourself of any crime 
▁ xxmaj unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace , 
▁ xxmaj solicit for it straight . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas , my lord , what may you mean by that ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj well , do it , and be brief ; i will walk by . 
▁ i would not kill thy unprepared spirit . 
▁ xxmaj no , heaven forfend ! i would not kill thy soul . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj talk you of killing ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , i do . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj then heaven have mercy on me ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj amen , with all my heart ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj if you say so , i hope you will not kill me . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj hum ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj and yet i fear you , for you are fatal then 
▁ xxmaj when your eyes roll so . xxmaj why i should fear i know not , 
▁ xxmaj since guiltiness i know not ; but yet i feel i fear . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj think on thy sins . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj they are loves i bear to you . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , and for that thou diest . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj that death 's unnatural that kills for loving . 
▁ xxmaj alas , why gnaw you so your nether lip ? 
▁ xxmaj some bloody passion shakes your very frame . 
▁ xxmaj these are portents ; but yet i hope , i hope , 
▁ xxmaj they do not point on me . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj peace , and be still ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . i will so . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that handkerchief which i so loved and gave thee 
▁ xxmaj thou gavest to xxmaj cassio . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj no , by my life and soul ! 
▁ xxmaj send for the man , and ask him . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj sweet soul , take heed , 
▁ xxmaj take heed of perjury ; thou are on thy deathbed . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj ay , but not yet to die . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj yes , presently : 
▁ xxmaj therefore confess thee freely of thy sin , 
▁ xxmaj for to deny each article with oath 
▁ xxmaj can not remove nor choke the strong conception 
▁ xxmaj that i do groan withal . xxmaj thou art to die . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj then xxmaj lord have mercy on me ! 
▁ xxup othello . i say , amen . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj and have you mercy too ! i never did 
▁ xxmaj offend you in my life ; never loved xxmaj cassio 
▁ xxmaj but with such general warranty of heaven 
▁ xxmaj as i might love . i never gave him token . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj by heaven , i saw my handkerchief in 's hand . 
▁ o perjured woman ! xxmaj thou dost stone my heart , 
▁ xxmaj and makest me call what i intend to do 
▁ a murther , which i thought a sacrifice . 
▁ i saw the handkerchief . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj he found it then ; 
▁ i never gave it him . xxmaj send for him hither ; 
▁ xxmaj let him confess a truth . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj he hath confess'd . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj what , my lord ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that he hath used thee . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj how ? unlawfully ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj he will not say so . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj no , his mouth is stopp'd ; 
▁ xxmaj honest xxmaj iago hath ta'en order for't . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , my fear interprets ! xxmaj what , is he dead ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj had all his hairs been lives , my great revenge 
▁ xxmaj had stomach for them all . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj alas , he is betray'd , and i undone ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj out , strumpet ! xxmaj weep'st thou for him to my face ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , banish me , my lord , but kill me not ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj down , strumpet ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj kill me tomorrow ; let me live tonight ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nay , if you strive- 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj but half an hour ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj being done , there is no pause . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj but while i say one prayer ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj it is too late . xxmaj he stifles her . 
▁ xxup emilia . [ within . ] xxmaj my lord , my lord ! xxmaj what , ho ! my lord , my lord ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what noise is this ? xxmaj not dead ? not yet quite dead ? 
▁ i that am cruel am yet merciful ; 
▁ i would not have thee linger in thy pain . 
▁ xxmaj so , so . 
▁ xxup emilia . [ within . ] xxmaj what , ho ! my lord , my lord ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup emilia . [ within . ] xxup o , good my lord , i would speak a word with you ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj yes , ' tis xxmaj emilia . xxmaj by and by . xxmaj she 's dead . 
▁ ' tis like she comes to speak of xxmaj cassio 's death . 
▁ xxmaj the noise was here . xxmaj ha ! no more moving ? 
▁ xxmaj still as the grave . xxmaj shall she come in ? were't good ? 
▁ i think she stirs again . xxmaj no . xxmaj what 's best to do ? 
▁ xxmaj if she come in , she 'll sure speak to my wife . 
▁ xxmaj my wife ! xxmaj my wife ! xxmaj what wife ? i have no wife . 
▁ xxup o , insupportable ! o heavy hour ! 
▁ xxmaj methinks it should be now a huge eclipse 
▁ xxmaj of sun and moon , and that the affrighted globe 
▁ xxmaj should yawn at alteration . 
▁ xxup emilia . [ within . ] i do beseech you 
▁ xxmaj that i may speak with you , xxup o , good my lord ! 
▁ xxup othello . i had forgot thee . xxup o , come in , xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxmaj soft , by and by . xxmaj let me the curtains draw . 
▁ xxmaj where art thou ? xxmaj unlocks the door . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj emilia . 

▁ xxmaj what 's the matter with thee now ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxup o , my good lord , yonder 's foul murthers done ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what , now ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj but now , my lord . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj it is the very error of the moon ; 
▁ xxmaj she comes more nearer earth than she was wo nt 
▁ xxmaj and makes men mad . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj cassio , my lord , hath kill'd a young xxmaj venetian 
▁ xxmaj call'd xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj roderigo kill'd ? 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cassio kill'd ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj no , xxmaj cassio is not kill'd . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj not xxmaj cassio kill'd ! xxmaj then murther 's out of tune , 
▁ xxmaj and sweet revenge grows harsh . 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxup o , falsely , falsely murther'd ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj alas , what cry is that ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that ? what ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj out , and alas ! xxmaj that was my lady 's voice . 
▁ xxmaj help ! help , ho ! help ! o lady , speak again ! 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj desdemona ! o sweet mistress , speak ! 
▁ xxup desdemona . a guiltless death i die . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxup o , who hath done this deed ? 
▁ xxup desdemona . xxmaj nobody ; i myself . xxmaj farewell ; 
▁ xxmaj commend me to my kind lord . xxup o , farewell ! xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why , how should she be murther'd ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj alas , who knows ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj you heard her say herself , it was not xxup i. 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj she said so ; i must needs report the truth . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj she 's like a liar gone to burning hell ; 
▁ ' twas i that kill'd her . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxup o , the more angel she , 
▁ xxmaj and you the blacker devil ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj she turn'd to folly , and she was a whore . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj thou dost belie her , and thou art a devil . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj she was false as water . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj thou art rash as fire , to say 
▁ xxmaj that she was false . xxup o , she was heavenly true ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj cassio did top her ; ask thy husband else . 
▁ xxup o , i were damn'd beneath all depth in hell , 
▁ xxmaj but that i did proceed upon just grounds 
▁ xxmaj to this extremity . xxmaj thy husband knew it all . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj my husband ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj thy husband . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj that she was false to wedlock ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , with xxmaj cassio . xxmaj nay , had she been true , 
▁ xxmaj if heaven would make me such another world 
▁ xxmaj of one entire and perfect chrysolite , 
▁ xxmaj i'ld not have sold her for it . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj my husband ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay , ' twas he that told me first . 
▁ xxmaj an honest man he is , and hates the slime 
▁ xxmaj that sticks on filthy deeds . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj my husband ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj what needs this iteration , woman ? i say thy husband . 
▁ xxup emilia . o mistress , villainy hath made mocks with love ! 
▁ xxmaj my husband say that she was false ! 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj he , woman ; 
▁ i say thy husband . xxmaj dost understand the word ? 
▁ xxmaj my friend , thy husband , honest , honest xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj if he say so , may his pernicious soul 
▁ xxmaj rot half a grain a day ! xxmaj he lies to the heart . 
▁ xxmaj she was too fond of her most filthy bargain . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj do thy worst ; 
▁ xxmaj this deed of thine is no more worthy heaven 
▁ xxmaj than thou wast worthy her . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj peace , you were best . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj thou hast not half that power to do me harm 
▁ xxmaj as i have to be hurt . o gull ! o dolt ! 
▁ xxmaj as ignorant as dirt ! xxmaj thou hast done a deed- 
▁ i care not for thy sword ; xxmaj i 'll make thee known , 
▁ xxmaj though i lost twenty lives . xxmaj help ! help , ho ! help ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj moor hath kill'd my mistress ! xxmaj murther , murther ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj montano , xxmaj gratiano , xxmaj iago , and others . 

▁ xxup montano . xxmaj what is the matter ? xxmaj how now , general ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxup o , are you come , xxmaj iago ? xxmaj you have done well , 
▁ xxmaj that men must lay their murthers on your neck . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj what is the matter ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj disprove this villain , if thou be'st a man . 
▁ xxmaj he says thou told'st him that his wife was false ; 
▁ i know thou didst not , thou'rt not such a villain . 
▁ xxmaj speak , for my heart is full . 
▁ xxup iago . i told him what i thought , and told no more 
▁ xxmaj than what he found himself was apt and true . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj but did you ever tell him she was false ? 
▁ xxup iago . i did . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj you told a lie , an odious , damned lie ; 
▁ xxmaj upon my soul , a lie , a wicked lie ! 
▁ xxmaj she false with xxmaj cassio ? xxmaj did you say with xxmaj cassio ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj with xxmaj cassio , mistress . xxmaj go to , charm your tongue . 
▁ xxup emilia . i will not charm my tongue ; i am bound to speak . 
▁ xxmaj my mistress here lies murther'd in her bed- 
▁ xxup all . o heavens forfend ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj and your reports have set the murther on . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj nay , stare not , masters ; it is true indeed . 
▁ xxup gratiano . ' tis a strange truth . 
▁ xxup montano . o monstrous act ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj villainy , villainy , villainy ! 
▁ i think upon't , i think , i smell't , o villainy ! 
▁ i thought so then . xxmaj i 'll kill myself for grief . 
▁ o villainy , villainy ! 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj what , are you mad ? i charge you , get you home . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj good gentlemen , let me have leave to speak ; 
▁ ' tis proper i obey him , but not now . 
▁ xxmaj perchance , xxmaj iago , i will ne'er go home . 
▁ xxup othello . xxup o ! xxup o ! xxup o ! xxmaj falls on the bed . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj nay , lay thee down and roar ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou hast kill'd the sweetest innocent 
▁ xxmaj that e'er did lift up eye . 
▁ xxup othello . [ rises . ] xxup o , she was foul ! 
▁ i scarce did know you , uncle ; there lies your niece , 
▁ xxmaj whose breath indeed these hands have newly stopp'd . 
▁ i know this act shows horrible and grim . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj poor xxmaj desdemon ! i am glad thy father 's dead . 
▁ xxmaj thy match was mortal to him , and pure grief 
▁ xxmaj shore his old thread in twain ; did he live now , 
▁ xxmaj this sight would make him do a desperate turn , 
▁ xxmaj yea , curse his better angel from his side , 
▁ xxmaj and fall to reprobation . 
▁ xxup othello . ' tis pitiful , but yet xxmaj iago knows 
▁ xxmaj that she with xxmaj cassio hath the act of shame 
▁ a thousand times committed . xxmaj cassio confess'd it , 
▁ xxmaj and she did gratify his amorous works 
▁ xxmaj with that recognizance and pledge of love 
▁ xxmaj which i first gave her . i saw it in his hand , 
▁ xxmaj it was a handkerchief , an antique token 
▁ xxmaj my father gave my mother . 
▁ xxup emilia . o heaven ! o heavenly powers ! 
▁ xxup iago . ' zounds ! xxmaj hold your peace . 
▁ xxup emilia . ' twill out , ' twill . i peace ? 
▁ xxmaj no , i will speak as liberal as the north ; 
▁ xxmaj let heaven and men and devils , let them all , 
▁ xxmaj all , all , cry shame against me , yet xxmaj i 'll speak . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj be wise , and get you home . 
▁ xxup emilia . i will not . 
▁ xxmaj iago offers to stab xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj fie ! 
▁ xxmaj your sword upon a woman ? 
▁ xxup emilia . o thou dull xxmaj moor ! xxmaj that handkerchief thou speak'st of 
▁ i found by fortune and did give my husband , 
▁ xxmaj for often with a solemn earnestness , 
▁ xxmaj more than indeed belong'd to such a trifle , 
▁ xxmaj he begg'd of me to steal it . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj villainous whore ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj she give it xxmaj cassio ? xxmaj no , alas , i found it , 
▁ xxmaj and i did give't my husband . 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj filth , thou liest ! 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj by heaven , i do not , i do not , gentlemen . 
▁ o murtherous coxcomb ! xxmaj what should such a fool 
▁ xxmaj do with so good a wife ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj are there not stones in heaven 
▁ xxmaj but what serve for thunder ? xxmaj precious villain ! 
▁ xxmaj he runs at xxmaj iago , but xxmaj montano 
▁ disarms him . xxmaj iago stabs xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj the woman falls ; sure , he hath kill'd his wife . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj ay , ay ! xxup o , lay me by my mistress ' side . xxmaj exit xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj he 's gone , but his wife 's kill'd . 
▁ xxup montano . ' tis a notorious villain . xxmaj take you this weapon , 
▁ xxmaj which i have here recover'd from the xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxmaj come , guard the door without ; let him not pass , 
▁ xxmaj but kill him rather . xxmaj i 'll after that same villain , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a damned slave . xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj othello and xxmaj emilia . 
▁ xxup othello . i am not valiant neither , 
▁ xxmaj but every puny whipster gets my sword . 
▁ xxmaj but why should honor outlive honesty ? 
▁ xxmaj let it go all . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj what did thy song bode , lady ? 
▁ xxmaj hark , canst thou hear me ? i will play the swan , 
▁ xxmaj and die in music . [ sings . ] " willow , willow , willow . " 
▁ xxmaj moor , she was chaste ; she loved thee , cruel xxmaj moor ; 
▁ xxmaj so come my soul to bliss , as i speak true ; 
▁ xxmaj so speaking as i think , i die , i die . xxmaj dies . 
▁ xxup othello . i have another weapon in this chamber ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a sword of xxmaj spain , the ice - brook 's temper- 
▁ xxup o , here it is . xxmaj uncle , i must come forth . 
▁ xxup gratiano . [ within . ] xxmaj if thou attempt it , it will cost thee dear . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast no weapon , and perforce must suffer . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj look in upon me then , and speak with me , 
▁ xxmaj or , naked as i am , i will assault thee . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj gratiano . 

▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj what is the matter ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj behold , i have a weapon ; 
▁ a better never did itself sustain 
▁ xxmaj upon a soldier 's thigh . i have seen the day 
▁ xxmaj that with this little arm and this good sword 
▁ i have made my way through more impediments 
▁ xxmaj than twenty times your stop . xxmaj but , o vain boast ! 
▁ xxmaj who can control his fate ? ' tis not so now . 
▁ xxmaj be not afraid , though you do see me weapon'd ; 
▁ xxmaj here is my journey 's end , here is my butt 
▁ xxmaj and very sea - mark of my utmost sail . 
▁ xxmaj do you go back dismay'd ? ' tis a lost fear . 
▁ xxmaj man but a rush against xxmaj othello 's breast , 
▁ xxmaj and he retires . xxmaj where should xxmaj othello go ? 
▁ xxmaj now , how dost thou look now ? o ill - starr'd wench ! 
▁ xxmaj pale as thy smock ! xxmaj when we shall meet at compt , 
▁ xxmaj this look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and fiends will snatch at it . xxmaj cold , cold , my girl ? 
▁ xxmaj even like thy chastity . o cursed , cursed slave ! 
▁ xxmaj whip me , ye devils , 
▁ xxmaj from the possession of this heavenly sight ! 
▁ xxmaj blow me about in winds ! xxmaj roast me in sulphur ! 
▁ xxmaj wash me in steep - down gulfs of liquid fire ! 
▁ o xxmaj desdemon ! dead , xxmaj desdemon ! dead ! 
▁ xxup o ! xxup o ! xxup o ! 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lodovico , xxmaj montano , xxmaj cassio carried in a chair , 
▁ and xxmaj officers with xxmaj iago , prisoner . 

▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj where is this rash and most unfortunate man ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj that 's he that was xxmaj othello . xxmaj here i am . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj where is that viper ? xxmaj bring the villain forth . 
▁ xxup othello . i look down towards his feet ; but that 's a fable . 
▁ xxmaj if that thou be'st a devil , i can not kill thee . xxmaj wounds xxmaj iago . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj wrench his sword from him . 
▁ xxup iago . i bleed , sir , but not kill'd . 
▁ xxup othello . i am not sorry neither . xxmaj i'ld have thee live , 
▁ xxmaj for , in my sense , ' tis happiness to die . 
▁ xxup lodovico . o thou xxmaj othello , that wert once so good , 
▁ xxmaj fall'n in the practice of a damned slave , 
▁ xxmaj what shall be said to thee ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj why , anything ; 
▁ xxmaj an honorable murtherer , if you will , 
▁ xxmaj for nought did i in hate , but all in honor . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj this wretch hath part confess'd his villainy . 
▁ xxmaj did you and he consent in xxmaj cassio 's death ? 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj dear general , i never gave you cause . 
▁ xxup othello . i do believe it , and i ask your pardon . 
▁ xxmaj will you , i pray , demand that demi - devil 
▁ xxmaj why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body ? 
▁ xxup iago . xxmaj demand me nothing ; what you know , you know . 
▁ xxmaj from this time forth i never will speak word . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj what , not to pray ? 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj torments will ope your lips . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj well , thou dost best . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj sir , you shall understand what hath befall'n , 
▁ xxmaj which , as i think , you know not . xxmaj here is a letter 
▁ xxmaj found in the pocket of the slain xxmaj roderigo , 
▁ xxmaj and here another . xxmaj the one of them imports 
▁ xxmaj the death of xxmaj cassio to be undertook 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj roderigo . 
▁ xxup othello . o villain ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj most heathenish and most gross ! 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj now here 's another discontented paper , 
▁ xxmaj found in his pocket too ; and this , it seems , 
▁ xxmaj roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain ; 
▁ xxmaj but that , belike , xxmaj iago in the interim 
▁ xxmaj came in and satisfied him . 
▁ xxup othello . o the pernicious caitiff ! 
▁ xxmaj how came you , xxmaj cassio , by that handkerchief 
▁ xxmaj that was my wife 's ? 
▁ xxup cassio . i found it in my chamber ; 
▁ xxmaj and he himself confess'd but even now 
▁ xxmaj that there he dropp'd it for a special purpose 
▁ xxmaj which wrought to his desire . 
▁ xxup othello . o fool ! fool ! fool ! 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj there is besides in xxmaj roderigo 's letter , 
▁ xxmaj how he upbraids xxmaj iago , that he made him 
▁ xxmaj brave me upon the watch , whereon it came 
▁ xxmaj that i was cast . xxmaj and even but now he spake 
▁ xxmaj after long seeming dead , xxmaj iago hurt him , 
▁ xxmaj iago set him on . 
▁ xxup lodovico . xxmaj you must forsake this room , and go with us . 
▁ xxmaj your power and your command is taken off , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cassio rules in xxmaj cyprus . xxmaj for this slave , 
▁ xxmaj if there be any cunning cruelty 
▁ xxmaj that can torment him much and hold him long , 
▁ xxmaj it shall be his . xxmaj you shall close prisoner rest , 
▁ xxmaj till that the nature of your fault be known 
▁ xxmaj to the xxmaj venetian state . xxmaj come , bring away . 
▁ xxup othello . xxmaj soft you ; a word or two before you go . 
▁ i have done the state some service , and they know't . 
▁ xxmaj no more of that . i pray you , in your letters , 
▁ xxmaj when you shall these unlucky deeds relate , 
▁ xxmaj speak of me as i am ; nothing extenuate , 
▁ xxmaj nor set down aught in malice . xxmaj then must you speak 
▁ xxmaj of one that loved not wisely but too well ; 
▁ xxmaj of one not easily jealous , but , being wrought , 
▁ xxmaj perplex'd in the extreme ; of one whose hand , 
▁ xxmaj like the base xxmaj indian , threw a pearl away 
▁ xxmaj richer than all his tribe ; of one whose subdued eyes , 
▁ xxmaj albeit unused to the melting mood , 
▁ xxmaj drop tears as fast as the xxmaj arabian trees 
▁ xxmaj their medicinal gum . xxmaj set you down this ; 
▁ xxmaj and say besides , that in xxmaj aleppo once , 
▁ xxmaj where a malignant and a turban'd xxmaj turk 
▁ xxmaj beat a xxmaj venetian and traduced the state , 
▁ i took by the throat the circumcised dog 
▁ xxmaj and smote him , thus . xxmaj stabs himself . 
▁ xxup lodovico . o bloody period ! 
▁ xxup gratiano . xxmaj all that 's spoke is marr'd . 
▁ xxup othello . i kiss'd thee ere i kill'd thee . xxmaj no way but this , 
▁ xxmaj killing myself , to die upon a kiss . 
▁ xxmaj falls on the bed , and dies . 
▁ xxup cassio . xxmaj this did i fear , but thought he had no weapon ; 
▁ xxmaj for he was great of heart . 
▁ xxup lodovico . [ to xxmaj iago . ] o xxmaj spartan dog , 
▁ xxmaj more fell than anguish , hunger , or the sea ! 
▁ xxmaj look on the tragic loading of this bed ; 
▁ xxmaj this is thy work . xxmaj the object poisons sight ;