xxbos xxmaj let it be hid . xxmaj gratiano , keep the house , 
▁ xxmaj and seize upon the fortunes of the xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj for they succeed on you . xxmaj to you , xxmaj lord xxmaj governor , 
▁ xxmaj remains the censure of this hellish villain , 
▁ xxmaj the time , the place , the torture . xxup o , enforce it ! 
▁ xxmaj myself will straight aboard , and to the state 
▁ xxmaj this heavy act with heavy heart relate . xxmaj exeunt . 


 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1596 


 xxup king xxup richard xxup the xxup second 


 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup king xxup richard xxup the xxup second 
▁ xxup john xxup of xxup gaunt , xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster - uncle to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup edmund xxup langley , xxmaj duke of xxmaj york - uncle to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup henry , surnamed xxup bolingbroke , xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford , son of 
▁ xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , afterwards xxmaj king xxmaj henry xxup iv 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup aumerle , son of the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 
▁ xxup thomas xxup mowbray , xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup surrey 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup salisbury 
▁ xxup earl xxup berkeley 
▁ xxup bushy - favourites of xxmaj king xxmaj richard 
▁ xxup bagot - " " " " 
▁ xxup green - " " " " 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup northumberland 
▁ xxup henry xxup percy , surnamed xxup hotspur , his son 
▁ xxup lord xxmaj ross xxup lord xxup willoughby 
▁ xxup lord xxup fitzwater xxup bishop xxup of xxup carlisle 
▁ xxup abbot xxup of xxup westminster xxup lord xxup marshal 
▁ xxup sir xxup stephen xxup scroop xxup sir xxup pierce xxup of xxup exton 
▁ xxup captain of a band of xxmaj welshmen xxup two xxup gardeners 

▁ xxup queen to xxmaj king xxmaj richard 
▁ xxup duchess xxup of xxup york 
▁ xxup duchess xxup of xxup gloucester , widow of xxmaj thomas of xxmaj woodstock , 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 
▁ xxup lady attending on the xxmaj queen 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj heralds , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj keeper , xxmaj messenger , 
▁ xxmaj groom , and other xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj england and xxmaj wales 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup richard , xxup john xxup of xxup gaunt , with other xxup nobles and attendants 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj old xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt , time - honoured xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj hast thou , according to thy oath and band , 
▁ xxmaj brought hither xxmaj henry xxmaj hereford , thy bold son , 
▁ xxmaj here to make good the boist'rous late appeal , 
▁ xxmaj which then our leisure would not let us hear , 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . i have , my liege . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj tell me , moreover , hast thou sounded him 
▁ xxmaj if he appeal the xxmaj duke on ancient malice , 
▁ xxmaj or worthily , as a good subject should , 
▁ xxmaj on some known ground of treachery in him ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj as near as i could sift him on that argument , 
▁ xxmaj on some apparent danger seen in him 
▁ xxmaj aim'd at your xxmaj highness - no inveterate malice . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then call them to our presence : face to face 
▁ xxmaj and frowning brow to brow , ourselves will hear 
▁ xxmaj the accuser and the accused freely speak . 
▁ xxmaj high - stomach'd are they both and full of ire , 
▁ xxmaj in rage , deaf as the sea , hasty as fire . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bolingbroke and xxup mowbray 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj many years of happy days befall 
▁ xxmaj my gracious sovereign , my most loving liege ! 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj each day still better other 's happiness 
▁ xxmaj until the heavens , envying earth 's good hap , 
▁ xxmaj add an immortal title to your crown ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj we thank you both ; yet one but flatters us , 
▁ xxmaj as well appeareth by the cause you come ; 
▁ xxmaj namely , to appeal each other of high treason . 
▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj hereford , what dost thou object 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj first - heaven be the record to my speech ! 
▁ xxmaj in the devotion of a subject 's love , 
▁ xxmaj tend'ring the precious safety of my prince , 
▁ xxmaj and free from other misbegotten hate , 
▁ xxmaj come i appellant to this princely presence . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray , do i turn to thee , 
▁ xxmaj and mark my greeting well ; for what i speak 
▁ xxmaj my body shall make good upon this earth , 
▁ xxmaj or my divine soul answer it in heaven- 
▁ xxmaj thou art a traitor and a miscreant , 
▁ xxmaj too good to be so , and too bad to live , 
▁ xxmaj since the more fair and crystal is the sky , 
▁ xxmaj the uglier seem the clouds that in it fly . 
▁ xxmaj once more , the more to aggravate the note , 
▁ xxmaj with a foul traitor 's name stuff i thy throat ; 
▁ xxmaj and wish - so please my sovereign - ere i move , 
▁ xxmaj what my tongue speaks , my right drawn sword may prove . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj let not my cold words here accuse my zeal . 
▁ ' tis not the trial of a woman 's war , 
▁ xxmaj the bitter clamour of two eager tongues , 
▁ xxmaj can arbitrate this cause betwixt us twain ; 
▁ xxmaj the blood is hot that must be cool'd for this . 
▁ xxmaj yet can i not of such tame patience boast 
▁ xxmaj as to be hush'd and nought at an to say . 
▁ xxmaj first , the fair reverence of your xxmaj highness curbs me 
▁ xxmaj from giving reins and spurs to my free speech ; 
▁ xxmaj which else would post until it had return'd 
▁ xxmaj these terms of treason doubled down his throat . 
▁ xxmaj setting aside his high blood 's royalty , 
▁ xxmaj and let him be no kinsman to my liege , 
▁ i do defy him , and i spit at him , 
▁ xxmaj call him a slanderous coward and a villain ; 
▁ xxmaj which to maintain , i would allow him odds 
▁ xxmaj and meet him , were i tied to run afoot 
▁ xxmaj even to the frozen ridges of the xxmaj alps , 
▁ xxmaj or any other ground inhabitable 
▁ xxmaj where ever xxmaj englishman durst set his foot . 
▁ xxmaj meantime let this defend my loyalty- 
▁ xxmaj by all my hopes , most falsely doth he lie 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj pale trembling coward , there i throw my gage , 
▁ xxmaj disclaiming here the kindred of the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj and lay aside my high blood 's royalty , 
▁ xxmaj which fear , not reverence , makes thee to except . 
▁ xxmaj if guilty dread have left thee so much strength 
▁ xxmaj as to take up mine honour 's pawn , then stoop . 
▁ xxmaj by that and all the rites of knighthood else 
▁ xxmaj will i make good against thee , arm to arm , 
▁ xxmaj what i have spoke or thou canst worst devise . 
▁ xxup mowbray . i take it up ; and by that sword i swear 
▁ xxmaj which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder 
▁ xxmaj i 'll answer thee in any fair degree 
▁ xxmaj or chivalrous design of knightly trial ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i mount , alive may i not light 
▁ xxmaj if i be traitor or unjustly fight ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what doth our cousin lay to xxmaj mowbray 's charge ? 
▁ xxmaj it must be great that can inherit us 
▁ xxmaj so much as of a thought of ill in him . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj look what i speak , my life shall prove it true- 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj mowbray hath receiv'd eight thousand nobles 
▁ xxmaj in name of lendings for your xxmaj highness ' soldiers , 
▁ xxmaj the which he hath detain'd for lewd employments 
▁ xxmaj like a false traitor and injurious villain . 
▁ xxmaj besides , i say and will in battle prove- 
▁ xxmaj or here , or elsewhere to the furthest verge 
▁ xxmaj that ever was survey'd by xxmaj english eye- 
▁ xxmaj that all the treasons for these eighteen years 
▁ xxmaj complotted and contrived in this land 
▁ xxmaj fetch from false xxmaj mowbray their first head and spring . 
▁ xxmaj further i say , and further will maintain 
▁ xxmaj upon his bad life to make all this good , 
▁ xxmaj that he did plot the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 's death , 
▁ xxmaj suggest his soon - believing adversaries , 
▁ xxmaj and consequently , like a traitor coward , 
▁ xxmaj sluic'd out his innocent soul through streams of blood ; 
▁ xxmaj which blood , like sacrificing xxmaj abel 's , cries , 
▁ xxmaj even from the tongueless caverns of the earth , 
▁ xxmaj to me for justice and rough chastisement ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by the glorious worth of my descent , 
▁ xxmaj this arm shall do it , or this life be spent . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj how high a pitch his resolution soars ! 
▁ xxmaj thomas of xxmaj norfolk , what say'st thou to this ? 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxup o , let my sovereign turn away his face 
▁ xxmaj and bid his ears a little while be deaf , 
▁ xxmaj till i have told this slander of his blood 
▁ xxmaj how xxmaj god and good men hate so foul a liar . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj mowbray , impartial are our eyes and cars . 
▁ xxmaj were he my brother , nay , my kingdom 's heir , 
▁ xxmaj as he is but my father 's brother 's son , 
▁ xxmaj now by my sceptre 's awe i make a vow , 
▁ xxmaj such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood 
▁ xxmaj should nothing privilege him nor partialize 
▁ xxmaj the unstooping firmness of my upright soul . 
▁ xxmaj he is our subject , xxmaj mowbray ; so art thou : 
▁ xxmaj free speech and fearless i to thee allow . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj then , xxmaj bolingbroke , as low as to thy heart , 
▁ xxmaj through the false passage of thy throat , thou liest . 
▁ xxmaj three parts of that receipt i had for xxmaj calais 
▁ xxmaj disburs'd i duly to his xxmaj highness ' soldiers ; 
▁ xxmaj the other part reserv'd i by consent , 
▁ xxmaj for that my sovereign liege was in my debt 
▁ xxmaj upon remainder of a dear account 
▁ xxmaj since last i went to xxmaj france to fetch his queen : 
▁ xxmaj now swallow down that lie . xxmaj for xxmaj gloucester 's death- 
▁ i slew him not , but to my own disgrace 
▁ xxmaj neglected my sworn duty in that case . 
▁ xxmaj for you , my noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj the honourable father to my foe , 
▁ xxmaj once did i lay an ambush for your life , 
▁ a trespass that doth vex my grieved soul ; 
▁ xxmaj but ere i last receiv'd the sacrament 
▁ i did confess it , and exactly begg'd 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace 's pardon ; and i hope i had it . 
▁ xxmaj this is my fault . xxmaj as for the rest appeal'd , 
▁ xxmaj it issues from the rancour of a villain , 
▁ a recreant and most degenerate traitor ; 
▁ xxmaj which in myself i boldly will defend , 
▁ xxmaj and interchangeably hurl down my gage 
▁ xxmaj upon this overweening traitor 's foot 
▁ xxmaj to prove myself a loyal gentleman 
▁ xxmaj even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom . 
▁ xxmaj in haste whereof , most heartily i pray 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness to assign our trial day . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj wrath - kindled gentlemen , be rul'd by me ; 
▁ xxmaj let 's purge this choler without letting blood- 
▁ xxmaj this we prescribe , though no physician ; 
▁ xxmaj deep malice makes too deep incision . 
▁ xxmaj forget , forgive ; conclude and be agreed : 
▁ xxmaj our doctors say this is no month to bleed . 
▁ xxmaj good uncle , let this end where it begun ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll calm the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , you your son . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj to be a make - peace shall become my age . 
▁ xxmaj throw down , my son , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk 's gage . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and , xxmaj norfolk , throw down his . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj when , xxmaj harry , when ? 
▁ xxmaj obedience bids i should not bid again . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj norfolk , throw down ; we bid . 
▁ xxmaj there is no boot . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj myself i throw , dread sovereign , at thy foot ; 
▁ xxmaj my life thou shalt command , but not my shame : 
▁ xxmaj the one my duty owes ; but my fair name , 
▁ xxmaj despite of death , that lives upon my grave 
▁ xxmaj to dark dishonour 's use thou shalt not have . 
▁ i am disgrac'd , impeach'd , and baffl'd here ; 
▁ xxmaj pierc'd to the soul with slander 's venom'd spear , 
▁ xxmaj the which no balm can cure but his heart - blood 
▁ xxmaj which breath'd this poison . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj rage must be withstood : 
▁ xxmaj give me his gage - lions make leopards tame . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj yea , but not change his spots . xxmaj take but my shame , 
▁ xxmaj and i resign my gage . xxmaj my dear dear lord , 
▁ xxmaj the purest treasure mortal times afford 
▁ xxmaj is spotless reputation ; that away , 
▁ xxmaj men are but gilded loam or painted clay . 
▁ a jewel in a ten - times barr'd - up chest 
▁ xxmaj is a bold spirit in a loyal breast . 
▁ xxmaj mine honour is my life ; both grow in one ; 
▁ xxmaj take honour from me , and my life is done : 
▁ xxmaj then , dear my liege , mine honour let me try ; 
▁ xxmaj in that i live , and for that will i die . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj cousin , throw up your gage ; do you begin . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxup o , xxmaj god defend my soul from such deep sin ! 
▁ xxmaj shall i seem crest - fallen in my father 's sight ? 
▁ xxmaj or with pale beggar - fear impeach my height 
▁ xxmaj before this outdar'd dastard ? xxmaj ere my tongue 
▁ xxmaj shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong 
▁ xxmaj or sound so base a parle , my teeth shall tear 
▁ xxmaj the slavish motive of recanting fear , 
▁ xxmaj and spit it bleeding in his high disgrace , 
▁ xxmaj where shame doth harbour , even in xxmaj mowbray 's face . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup gaunt 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj we were not born to sue , but to command ; 
▁ xxmaj which since we can not do to make you friends , 
▁ xxmaj be ready , as your lives shall answer it , 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj coventry , upon xxmaj saint xxmaj lambert 's day . 
▁ xxmaj there shall your swords and lances arbitrate 
▁ xxmaj the swelling difference of your settled hate ; 
▁ xxmaj since we can not atone you , we shall see 
▁ xxmaj justice design the victor 's chivalry . 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj marshal , command our officers - at - arms 
▁ xxmaj be ready to direct these home alarms . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxup duke xxup of xxup lancaster 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup john xxup of xxup gaunt with the xxup duchess xxup of xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj alas , the part i had in xxmaj woodstock 's blood 
▁ xxmaj doth more solicit me than your exclaims 
▁ xxmaj to stir against the butchers of his life ! 
▁ xxmaj but since correction lieth in those hands 
▁ xxmaj which made the fault that we can not correct , 
▁ xxmaj put we our quarrel to the will of heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj who , when they see the hours ripe on earth , 
▁ xxmaj will rain hot vengeance on offenders ' heads . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur ? 
▁ xxmaj hath love in thy old blood no living fire ? 
▁ xxmaj edward 's seven sons , whereof thyself art one , 
▁ xxmaj were as seven vials of his sacred blood , 
▁ xxmaj or seven fair branches springing from one root . 
▁ xxmaj some of those seven are dried by nature 's course , 
▁ xxmaj some of those branches by the xxmaj destinies cut ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj thomas , my dear lord , my life , my xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj one vial full of xxmaj edward 's sacred blood , 
▁ xxmaj one flourishing branch of his most royal root , 
▁ xxmaj is crack'd , and all the precious liquor spilt ; 
▁ xxmaj is hack'd down , and his summer leaves all faded , 
▁ xxmaj by envy 's hand and murder 's bloody axe . 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj gaunt , his blood was thine ! xxmaj that bed , that womb , 
▁ xxmaj that mettle , that self mould , that fashion'd thee , 
▁ xxmaj made him a man ; and though thou livest and breathest , 
▁ xxmaj yet art thou slain in him . xxmaj thou dost consent 
▁ xxmaj in some large measure to thy father 's death 
▁ xxmaj in that thou seest thy wretched brother die , 
▁ xxmaj who was the model of thy father 's life . 
▁ xxmaj call it not patience , xxmaj gaunt - it is despair ; 
▁ xxmaj in suff'ring thus thy brother to be slaught'red , 
▁ xxmaj thou showest the naked pathway to thy life , 
▁ xxmaj teaching stern murder how to butcher thee . 
▁ xxmaj that which in mean men we entitle patience 
▁ xxmaj is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts . 
▁ xxmaj what shall i say ? xxmaj to safeguard thine own life 
▁ xxmaj the best way is to venge my xxmaj gloucester 's death . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj god 's is the quarrel ; for xxmaj god 's substitute , 
▁ xxmaj his deputy anointed in xxmaj his sight , 
▁ xxmaj hath caus'd his death ; the which if wrongfully , 
▁ xxmaj let heaven revenge ; for i may never lift 
▁ xxmaj an angry arm against xxmaj his minister . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj where then , alas , may i complain myself ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj to xxmaj god , the widow 's champion and defence . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj why then , i will . xxmaj farewell , old xxmaj gaunt . 
▁ xxmaj thou goest to xxmaj coventry , there to behold 
▁ xxmaj our cousin xxmaj hereford and fell xxmaj mowbray fight . 
▁ xxup o , sit my husband 's wrongs on xxmaj hereford 's spear , 
▁ xxmaj that it may enter butcher xxmaj mowbray 's breast ! 
▁ xxmaj or , if misfortune miss the first career , 
▁ xxmaj be xxmaj mowbray 's sins so heavy in his bosom 
▁ xxmaj that they may break his foaming courser 's back 
▁ xxmaj and throw the rider headlong in the lists , 
▁ a caitiff recreant to my cousin xxmaj hereford ! 
▁ xxmaj farewell , old xxmaj gaunt ; thy sometimes brother 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj with her companion , xxmaj grief , must end her life . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj sister , farewell ; i must to xxmaj coventry . 
▁ xxmaj as much good stay with thee as go with me ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj yet one word more- grief boundeth where it falls , 
▁ xxmaj not with the empty hollowness , but weight . 
▁ i take my leave before i have begun , 
▁ xxmaj for sorrow ends not when it seemeth done . 
▁ xxmaj commend me to thy brother , xxmaj edmund xxmaj york . 
▁ xxmaj lo , this is all- nay , yet depart not so ; 
▁ xxmaj though this be all , do not so quickly go ; 
▁ i shall remember more . xxmaj bid him- ah , what?- 
▁ xxmaj with all good speed at xxmaj plashy visit me . 
▁ xxmaj alack , and what shall good old xxmaj york there see 
▁ xxmaj but empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls , 
▁ xxmaj unpeopled offices , untrodden stones ? 
▁ xxmaj and what hear there for welcome but my groans ? 
▁ xxmaj therefore commend me ; let him not come there 
▁ xxmaj to seek out sorrow that dwells every where . 
▁ xxmaj desolate , desolate , will i hence and die ; 
▁ xxmaj the last leave of thee takes my weeping eye . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj the lists at xxmaj coventry 

 xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup marshal and the xxup duke xxup of xxup aumerle 

▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj aumerle , is xxmaj harry xxmaj hereford arm'd ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj yea , at all points ; and longs to enter in . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , spightfully and bold , 
▁ xxmaj stays but the summons of the appelant 's trumpet . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj why then , the champions are prepar'd , and stay 
▁ xxmaj for nothing but his xxmaj majesty 's approach . 

▁ xxmaj the trumpets sound , and the xxup king enters with his nobles , 
▁ xxup gaunt , xxup bushy , xxup bagot , xxup green , and others . xxmaj when they are set , 
▁ enter xxup mowbray , xxmaj duke of xxmaj nor folk , in arms , defendant , and 
▁ a xxup herald 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj marshal , demand of yonder champion 
▁ xxmaj the cause of his arrival here in arms ; 
▁ xxmaj ask him his name ; and orderly proceed 
▁ xxmaj to swear him in the justice of his cause . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj in xxmaj god 's name and the xxmaj king 's , say who thou art , 
▁ xxmaj and why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms ; 
▁ xxmaj against what man thou com'st , and what thy quarrel . 
▁ xxmaj speak truly on thy knighthood and thy oath ; 
▁ xxmaj as so defend thee heaven and thy valour ! 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj my name is xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray , xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk ; 
▁ xxmaj who hither come engaged by my oath- 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj god defend a knight should violate!- 
▁ xxmaj both to defend my loyalty and truth 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj god , my xxmaj king , and my succeeding issue , 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford that appeals me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by the grace of xxmaj god and this mine arm , 
▁ xxmaj to prove him , in defending of myself , 
▁ a traitor to my xxmaj god , my xxmaj king , and me . 
▁ xxmaj and as i truly fight , defend me heaven ! 

▁ xxmaj the trumpets sound . xxmaj enter xxup bolingbroke , xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford , 
▁ appellant , in armour , and a xxup herald 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj marshal , ask yonder knight in arms , 
▁ xxmaj both who he is and why he cometh hither 
▁ xxmaj thus plated in habiliments of war ; 
▁ xxmaj and formally , according to our law , 
▁ xxmaj depose him in the justice of his cause . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj what is thy name ? and wherefore com'st thou hither 
▁ xxmaj before xxmaj king xxmaj richard in his royal lists ? 
▁ xxmaj against whom comest thou ? and what 's thy quarrel ? 
▁ xxmaj speak like a true knight , so defend thee heaven ! 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj harry of xxmaj hereford , xxmaj lancaster , and xxmaj derby , 
▁ xxmaj am xxup i ; who ready here do stand in arms 
▁ xxmaj to prove , by xxmaj god 's grace and my body 's valour , 
▁ xxmaj in lists on xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray , xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , 
▁ xxmaj that he is a traitor , foul and dangerous , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj god of heaven , xxmaj king xxmaj richard , and to me . 
▁ xxmaj and as i truly fight , defend me heaven ! 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj on pain of death , no person be so bold 
▁ xxmaj or daring - hardy as to touch the lists , 
▁ xxmaj except the xxmaj marshal and such officers 
▁ xxmaj appointed to direct these fair designs . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj lord xxmaj marshal , let me kiss my sovereign 's hand , 
▁ xxmaj and bow my knee before his xxmaj majesty ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj mowbray and myself are like two men 
▁ xxmaj that vow a long and weary pilgrimage . 
▁ xxmaj then let us take a ceremonious leave 
▁ xxmaj and loving farewell of our several friends . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj the appellant in all duty greets your xxmaj highness , 
▁ xxmaj and craves to kiss your hand and take his leave . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj we will descend and fold him in our arms . 
▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj hereford , as thy cause is right , 
▁ xxmaj so be thy fortune in this royal fight ! 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my blood ; which if to - day thou shed , 
▁ xxmaj lament we may , but not revenge thee dead . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxup o , let no noble eye profane a tear 
▁ xxmaj for me , if i be gor'd with xxmaj mowbray 's spear . 
▁ xxmaj as confident as is the falcon 's flight 
▁ xxmaj against a bird , do i with xxmaj mowbray fight . 
▁ xxmaj my loving lord , i take my leave of you ; 
▁ xxmaj of you , my noble cousin , xxmaj lord xxmaj aumerle ; 
▁ xxmaj not sick , although i have to do with death , 
▁ xxmaj but lusty , young , and cheerly drawing breath . 
▁ xxmaj lo , as at xxmaj english feasts , so i regreet 
▁ xxmaj the daintiest last , to make the end most sweet . 
▁ o thou , the earthly author of my blood , 
▁ xxmaj whose youthful spirit , in me regenerate , 
▁ xxmaj doth with a twofold vigour lift me up 
▁ xxmaj to reach at victory above my head , 
▁ xxmaj add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers , 
▁ xxmaj and with thy blessings steel my lance 's point , 
▁ xxmaj that it may enter xxmaj mowbray 's waxen coat 
▁ xxmaj and furbish new the name of xxmaj john o ' xxmaj gaunt , 
▁ xxmaj even in the lusty haviour of his son . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj god in thy good cause make thee prosperous ! 
▁ xxmaj be swift like lightning in the execution , 
▁ xxmaj and let thy blows , doubly redoubled , 
▁ xxmaj fall like amazing thunder on the casque 
▁ xxmaj of thy adverse pernicious enemy . 
▁ xxmaj rouse up thy youthful blood , be valiant , and live . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj mine innocence and xxmaj saint xxmaj george to thrive ! 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj however xxmaj god or fortune cast my lot , 
▁ xxmaj there lives or dies , true to xxmaj king xxmaj richard 's throne , 
▁ a loyal , just , and upright gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj never did captive with a freer heart 
▁ xxmaj cast off his chains of bondage , and embrace 
▁ xxmaj his golden uncontroll'd enfranchisement , 
▁ xxmaj more than my dancing soul doth celebrate 
▁ xxmaj this feast of battle with mine adversary . 
▁ xxmaj most mighty liege , and my companion peers , 
▁ xxmaj take from my mouth the wish of happy years . 
▁ xxmaj as gentle and as jocund as to jest 
▁ xxmaj go i to fight : truth hath a quiet breast . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj farewell , my lord , securely i espy 
▁ xxmaj virtue with valour couched in thine eye . 
▁ xxmaj order the trial , xxmaj marshal , and begin . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj harry of xxmaj hereford , xxmaj lancaster , and xxmaj derby , 
▁ xxmaj receive thy lance ; and xxmaj god defend the right ! 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj strong as a tower in hope , i cry amen . 
▁ xxup marshal . [ to an officer ] xxmaj go bear this lance to xxmaj thomas , 
▁ xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk . 
▁ xxup first xxup herald . xxmaj harry of xxmaj hereford , xxmaj lancaster , and xxmaj derby , 
▁ xxmaj stands here for xxmaj god , his sovereign , and himself , 
▁ xxmaj on pain to be found false and recreant , 
▁ xxmaj to prove the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray , 
▁ a traitor to his xxmaj god , his xxmaj king , and him ; 
▁ xxmaj and dares him to set forward to the fight . 
▁ xxup second xxup herald . xxmaj here standeth xxmaj thomas xxmaj mowbray , xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , 
▁ xxmaj on pain to be found false and recreant , 
▁ xxmaj both to defend himself , and to approve 
▁ xxmaj henry of xxmaj hereford , xxmaj lancaster , and xxmaj derby , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj god , his sovereign , and to him disloyal , 
▁ xxmaj courageously and with a free desire 
▁ xxmaj attending but the signal to begin . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj sound trumpets ; and set forward , combatants . 
▁ [ a charge sounded ] 
▁ xxmaj stay , the xxmaj king hath thrown his warder down . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj let them lay by their helmets and their spears , 
▁ xxmaj and both return back to their chairs again . 
▁ xxmaj withdraw with us ; and let the trumpets sound 
▁ xxmaj while we return these dukes what we decree . 

▁ a long flourish , while the xxup king consults his xxmaj council 
▁
▁ xxmaj draw near , 
▁ xxmaj and list what with our council we have done . 
▁ xxmaj for that our kingdom 's earth should not be soil'd 
▁ xxmaj with that dear blood which it hath fostered ; 
▁ xxmaj and for our eyes do hate the dire aspect 
▁ xxmaj of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours ' sword ; 
▁ xxmaj and for we think the eagle - winged pride 
▁ xxmaj of sky - aspiring and ambitious thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj with rival - hating envy , set on you 
▁ xxmaj to wake our peace , which in our country 's cradle 
▁ xxmaj draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep ; 
▁ xxmaj which so rous'd up with boist'rous untun'd drums , 
▁ xxmaj with harsh - resounding trumpets ' dreadful bray , 
▁ xxmaj and grating shock of wrathful iron arms , 
▁ xxmaj might from our quiet confines fright fair peace 
▁ xxmaj and make us wade even in our kindred 's blood- 
▁ xxmaj therefore we banish you our territories . 
▁ xxmaj you , cousin xxmaj hereford , upon pain of life , 
▁ xxmaj till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields 
▁ xxmaj shall not regreet our fair dominions , 
▁ xxmaj but tread the stranger paths of banishment . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj your will be done . xxmaj this must my comfort be- 
▁ xxmaj that sun that warms you here shall shine on me , 
▁ xxmaj and those his golden beams to you here lent 
▁ xxmaj shall point on me and gild my banishment . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj norfolk , for thee remains a heavier doom , 
▁ xxmaj which i with some unwillingness pronounce : 
▁ xxmaj the sly slow hours shall not determinate 
▁ xxmaj the dateless limit of thy dear exile ; 
▁ xxmaj the hopeless word of ' never to return ' 
▁ xxmaj breathe i against thee , upon pain of life . 
▁ xxup mowbray . a heavy sentence , my most sovereign liege , 
▁ xxmaj and all unlook'd for from your xxmaj highness ' mouth . 
▁ a dearer merit , not so deep a maim 
▁ xxmaj as to be cast forth in the common air , 
▁ xxmaj have i deserved at your xxmaj highness ' hands . 
▁ xxmaj the language i have learnt these forty years , 
▁ xxmaj my native xxmaj english , now i must forgo ; 
▁ xxmaj and now my tongue 's use is to me no more 
▁ xxmaj than an unstringed viol or a harp ; 
▁ xxmaj or like a cunning instrument cas'd up 
▁ xxmaj or , being open , put into his hands 
▁ xxmaj that knows no touch to tune the harmony . 
▁ xxmaj within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips ; 
▁ xxmaj and dull , unfeeling , barren ignorance 
▁ xxmaj is made my gaoler to attend on me . 
▁ i am too old to fawn upon a nurse , 
▁ xxmaj too far in years to be a pupil now . 
▁ xxmaj what is thy sentence , then , but speechless death , 
▁ xxmaj which robs my tongue from breathing native breath ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj it boots thee not to be compassionate ; 
▁ xxmaj after our sentence plaining comes too late . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj then thus i turn me from my countrv 's light , 
▁ xxmaj to dwell in solemn shades of endless night . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj return again , and take an oath with thee . 
▁ xxmaj lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands ; 
▁ xxmaj swear by the duty that you owe to xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj our part therein we banish with yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj to keep the oath that we administer : 
▁ xxmaj you never shall , so help you truth and xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj embrace each other 's love in banishment ; 
▁ xxmaj nor never look upon each other 's face ; 
▁ xxmaj nor never write , regreet , nor reconcile 
▁ xxmaj this louring tempest of your home - bred hate ; 
▁ xxmaj nor never by advised purpose meet 
▁ xxmaj to plot , contrive , or complot any ill , 
▁ ' gainst us , our state , our subjects , or our land . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i swear . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj and xxup i , to keep all this . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj norfolk , so far as to mine enemy . 
▁ xxmaj by this time , had the xxmaj king permitted us , 
▁ xxmaj one of our souls had wand'red in the air , 
▁ xxmaj banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh , 
▁ xxmaj as now our flesh is banish'd from this land- 
▁ xxmaj confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm ; 
▁ xxmaj since thou hast far to go , bear not along 
▁ xxmaj the clogging burden of a guilty soul . 
▁ xxup mowbray . xxmaj no , xxmaj bolingbroke ; if ever i were traitor , 
▁ xxmaj my name be blotted from the book of life , 
▁ xxmaj and i from heaven banish'd as from hence ! 
▁ xxmaj but what thou art , xxmaj god , thou , and xxup i , do know ; 
▁ xxmaj and all too soon , i fear , the xxmaj king shall rue . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my liege . xxmaj now no way can i stray : 
▁ xxmaj save back to xxmaj england , an the world 's my way . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj uncle , even in the glasses of thine eyes 
▁ i see thy grieved heart . xxmaj thy sad aspect 
▁ xxmaj hath from the number of his banish'd years 
▁ xxmaj pluck'd four away . [ to xxup bolingbroke ] xxmaj six frozen winters spent , 
▁ xxmaj return with welcome home from banishment . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj how long a time lies in one little word ! 
▁ xxmaj four lagging winters and four wanton springs 
▁ xxmaj end in a word : such is the breath of xxmaj kings . 
▁ xxup gaunt . i thank my liege that in regard of me 
▁ xxmaj he shortens four years of my son 's exile ; 
▁ xxmaj but little vantage shall i reap thereby , 
▁ xxmaj for ere the six years that he hath to spend 
▁ xxmaj can change their moons and bring their times about , 
▁ xxmaj my oil - dried lamp and time - bewasted light 
▁ xxmaj shall be extinct with age and endless night ; 
▁ xxmaj my inch of taper will be burnt and done , 
▁ xxmaj and blindfold death not let me see my son . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , uncle , thou hast many years to live . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj but not a minute , xxmaj king , that thou canst give : 
▁ xxmaj shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow 
▁ xxmaj and pluck nights from me , but not lend a morrow ; 
▁ xxmaj thou can'st help time to furrow me with age , 
▁ xxmaj but stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage ; 
▁ xxmaj thy word is current with him for my death , 
▁ xxmaj but dead , thy kingdom can not buy my breath . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thy son is banish'd upon good advice , 
▁ xxmaj whereto thy tongue a party - verdict gave . 
▁ xxmaj why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour . 
▁ xxmaj you urg'd me as a judge ; but i had rather 
▁ xxmaj you would have bid me argue like a father . 
▁ xxup o , had it been a stranger , not my child , 
▁ xxmaj to smooth his fault i should have been more mild . 
▁ a partial slander sought i to avoid , 
▁ xxmaj and in the sentence my own life destroy'd . 
▁ xxmaj alas , i look'd when some of you should say 
▁ i was too strict to make mine own away ; 
▁ xxmaj but you gave leave to my unwilling tongue 
▁ xxmaj against my will to do myself this wrong . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj cousin , farewell ; and , uncle , bid him so . 
▁ xxmaj six years we banish him , and he shall go . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exit xxup king with train 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj cousin , farewell ; what presence must not know , 
▁ xxmaj from where you do remain let paper show . 
▁ xxup marshal . xxmaj my lord , no leave take xxup i , for i will ride 
▁ xxmaj as far as land will let me by your side . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxup o , to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words , 
▁ xxmaj that thou returnest no greeting to thy friends ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i have too few to take my leave of you , 
▁ xxmaj when the tongue 's office should be prodigal 
▁ xxmaj to breathe the abundant dolour of the heart . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj thy grief is but thy absence for a time . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj joy absent , grief is present for that time . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj what is six winters ? xxmaj they are quickly gone . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj to men in joy ; but grief makes one hour ten . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj call it a travel that thou tak'st for pleasure . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj my heart will sigh when i miscall it so , 
▁ xxmaj which finds it an enforced pilgrimage . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj the sullen passage of thy weary steps 
▁ xxmaj esteem as foil wherein thou art to set 
▁ xxmaj the precious jewel of thy home return . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj nay , rather , every tedious stride i make 
▁ xxmaj will but remember me what a deal of world 
▁ i wander from the jewels that i love . 
▁ xxmaj must i not serve a long apprenticehood 
▁ xxmaj to foreign passages ; and in the end , 
▁ xxmaj having my freedom , boast of nothing else 
▁ xxmaj but that i was a journeyman to grief ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj all places that the eye of heaven visits 
▁ xxmaj are to a wise man ports and happy havens . 
▁ xxmaj teach thy necessity to reason thus : 
▁ xxmaj there is no virtue like necessity . 
▁ xxmaj think not the xxmaj king did banish thee , 
▁ xxmaj but thou the xxmaj king . xxmaj woe doth the heavier sit 
▁ xxmaj where it perceives it is but faintly home . 
▁ xxmaj go , say i sent thee forth to purchase honour , 
▁ xxmaj and not the xxmaj king exil'd thee ; or suppose 
▁ xxmaj devouring pestilence hangs in our air 
▁ xxmaj and thou art flying to a fresher clime . 
▁ xxmaj look what thy soul holds dear , imagine it 
▁ xxmaj to lie that way thou goest , not whence thou com'st . 
▁ xxmaj suppose the singing birds musicians , 
▁ xxmaj the grass whereon thou tread'st the presence strew'd , 
▁ xxmaj the flowers fair ladies , and thy steps no more 
▁ xxmaj than a delightful measure or a dance ; 
▁ xxmaj for gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite 
▁ xxmaj the man that mocks at it and sets it light . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxup o , who can hold a fire in his hand 
▁ xxmaj by thinking on the frosty xxmaj caucasus ? 
▁ xxmaj or cloy the hungry edge of appetite 
▁ xxmaj by bare imagination of a feast ? 
▁ xxmaj or wallow naked in xxmaj december snow 
▁ xxmaj by thinking on fantastic summer 's heat ? 
▁ xxup o , no ! the apprehension of the good 
▁ xxmaj gives but the greater feeling to the worse . 
▁ xxmaj fell sorrow 's tooth doth never rankle more 
▁ xxmaj than when he bites , but lanceth not the sore . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj come , come , my son , xxmaj i 'll bring thee on thy way . 
▁ xxmaj had i thy youtli and cause , i would not stay . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj then , xxmaj england 's ground , farewell ; sweet soil , adieu ; 
▁ xxmaj my mother , and my nurse , that bears me yet ! 
▁ xxmaj where'er i wander , boast of this i can : 
▁ xxmaj though banish'd , yet a trueborn xxmaj english man . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj the court 

 xxmaj enter the xxup king , with xxup bagot and xxup green , at one door ; 
 and the xxup duke xxup of xxup aumerle at another 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj we did observe . xxmaj cousin xxmaj aumerle , 
▁ xxmaj how far brought you high xxmaj hereford on his way ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . i brought high xxmaj hereford , if you call him so , 
▁ xxmaj but to the next high way , and there i left him . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and say , what store of parting tears were shed ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj faith , none for me ; except the north - east wind , 
▁ xxmaj which then blew bitterly against our faces , 
▁ xxmaj awak'd the sleeping rheum , and so by chance 
▁ xxmaj did grace our hollow parting with a tear . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what said our cousin when you parted with him ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . ' farewell . ' 
▁ xxmaj and , for my heart disdained that my tongue 
▁ xxmaj should so profane the word , that taught me craft 
▁ xxmaj to counterfeit oppression of such grief 
▁ xxmaj that words seem'd buried in my sorrow 's grave . 
▁ xxmaj marry , would the word ' farewell ' have length'ned hours 
▁ xxmaj and added years to his short banishment , 
▁ xxmaj he should have had a volume of farewells ; 
▁ xxmaj but since it would not , he had none of me . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj he is our cousin , cousin ; but ' tis doubt , 
▁ xxmaj when time shall call him home from banishment , 
▁ xxmaj whether our kinsman come to see his friends . 
▁ xxmaj ourself , and xxmaj bushy , xxmaj bagot here , and xxmaj green , 
▁ xxmaj observ'd his courtship to the common people ; 
▁ xxmaj how he did seem to dive into their hearts 
▁ xxmaj with humble and familiar courtesy ; 
▁ xxmaj what reverence he did throw away on slaves , 
▁ xxmaj wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles 
▁ xxmaj and patient underbearing of his fortune , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere to banish their affects with him . 
▁ xxmaj off goes his bonnet to an oyster - wench ; 
▁ a brace of draymen bid xxmaj god speed him well 
▁ xxmaj and had the tribute of his supple knee , 
▁ xxmaj with ' thanks , my countrymen , my loving friends ' ; 
▁ xxmaj as were our xxmaj england in reversion his , 
▁ xxmaj and he our subjects ' next degree in hope . 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj well , he is gone ; and with him go these thoughts ! 
▁ xxmaj now for the rebels which stand out in xxmaj ireland , 
▁ xxmaj expedient manage must be made , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj ere further leisure yicld them further means 
▁ xxmaj for their advantage and your xxmaj highness ' loss . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj we will ourself in person to this war ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for our coffers , with too great a court 
▁ xxmaj and liberal largess , are grown somewhat light , 
▁ xxmaj we are enforc'd to farm our royal realm ; 
▁ xxmaj the revenue whereof shall furnish us 
▁ xxmaj for our affairs in hand . xxmaj if that come short , 
▁ xxmaj our substitutes at home shall have blank charters ; 
▁ xxmaj whereto , when they shall know what men are rich , 
▁ xxmaj they shall subscribe them for large sums of gold , 
▁ xxmaj and send them after to supply our wants ; 
▁ xxmaj for we will make for xxmaj ireland presently . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bushy 

▁ xxmaj bushy , what news ? 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj old xxmaj john of xxmaj gaunt is grievous sick , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj suddenly taken ; and hath sent poste - haste 
▁ xxmaj to entreat your xxmaj majesty to visit him . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj where lies he ? 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj at xxmaj ely xxmaj house . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj now put it , xxmaj god , in the physician 's mind 
▁ xxmaj to help him to his grave immediately ! 
▁ xxmaj the lining of his coffers shall make coats 
▁ xxmaj to deck our soldiers for these xxmaj irish wars . 
▁ xxmaj come , gentlemen , let 's all go visit him . 
▁ xxmaj pray xxmaj god we may make haste , and come too late ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj amen . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj london . xxmaj ely xxmaj house 

 xxmaj enter xxup john xxup of xxup gaunt , sick , with the xxup duke xxup of xxup york , etc . 

▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj will the xxmaj king come , that i may breathe my last 
▁ xxmaj in wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj vex not yourself , nor strive not with your breath ; 
▁ xxmaj for all in vain comes counsel to his ear . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxup o , but they say the tongues of dying men 
▁ xxmaj enforce attention like deep harmony . 
▁ xxmaj where words are scarce , they are seldom spent in vain ; 
▁ xxmaj for they breathe truth that breathe their words -in pain . 
▁ xxmaj he that no more must say is listen'd more 
▁ xxmaj than they whom youth and ease have taught to glose ; 
▁ xxmaj more are men 's ends mark'd than their lives before . 
▁ xxmaj the setting sun , and music at the close , 
▁ xxmaj as the last taste of sweets , is sweetest last , 
▁ xxmaj writ in remembrance more than things long past . 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj richard my life 's counsel would not hear , 
▁ xxmaj my death 's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj no ; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds , 
▁ xxmaj as praises , of whose taste the wise are fond , 
▁ xxmaj lascivious metres , to whose venom sound 
▁ xxmaj the open ear of youth doth always listen ; 
▁ xxmaj report of fashions in proud xxmaj italy , 
▁ xxmaj whose manners still our tardy apish nation 
▁ xxmaj limps after in base imitation . 
▁ xxmaj where doth the world thrust forth a vanity- 
▁ xxmaj so it be new , there 's no respect how vile- 
▁ xxmaj that is not quickly buzz'd into his ears ? 
▁ xxmaj then all too late comes counsel to be heard 
▁ xxmaj where will doth mutiny with wit 's regard . 
▁ xxmaj direct not him whose way himself will choose . 
▁ ' tis breath thou lack'st , and that breath wilt thou lose . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj methinks i am a prophet new inspir'd , 
▁ xxmaj and thus expiring do foretell of him : 
▁ xxmaj his rash fierce blaze of riot can not last , 
▁ xxmaj for violent fires soon burn out themselves ; 
▁ xxmaj small showers last long , but sudden storms are short ; 
▁ xxmaj he tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes ; 
▁ xxmaj with eager feeding food doth choke the feeder ; 
▁ xxmaj light vanity , insatiate cormorant , 
▁ xxmaj consuming means , soon preys upon itself . 
▁ xxmaj this royal throne of kings , this scept'red isle , 
▁ xxmaj this earth of majesty , this seat of xxmaj mars , 
▁ xxmaj this other xxmaj eden , demi - paradise , 
▁ xxmaj this fortress built by xxmaj nature for herself 
▁ xxmaj against infection and the hand of war , 
▁ xxmaj this happy breed of men , this little world , 
▁ xxmaj this precious stone set in the silver sea , 
▁ xxmaj which serves it in the office of a wall , 
▁ xxmaj or as a moat defensive to a house , 
▁ xxmaj against the envy of less happier lands ; 
▁ xxmaj this blessed plot , this earth , this realm , this xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj this nurse , this teeming womb of royal kings , 
▁ xxmaj fear'd by their breed , and famous by their birth , 
▁ xxmaj renowned for their deeds as far from home , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj christian service and true chivalry , 
▁ xxmaj as is the sepulchre in stubborn xxmaj jewry 
▁ xxmaj of the world 's ransom , blessed xxmaj mary 's xxmaj son ; 
▁ xxmaj this land of such dear souls , this dear dear land , 
▁ xxmaj dear for her reputation through the world , 
▁ xxmaj is now leas'd out - i die pronouncing it- 
▁ xxmaj like to a tenement or pelting farm . 
▁ xxmaj england , bound in with the triumphant sea , 
▁ xxmaj whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege 
▁ xxmaj of wat'ry xxmaj neptune , is now bound in with shame , 
▁ xxmaj with inky blots and rotten parchment bonds ; 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj england , that was wo nt to conquer others , 
▁ xxmaj hath made a shameful conquest of itself . 
▁ xxmaj ah , would the scandal vanish with my life , 
▁ xxmaj how happy then were my ensuing death ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king and xxup queen , xxup aumerle , xxup bushy , xxup green , xxup bagot , 
▁ xxmaj ross , and xxup willoughby 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj the xxmaj king is come ; deal mildly with his youth , 
▁ xxmaj for young hot colts being rag'd do rage the more . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj how fares our noble uncle xxmaj lancaster ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what comfort , man ? xxmaj how is't with aged xxmaj gaunt ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxup o , how that name befits my composition ! 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj gaunt , indeed ; and gaunt in being old . 
▁ xxmaj within me grief hath kept a tedious fast ; 
▁ xxmaj and who abstains from meat that is not gaunt ? 
▁ xxmaj for sleeping xxmaj england long time have i watch'd ; 
▁ xxmaj watching breeds leanness , leanness is an gaunt . 
▁ xxmaj the pleasure that some fathers feed upon 
▁ xxmaj is my strict fast - i mean my children 's looks ; 
▁ xxmaj and therein fasting , hast thou made me gaunt . 
▁ xxmaj gaunt am i for the grave , gaunt as a grave , 
▁ xxmaj whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj can sick men play so nicely with their names ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj no , misery makes sport to mock itself : 
▁ xxmaj since thou dost seek to kill my name in me , 
▁ i mock my name , great king , to flatter thee . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj should dying men flatter with those that live ? 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj no , no ; men living flatter those that die . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thou , now a - dying , sayest thou flatterest me . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxup o , no ! thou diest , though i the sicker be . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i am in health , i breathe , and see thee ill . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxmaj now xxmaj he that made me knows i see thee ill ; 
▁ xxmaj ill in myself to see , and in thee seeing ill . 
▁ xxmaj thy death - bed is no lesser than thy land 
▁ xxmaj wherein thou liest in reputation sick ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou , too careless patient as thou art , 
▁ xxmaj commit'st thy anointed body to the cure 
▁ xxmaj of those physicians that first wounded thee : 
▁ a thousand flatterers sit within thy crown , 
▁ xxmaj whose compass is no bigger than thy head ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , incaged in so small a verge , 
▁ xxmaj the waste is no whit lesser than thy land . 
▁ xxup o , had thy grandsire with a prophet 's eye 
▁ xxmaj seen how his son 's son should destroy his sons , 
▁ xxmaj from forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame , 
▁ xxmaj deposing thee before thou wert possess'd , 
▁ xxmaj which art possess'd now to depose thyself . 
▁ xxmaj why , cousin , wert thou regent of the world , 
▁ xxmaj it were a shame to let this land by lease ; 
▁ xxmaj but for thy world enjoying but this land , 
▁ xxmaj is it not more than shame to shame it so ? 
▁ xxmaj landlord of xxmaj england art thou now , not xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj thy state of law is bondslave to the law ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . a lunatic lean - witted fool , 
▁ xxmaj presuming on an ague 's privilege , 
▁ xxmaj darest with thy frozen admonition 
▁ xxmaj make pale our cheek , chasing the royal blood 
▁ xxmaj with fury from his native residence . 
▁ xxmaj now by my seat 's right royal majesty , 
▁ xxmaj wert thou not brother to great xxmaj edward 's son , 
▁ xxmaj this tongue that runs so roundly in thy head 
▁ xxmaj should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders . 
▁ xxup gaunt . xxup o , xxmaj spare me not , my brother xxmaj edward 's son , 
▁ xxmaj for that i was his father xxmaj edward 's son ; 
▁ xxmaj that blood already , like the pelican , 
▁ xxmaj hast thou tapp'd out , and drunkenly carous'd . 
▁ xxmaj my brother xxmaj gloucester , plain well - meaning soul- 
▁ xxmaj whom fair befall in heaven ' mongst happy souls!- 
▁ xxmaj may be a precedent and witness good 
▁ xxmaj that thou respect'st not spilling xxmaj edward 's blood . 
▁ xxmaj join with the present sickness that i have ; 
▁ xxmaj and thy unkindness be like crooked age , 
▁ xxmaj to crop at once a too long withered flower . 
▁ xxmaj live in thy shame , but die not shame with thee ! 
▁ xxmaj these words hereafter thy tormentors be ! 
▁ xxmaj convey me to my bed , then to my grave . 
▁ xxmaj love they to live that love and honour have . 
▁ xxmaj exit , borne out by his attendants 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and let them die that age and sullens have ; 
▁ xxmaj for both hast thou , and both become the grave . 
▁ xxup york . i do beseech your xxmaj majesty impute his words 
▁ xxmaj to wayward sickliness and age in him . 
▁ xxmaj he loves you , on my life , and holds you dear 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj harry xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford , were he here . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj right , you say true : as xxmaj hereford 's love , so his ; 
▁ xxmaj as theirs , so mine ; and all be as it is . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup northumberland 

▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj my liege , old xxmaj gaunt commends him to your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what says he ? 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj nay , nothing ; all is said . 
▁ xxmaj his tongue is now a stringless instrument ; 
▁ xxmaj words , life , and all , old xxmaj lancaster hath spent . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj be xxmaj york the next that must be bankrupt so ! 
▁ xxmaj though death be poor , it ends a mortal woe . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj the ripest fruit first falls , and so doth he ; 
▁ xxmaj his time is spent , our pilgrimage must be . 
▁ xxmaj so much for that . xxmaj now for our xxmaj irish wars . 
▁ xxmaj we must supplant those rough rug - headed kerns , 
▁ xxmaj which live like venom where no venom else 
▁ xxmaj but only they have privilege to live . 
▁ xxmaj and for these great affairs do ask some charge , 
▁ xxmaj towards our assistance we do seize to us 
▁ xxmaj the plate , coin , revenues , and moveables , 
▁ xxmaj whereof our uncle xxmaj gaunt did stand possess'd . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj how long shall i be patient ? xxmaj ah , how long 
▁ xxmaj shall tender duty make me suffer wrong ? 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj gloucester 's death , nor xxmaj hereford 's banishment , 
▁ xxmaj nor xxmaj gaunt 's rebukes , nor xxmaj england 's private wrongs , 
▁ xxmaj nor the prevention of poor xxmaj bolingbroke 
▁ xxmaj about his marriage , nor my own disgrace , 
▁ xxmaj have ever made me sour my patient cheek 
▁ xxmaj or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign 's face . 
▁ i am the last of noble xxmaj edward 's sons , 
▁ xxmaj of whom thy father , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , was first .