xxbos xxmaj in war was never lion rag'd more fierce , 
▁ xxmaj in peace was never gentle lamb more mild , 
▁ xxmaj than was that young and princely gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj his face thou hast , for even so look'd he , 
▁ xxmaj accomplish'd with the number of thy hours ; 
▁ xxmaj but when he frown'd , it was against the xxmaj french 
▁ xxmaj and not against his friends . xxmaj his noble hand 
▁ xxmaj did win what he did spend , and spent not that 
▁ xxmaj which his triumphant father 's hand had won . 
▁ xxmaj his hands were guilty of no kindred blood , 
▁ xxmaj but bloody with the enemies of his kin . 
▁ o xxmaj richard ! xxmaj york is too far gone with grief , 
▁ xxmaj or else he never would compare between- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , uncle , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup york . o my liege , 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , if you please ; if not , xxup i , pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj not to be pardoned , am content withal . 
▁ xxmaj seek you to seize and gripe into your hands 
▁ xxmaj the royalties and rights of banish'd xxmaj hereford ? 
▁ xxmaj is not xxmaj gaunt dead ? and doth not xxmaj hereford live ? 
▁ xxmaj was not xxmaj gaunt just ? and is not xxmaj harry true ? 
▁ xxmaj did not the one deserve to have an heir ? 
▁ xxmaj is not his heir a well - deserving son ? 
▁ xxmaj take xxmaj hereford 's rights away , and take from xxmaj time 
▁ xxmaj his charters and his customary rights ; 
▁ xxmaj let not to - morrow then ensue to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj be not thyself - for how art thou a king 
▁ xxmaj but by fair sequence and succession ? 
▁ xxmaj now , afore god - god forbid i say true!- 
▁ xxmaj if you do wrongfully seize xxmaj hereford 's rights , 
▁ xxmaj call in the letters patents that he hath 
▁ xxmaj by his attorneys - general to sue 
▁ xxmaj his livery , and deny his off'red homage , 
▁ xxmaj you pluck a thousand dangers on your head , 
▁ xxmaj you lose a thousand well - disposed hearts , 
▁ xxmaj and prick my tender patience to those thoughts 
▁ xxmaj which honour and allegiance can not think . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj think what you will , we seize into our hands 
▁ xxmaj his plate , his goods , his money , and his lands . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj i 'll not be by the while . xxmaj my liege , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj what will ensue hereof there 's none can tell ; 
▁ xxmaj but by bad courses may be understood 
▁ xxmaj that their events can never fall out good . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj go , xxmaj bushy , to the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire straight ; 
▁ xxmaj bid him repair to us to xxmaj ely xxmaj house 
▁ xxmaj to see this business . xxmaj to - morrow next 
▁ xxmaj we will for xxmaj ireland ; and ' tis time , i trow . 
▁ xxmaj and we create , in absence of ourself , 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj uncle xxmaj york xxmaj lord xxmaj governor of xxmaj england ; 
▁ xxmaj for he is just , and always lov'd us well . 
▁ xxmaj come on , our queen ; to - morrow must we part ; 
▁ xxmaj be merry , for our time of stay is short . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt xxup king , xxup queen , xxup bushy , xxup aumerle , 
▁ xxup green , and xxup bagot 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj well , lords , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster is dead . 
▁ xxmaj ross . xxmaj and living too ; for now his son is xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj barely in title , not in revenues . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj richly in both , if justice had her right . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj my heart is great ; but it must break with silence , 
▁ xxmaj ere't be disburdened with a liberal tongue . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj nay , speak thy mind ; and let him ne'er speak more 
▁ xxmaj that speaks thy words again to do thee harm ! 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj tends that thou wouldst speak to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford ? 
▁ xxmaj if it be so , out with it boldly , man ; 
▁ xxmaj quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj no good at all that i can do for him ; 
▁ xxmaj unless you call it good to pity him , 
▁ xxmaj bereft and gelded of his patrimony . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj now , afore xxmaj god , ' tis shame such wrongs are borne 
▁ xxmaj in him , a royal prince , and many moe 
▁ xxmaj of noble blood in this declining land . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is not himself , but basely led 
▁ xxmaj by flatterers ; and what they will inform , 
▁ xxmaj merely in hate , ' gainst any of us an , 
▁ xxmaj that will the xxmaj king severely prosecute 
▁ ' gainst us , our lives , our children , and our heirs . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj the commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes ; 
▁ xxmaj and quite lost their hearts ; the nobles hath he find 
▁ xxmaj for ancient quarrels and quite lost their hearts . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj and daily new exactions are devis'd , 
▁ xxmaj as blanks , benevolences , and i wot not what ; 
▁ xxmaj but what , a xxmaj god 's name , doth become of this ? 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj wars hath not wasted it , for warr'd he hath not , 
▁ xxmaj but basely yielded upon compromise 
▁ xxmaj that which his noble ancestors achiev'd with blows . 
▁ xxmaj more hath he spent in peace than they in wars . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire hath the realm in farm . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj the xxmaj king 's grown bankrupt like a broken man . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj reproach and dissolution hangeth over him . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj he hath not money for these xxmaj irish wars , 
▁ xxmaj his burdenous taxations notwithstanding , 
▁ xxmaj but by the robbing of the banish'd xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj his noble kinsman - most degenerate king ! 
▁ xxmaj but , lords , we hear this fearful tempest sing , 
▁ xxmaj yet seek no shelter to avoid the storm ; 
▁ xxmaj we see the wind sit sore upon our sails , 
▁ xxmaj and yet we strike not , but securely perish . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj we see the very wreck that we must suffer ; 
▁ xxmaj and unavoided is the danger now 
▁ xxmaj for suffering so the causes of our wreck . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj not so ; even through the hollow eyes of death 
▁ i spy life peering ; but i dare not say 
▁ xxmaj how near the tidings of our comfort is . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj nay , let us share thy thoughts as thou dost ours . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj be confident to speak , xxmaj northumberland . 
▁ xxmaj we three are but thyself , and , speaking so , 
▁ xxmaj thy words are but as thoughts ; therefore be bold . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj then thus : i have from xxmaj le xxmaj port xxmaj blanc , a bay 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj brittany , receiv'd intelligence 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj harry xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford , xxmaj rainold xxmaj lord xxmaj cobham , 
▁ xxmaj that late broke from the xxmaj duke of xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj his brother , xxmaj archbishop late of xxmaj canterbury , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj erpingham , xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj ramston , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj john xxmaj norbery , xxmaj sir xxmaj robert xxmaj waterton , and xxmaj francis xxmaj quoint- 
▁ xxmaj all these , well furnish'd by the xxmaj duke of xxmaj britaine , 
▁ xxmaj with eight tall ships , three thousand men of war , 
▁ xxmaj are making hither with all due expedience , 
▁ xxmaj and shortly mean to touch our northern shore . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps they had ere this , but that they stay 
▁ xxmaj the first departing of the xxmaj king for xxmaj ireland . 
▁ xxmaj if then we shall shake off our slavish yoke , 
▁ xxmaj imp out our drooping country 's broken wing , 
▁ xxmaj redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown , 
▁ xxmaj wipe off the dust that hides our sceptre 's gilt , 
▁ xxmaj and make high majesty look like itself , 
▁ xxmaj away with me in post to xxmaj ravenspurgh ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you faint , as fearing to do so , 
▁ xxmaj stay and be secret , and myself will go . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj to horse , to horse ! xxmaj urge doubts to them that fear . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj hold out my horse , and i will first be there . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj windsor xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup queen , xxup bushy , and xxup bagot 

▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj madam , your xxmaj majesty is too much sad . 
▁ xxmaj you promis'd , when you parted with the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj to lay aside life - harming heaviness 
▁ xxmaj and entertain a cheerful disposition . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj to please the xxmaj king , i did ; to please myself 
▁ i can not do it ; yet i know no cause 
▁ xxmaj why i should welcome such a guest as grief , 
▁ xxmaj save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest 
▁ xxmaj as my sweet xxmaj richard . xxmaj yet again methinks 
▁ xxmaj some unborn sorrow , ripe in fortune 's womb , 
▁ xxmaj is coming towards me , and my inward soul 
▁ xxmaj with nothing trembles . xxmaj at some thing it grieves 
▁ xxmaj more than with parting from my lord the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows , 
▁ xxmaj which shows like grief itself , but is not so ; 
▁ xxmaj for sorrow 's eye , glazed with blinding tears , 
▁ xxmaj divides one thing entire to many objects , 
▁ xxmaj like perspectives which , rightly gaz'd upon , 
▁ xxmaj show nothing but confusion - ey'd awry , 
▁ xxmaj distinguish form . xxmaj so your sweet xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj looking awry upon your lord 's departure , 
▁ xxmaj find shapes of grief more than himself to wail ; 
▁ xxmaj which , look'd on as it is , is nought but shadows 
▁ xxmaj of what it is not . xxmaj then , thrice - gracious xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj more than your lord 's departure weep not - more is not seen ; 
▁ xxmaj or if it be , ' tis with false sorrow 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj which for things true weeps things imaginary . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj it may be so ; but yet my inward soul 
▁ xxmaj persuades me it is otherwise . xxmaj howe'er it be , 
▁ i can not but be sad ; so heavy sad 
▁ xxmaj as - though , on thinking , on no thought i think- 
▁ xxmaj makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink . 
▁ xxup bushy . ' tis nothing but conceit , my gracious lady . 
▁ xxup queen . ' tis nothing less : conceit is still deriv'd 
▁ xxmaj from some forefather grief ; mine is not so , 
▁ xxmaj for nothing hath begot my something grief , 
▁ xxmaj or something hath the nothing that i grieve ; 
▁ ' tis in reversion that i do possess- 
▁ xxmaj but what it is that is not yet known what , 
▁ i can not name ; ' tis nameless woe , i wot . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup green 

▁ xxup green . xxmaj god save your xxmaj majesty ! and well met , gentlemen . 
▁ i hope the xxmaj king is not yet shipp'd for xxmaj ireland . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj why hopest thou so ? ' tis better hope he is ; 
▁ xxmaj for his designs crave haste , his haste good hope . 
▁ xxmaj then wherefore dost thou hope he is not shipp'd ? 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj that he , our hope , might have retir'd his power 
▁ xxmaj and driven into despair an enemy 's hope 
▁ xxmaj who strongly hath set footing in this land . 
▁ xxmaj the banish'd xxmaj bolingbroke repeals himself , 
▁ xxmaj and with uplifted arms is safe arriv'd 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj ravenspurgh . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj now xxmaj god in heaven forbid ! 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj ah , madam , ' tis too true ; and that is worse , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland , his son young xxmaj henry xxmaj percy , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lords of xxmaj ross , xxmaj beaumond , and xxmaj willoughby , 
▁ xxmaj with all their powerful friends , are fled to him . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj why have you not proclaim'd xxmaj northumberland 
▁ xxmaj and all the rest revolted faction traitors ? 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj we have ; whereupon the xxmaj earl of xxmaj worcester 
▁ xxmaj hath broken his staff , resign'd his stewardship , 
▁ xxmaj and all the household servants fled with him 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj so , xxmaj green , thou art the midwife to my woe , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj bolingbroke my sorrow 's dismal heir . 
▁ xxmaj now hath my soul brought forth her prodigy ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , a gasping new - deliver'd mother , 
▁ xxmaj have woe to woe , sorrow to sorrow join'd . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj despair not , madam . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj who shall hinder me ? 
▁ i will despair , and be at enmity 
▁ xxmaj with cozening hope - he is a flatterer , 
▁ a parasite , a keeper - back of death , 
▁ xxmaj who gently would dissolve the bands of life , 
▁ xxmaj which false hope lingers in extremity . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york 

▁ xxup green . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj with signs of war about his aged neck . 
▁ xxup o , full of careful business are his looks ! 
▁ xxmaj uncle , for xxmaj god 's sake , speak comfortable words . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj should i do so , i should belie my thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj comfort 's in heaven ; and we are on the earth , 
▁ xxmaj where nothing lives but crosses , cares , and grief . 
▁ xxmaj your husband , he is gone to save far off , 
▁ xxmaj whilst others come to make him lose at home . 
▁ xxmaj here am i left to underprop his land , 
▁ xxmaj who , weak with age , can not support myself . 
▁ xxmaj now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made ; 
▁ xxmaj now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servingman 

▁ xxup servingman . xxmaj my lord , your son was gone before i came . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj he was - why so go all which way it will ! 
▁ xxmaj the nobles they are fled , the commons they are cold 
▁ xxmaj and will , i fear , revolt on xxmaj hereford 's side . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , get thee to xxmaj plashy , to my sister xxmaj gloucester ; 
▁ xxmaj bid her send me presently a thousand pound . 
▁ xxmaj hold , take my ring . 
▁ xxup servingman . xxmaj my lord , i had forgot to tell your lordship , 
▁ xxmaj to - day , as i came by , i called there- 
▁ xxmaj but i shall grieve you to report the rest . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj what is't , knave ? 
▁ xxup servingman . xxmaj an hour before i came , the xxmaj duchess died . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj god for his mercy ! what a tide of woes 
▁ xxmaj comes rushing on this woeful land at once ! 
▁ i know not what to do . i would to xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj so my untruth had not provok'd him to it , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king had cut off my head with my brother 's . 
▁ xxmaj what , are there no posts dispatch'd for xxmaj ireland ? 
▁ xxmaj how shall we do for money for these wars ? 
▁ xxmaj come , sister - cousin , i would say - pray , pardon me . 
▁ xxmaj go , fellow , get thee home , provide some carts , 
▁ xxmaj and bring away the armour that is there . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup servingman 
▁ xxmaj gentlemen , will you go muster men ? 
▁ xxmaj if i know how or which way to order these affairs 
▁ xxmaj thus disorderly thrust into my hands , 
▁ xxmaj never believe me . xxmaj both are my kinsmen . 
▁ xxmaj t'one is my sovereign , whom both my oath 
▁ xxmaj and duty bids defend ; t'other again 
▁ xxmaj is my kinsman , whom the xxmaj king hath wrong'd , 
▁ xxmaj whom conscience and my kindred bids to right . 
▁ xxmaj well , somewhat we must do.-come , cousin , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll dispose of you . xxmaj gentlemen , go muster up your men 
▁ xxmaj and meet me presently at xxmaj berkeley . 
▁ i should to xxmaj plashy too , 
▁ xxmaj but time will not permit . xxmaj all is uneven , 
▁ xxmaj and everything is left at six and seven . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup york and xxup queen 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj the wind sits fair for news to go to xxmaj ireland . 
▁ xxmaj but none returns . xxmaj for us to levy power 
▁ xxmaj proportionable to the enemy 
▁ xxmaj is all unpossible . 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj besides , our nearness to the xxmaj king in love 
▁ xxmaj is near the hate of those love not the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup bagot . xxmaj and that is the wavering commons ; for their love 
▁ xxmaj lies in their purses ; and whoso empties them , 
▁ xxmaj by so much fills their hearts with deadly hate . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj wherein the xxmaj king stands generally condemn'd . 
▁ xxup bagot . xxmaj if judgment lie in them , then so do we , 
▁ xxmaj because we ever have been near the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj well , i will for refuge straight to xxmaj bristow xxmaj castle . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire is already there . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj thither will i with you ; for little office 
▁ xxmaj will the hateful commons perform for us , 
▁ xxmaj except xxmaj eke curs to tear us all to pieces . 
▁ xxmaj will you go along with us ? 
▁ xxup bagot . xxmaj no ; i will to xxmaj ireland to his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj if heart 's presages be not vain , 
▁ xxmaj we three here part that ne'er shall meet again . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj that 's as xxmaj york thrives to beat back xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj duke ! the task he undertakes 
▁ xxmaj is numb'ring sands and drinking oceans dry . 
▁ xxmaj where one on his side fights , thousands will fly . 
▁ xxmaj farewell at once - for once , for all , and ever . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj well , we may meet again . 
▁ xxup bagot . i fear me , never . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj gloucestershire 

 xxmaj enter xxup bolingbroke and xxup northumberland , forces 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj how far is it , my lord , to xxmaj berkeley now ? 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj believe me , noble lord , 
▁ i am a stranger here in xxmaj gloucestershire . 
▁ xxmaj these high wild hills and rough uneven ways 
▁ xxmaj draws out our miles , and makes them wearisome ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar , 
▁ xxmaj making the hard way sweet and delectable . 
▁ xxmaj but i bethink me what a weary way 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj ravenspurgh to xxmaj cotswold will be found 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj ross and xxmaj willoughby , wanting your company , 
▁ xxmaj which , i protest , hath very much beguil'd 
▁ xxmaj the tediousness and process of my travel . 
▁ xxmaj but theirs is sweet'ned with the hope to have 
▁ xxmaj the present benefit which i possess ; 
▁ xxmaj and hope to joy is little less in joy 
▁ xxmaj than hope enjoy'd . xxmaj by this the weary lords 
▁ xxmaj shall make their way seem short , as mine hath done 
▁ xxmaj by sight of what i have , your noble company . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj of much less value is my company 
▁ xxmaj than your good words . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup harry xxup percy 

▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj it is my son , young xxmaj harry xxmaj percy , 
▁ xxmaj sent from my brother xxmaj worcester , whencesoever . 
▁ xxmaj harry , how fares your uncle ? 
▁ xxup percy . i had thought , my lord , to have learn'd his health of you . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj why , is he not with the xxmaj queen ? 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj no , my good lord ; he hath forsook the court , 
▁ xxmaj broken his staff of office , and dispers'd 
▁ xxmaj the household of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj what was his reason ? 
▁ xxmaj he was not so resolv'd when last we spake together . 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj because your lordship was proclaimed traitor . 
▁ xxmaj but he , my lord , is gone to xxmaj ravenspurgh , 
▁ xxmaj to offer service to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford ; 
▁ xxmaj and sent me over by xxmaj berkeley , to discover 
▁ xxmaj what power the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york had levied there ; 
▁ xxmaj then with directions to repair to xxmaj ravenspurgh . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj have you forgot the xxmaj duke of xxmaj hereford , boy ? 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj no , my good lord ; for that is not forgot 
▁ xxmaj which ne'er i did remember ; to my knowledge , 
▁ i never in my life did look on him . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj then learn to know him now ; this is the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj my gracious lord , i tender you my service , 
▁ xxmaj such as it is , being tender , raw , and young ; 
▁ xxmaj which elder days shall ripen , and confirm 
▁ xxmaj to more approved service and desert . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i thank thee , gentle xxmaj percy ; and be sure 
▁ i count myself in nothing else so happy 
▁ xxmaj as in a soul rememb'ring my good friends ; 
▁ xxmaj and as my fortune ripens with thy love , 
▁ xxmaj it shall be still thy true love 's recompense . 
▁ xxmaj my heart this covenant makes , my hand thus seals it . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj how far is it to xxmaj berkeley ? xxmaj and what stir 
▁ xxmaj keeps good old xxmaj york there with his men of war ? 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj there stands the castle , by yon tuft of trees , 
▁ xxmaj mann'd with three hundred men , as i have heard ; 
▁ xxmaj and in it are the xxmaj lords of xxmaj york , xxmaj berkeley , and xxmaj seymour- 
▁ xxmaj none else of name and noble estimate . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj ross and xxup willoughby 

▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj here come the xxmaj lords of xxmaj ross and xxmaj willoughby , 
▁ xxmaj bloody with spurring , fiery - red with haste . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj welcome , my lords . i wot your love pursues 
▁ a banish'd traitor . xxmaj all my treasury 
▁ xxmaj is yet but unfelt thanks , which , more enrich'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall be your love and labour 's recompense . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj your presence makes us rich , most noble lord . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj and far surmounts our labour to attain it . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj evermore thanks , the exchequer of the poor ; 
▁ xxmaj which , till my infant fortune comes to years , 
▁ xxmaj stands for my bounty . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup berkeley 
▁
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj it is my xxmaj lord of xxmaj berkeley , as i guess . 
▁ xxup berkeley . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj hereford , my message is to you . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj my lord , my answer is-'to xxmaj lancaster ' ; 
▁ xxmaj and i am come to seek that name in xxmaj england ; 
▁ xxmaj and i must find that title in your tongue 
▁ xxmaj before i make reply to aught you say . 
▁ xxup berkeley . xxmaj mistake me not , my lord ; ' tis not my meaning 
▁ xxmaj to raze one title of your honour out . 
▁ xxmaj to you , my lord , i come - what lord you will- 
▁ xxmaj from the most gracious regent of this land , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , to know what pricks you on 
▁ xxmaj to take advantage of the absent time , 
▁ xxmaj and fright our native peace with self - borne arms . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york , attended 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . i shall not need transport my words by you ; 
▁ xxmaj here comes his xxmaj grace in person . xxmaj my noble uncle ! 
▁ [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj show me thy humble heart , and not thy knee , 
▁ xxmaj whose duty is deceivable and false . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj my gracious uncle!- 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj tut , tut ! 
▁ xxmaj grace me no grace , nor uncle me no uncle . 
▁ i am no traitor 's uncle ; and that word ' grace ' 
▁ xxmaj in an ungracious mouth is but profane . 
▁ xxmaj why have those banish'd and forbidden legs 
▁ xxmaj dar'd once to touch a dust of xxmaj england 's ground ? 
▁ xxmaj but then more ' why?'-why have they dar'd to march 
▁ xxmaj so many miles upon her peaceful bosom , 
▁ xxmaj frighting her pale - fac'd villages with war 
▁ xxmaj and ostentation of despised arms ? 
▁ xxmaj com'st thou because the anointed xxmaj king is hence ? 
▁ xxmaj why , foolish boy , the xxmaj king is left behind , 
▁ xxmaj and in my loyal bosom lies his power . 
▁ xxmaj were i but now lord of such hot youth 
▁ xxmaj as when brave xxmaj gaunt , thy father , and myself 
▁ xxmaj rescued the xxmaj black xxmaj prince , that young xxmaj mars of men , 
▁ xxmaj from forth the ranks of many thousand xxmaj french , 
▁ xxup o , then how quickly should this arm of mine , 
▁ xxmaj now prisoner to the palsy , chastise the 
▁ xxmaj and minister correction to thy fault ! 
▁ xxup bolingbroke xxmaj my gracious uncle , let me know my fault ; 
▁ xxmaj on what condition stands it and wherein ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj even in condition of the worst degree- 
▁ xxmaj in gross rebellion and detested treason . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a banish'd man , and here art come 
▁ xxmaj before the expiration of thy time , 
▁ xxmaj in braving arms against thy sovereign . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj as i was banish'd , i was banish'd xxmaj hereford ; 
▁ xxmaj but as i come , i come for xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxmaj and , noble uncle , i beseech your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye . 
▁ xxmaj you are my father , for methinks in you 
▁ i see old xxmaj gaunt alive . xxup o , then , my father , 
▁ xxmaj will you permit that i shall stand condemn'd 
▁ a wandering vagabond ; my rights and royalties 
▁ xxmaj pluck'd from my arms perforce , and given away 
▁ xxmaj to upstart unthrifts ? xxmaj wherefore was i born ? 
▁ xxmaj if that my cousin king be xxmaj king in xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj it must be granted i am xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxmaj you have a son , xxmaj aumerle , my noble cousin ; 
▁ xxmaj had you first died , and he been thus trod down , 
▁ xxmaj he should have found his uncle xxmaj gaunt a father 
▁ xxmaj to rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay . 
▁ i am denied to sue my livery here , 
▁ xxmaj and yet my letters patents give me leave . 
▁ xxmaj my father 's goods are all distrain'd and sold ; 
▁ xxmaj and these and all are all amiss employ'd . 
▁ xxmaj what would you have me do ? i am a subject , 
▁ xxmaj and i challenge law - attorneys are denied me ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore personally i lay my claim 
▁ xxmaj to my inheritance of free descent . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj the noble xxmaj duke hath been too much abused . 
▁ xxup ross . xxmaj it stands your xxmaj grace upon to do him right . 
▁ xxup willoughby . xxmaj base men by his endowments are made great . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj my lords of xxmaj england , let me tell you this : 
▁ i have had feeling of my cousin 's wrongs , 
▁ xxmaj and labour'd all i could to do him right ; 
▁ xxmaj but in this kind to come , in braving arms , 
▁ xxmaj be his own carver and cut out his way , 
▁ xxmaj to find out right with wrong - it may not be ; 
▁ xxmaj and you that do abet him in this kind 
▁ xxmaj cherish rebellion , and are rebels all . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj the noble xxmaj duke hath sworn his coming is 
▁ xxmaj but for his own ; and for the right of that 
▁ xxmaj we all have strongly sworn to give him aid ; 
▁ xxmaj and let him never see joy that breaks that oath ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj well , well , i see the issue of these arms . 
▁ i can not mend it , i must needs confess , 
▁ xxmaj because my power is weak and all ill left ; 
▁ xxmaj but if i could , by xxmaj him that gave me life , 
▁ i would attach you all and make you stoop 
▁ xxmaj unto the sovereign mercy of the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj but since i can not , be it known unto you 
▁ i do remain as neuter . xxmaj so , fare you well ; 
▁ xxmaj unless you please to enter in the castle , 
▁ xxmaj and there repose you for this night . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj an offer , uncle , that we will accept . 
▁ xxmaj but we must win your xxmaj grace to go with us 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj bristow xxmaj castle , which they say is held 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj bushy , xxmaj bagot , and their complices , 
▁ xxmaj the caterpillars of the commonwealth , 
▁ xxmaj which i have sworn to weed and pluck away . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj it may be i will go with you ; but yet xxmaj i 'll pause , 
▁ xxmaj for i am loath to break our country 's laws . 
▁ xxmaj nor friends nor foes , to me welcome you are . 
▁ xxmaj things past redress are now with me past care . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 
 a camp in xxmaj wales 

 xxmaj enter xxup earl xxup of xxup salisbury and a xxup welsh xxup captain 

▁ xxup captain . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj salisbury , we have stay'd ten days 
▁ xxmaj and hardly kept our countrymen together , 
▁ xxmaj and yet we hear no tidings from the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore we will disperse ourselves . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj stay yet another day , thou trusty xxmaj welshman ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king reposeth all his confidence in thee . 
▁ xxup captain . ' tis thought the xxmaj king is dead ; we will not stay . 
▁ xxmaj the bay trees in our country are all wither'd , 
▁ xxmaj and meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven ; 
▁ xxmaj the pale - fac'd moon looks bloody on the earth , 
▁ xxmaj and lean - look'd prophets whisper fearful change ; 
▁ xxmaj rich men look sad , and ruffians dance and leap- 
▁ xxmaj the one in fear to lose what they enjoy , 
▁ xxmaj the other to enjoy by rage and war . 
▁ xxmaj these signs forerun the death or fall of kings . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj our countrymen are gone and fled , 
▁ xxmaj as well assur'd xxmaj richard their xxmaj king is dead . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj ah , xxmaj richard , with the eyes of heavy mind , 
▁ i see thy glory like a shooting star 
▁ xxmaj fall to the base earth from the firmament ! 
▁ xxmaj the sun sets weeping in the lowly west , 
▁ xxmaj witnessing storms to come , woe , and unrest ; 
▁ xxmaj thy friends are fled , to wait upon thy foes ; 
▁ xxmaj and crossly to thy good all fortune goes . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxup bolingbroke 's camp at xxmaj bristol 

 xxmaj enter xxup bolingbroke , xxup york , xxup northumberland , xxup percy , xxup ross , xxup willoughby , 
 xxup bushy and xxup green , prisoners 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj bring forth these men . 
▁ xxmaj bushy and xxmaj green , i will not vex your souls- 
▁ xxmaj since presently your souls must part your bodies- 
▁ xxmaj with too much urging your pernicious lives , 
▁ xxmaj for ' twere no charity ; yet , to wash your blood 
▁ xxmaj from off my hands , here in the view of men 
▁ i will unfold some causes of your deaths : 
▁ xxmaj you have misled a prince , a royal king , 
▁ a happy gentleman in blood and lineaments , 
▁ xxmaj by you unhappied and disfigured clean ; 
▁ xxmaj you have in manner with your sinful hours 
▁ xxmaj made a divorce betwixt his queen and him ; 
▁ xxmaj broke the possession of a royal bed , 
▁ xxmaj and stain'd the beauty of a fair queen 's cheeks 
▁ xxmaj with tears drawn from her eyes by your foul wrongs ; 
▁ xxmaj myself - a prince by fortune of my birth , 
▁ xxmaj near to the xxmaj king in blood , and near in love 
▁ xxmaj till you did make him misinterpret me- 
▁ xxmaj have stoop'd my neck under your injuries 
▁ xxmaj and sigh'd my xxmaj english breath in foreign clouds , 
▁ xxmaj eating the bitter bread of banishment , 
▁ xxmaj whilst you have fed upon my signories , 
▁ xxmaj dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods , 
▁ xxmaj from my own windows torn my household coat , 
▁ xxmaj raz'd out my imprese , leaving me no sign 
▁ xxmaj save men 's opinions and my living blood 
▁ xxmaj to show the world i am a gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj this and much more , much more than twice all this , 
▁ xxmaj condemns you to the death . xxmaj see them delivered over 
▁ xxmaj to execution and the hand of death . 
▁ xxup bushy . xxmaj more welcome is the stroke of death to me 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj bolingbroke to xxmaj england . xxmaj lords , farewell . 
▁ xxup green . xxmaj my comfort is that heaven will take our souls , 
▁ xxmaj and plague injustice with the pains of hell . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland , see them dispatch'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup northumberland , and others , with the prisoners 
▁ xxmaj uncle , you say the xxmaj queen is at your house ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , fairly let her be entreated . 
▁ xxmaj tell her i send to her my kind commends ; 
▁ xxmaj take special care my greetings be delivered . 
▁ xxup york . a gentleman of mine i have dispatch'd 
▁ xxmaj with letters of your love to her at large . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj thanks , gentle uncle . xxmaj come , lords , away , 
▁ xxmaj to fight with xxmaj glendower and his complices . 
▁ xxmaj awhile to work , and after holiday . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj the coast of xxmaj wales . a castle in view 

 xxmaj drums . xxmaj flourish and colours . xxmaj enter the xxup king , the xxup bishop xxup of xxup carlisle , 
 xxup aumerle , and soldiers 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj barkloughly xxmaj castle can they this at hand ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj yea , my lord . xxmaj how brooks your xxmaj grace the air 
▁ xxmaj after your late tossing on the breaking seas ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj needs must i like it well . i weep for joy 
▁ xxmaj to stand upon my kingdom once again . 
▁ xxmaj dear earth , i do salute thee with my hand , 
▁ xxmaj though rebels wound thee with their horses ' hoofs . 
▁ xxmaj as a long - parted mother with her child 
▁ xxmaj plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting , 
▁ xxmaj so weeping - smiling greet i thee , my earth , 
▁ xxmaj and do thee favours with my royal hands . 
▁ xxmaj feed not thy sovereign 's foe , my gentle earth , 
▁ xxmaj nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense ; 
▁ xxmaj but let thy spiders , that suck up thy venom , 
▁ xxmaj and heavy - gaited toads , lie in their way , 
▁ xxmaj doing annoyance to the treacherous feet 
▁ xxmaj which with usurping steps do trample thee ; 
▁ xxmaj yield stinging nettles to mine enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj and when they from thy bosom pluck a flower , 
▁ xxmaj guard it , i pray thee , with a lurking adder , 
▁ xxmaj whose double tongue may with a mortal touch 
▁ xxmaj throw death upon thy sovereign 's enemies . 
▁ xxmaj mock not my senseless conjuration , lords . 
▁ xxmaj this earth shall have a feeling , and these stones 
▁ xxmaj prove armed soldiers , ere her native king 
▁ xxmaj shall falter under foul rebellion 's arms . 
▁ xxup carlisle . xxmaj fear not , my lord ; that xxmaj power that made you king 
▁ xxmaj hath power to keep you king in spite of all . 
▁ xxmaj the means that heaven yields must be embrac'd 
▁ xxmaj and not neglected ; else , if heaven would , 
▁ xxmaj and we will not , heaven 's offer we refuse , 
▁ xxmaj the proffered means of succour and redress . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj he means , my lord , that we are too remiss ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst xxmaj bolingbroke , through our security , 
▁ xxmaj grows strong and great in substance and in power . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj discomfortable cousin ! know'st thou not 
▁ xxmaj that when the searching eye of heaven is hid , 
▁ xxmaj behind the globe , that lights the lower world , 
▁ xxmaj then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen 
▁ xxmaj in murders and in outrage boldly here ; 
▁ xxmaj but when from under this terrestrial ball 
▁ xxmaj he fires the proud tops of the eastern pines 
▁ xxmaj and darts his light through every guilty hole , 
▁ xxmaj then murders , treasons , and detested sins , 
▁ xxmaj the cloak of night being pluck'd from off their backs , 
▁ xxmaj stand bare and naked , trembling at themselves ? 
▁ xxmaj so when this thief , this traitor , xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxmaj who all this while hath revell'd in the night , 
▁ xxmaj whilst we were wand'ring with the xxmaj antipodes , 
▁ xxmaj shall see us rising in our throne , the east , 
▁ xxmaj his treasons will sit blushing in his face , 
▁ xxmaj not able to endure the sight of day , 
▁ xxmaj but self - affrighted tremble at his sin . 
▁ xxmaj not all the water in the rough rude sea 
▁ xxmaj can wash the balm off from an anointed king ; 
▁ xxmaj the breath of worldly men can not depose 
▁ xxmaj the deputy elected by the xxmaj lord . 
▁ xxmaj for every man that xxmaj bolingbroke hath press'd 
▁ xxmaj to lift shrewd steel against our golden crown , 
▁ xxmaj god for his xxmaj richard hath in heavenly pay 
▁ a glorious angel . xxmaj then , if angels fight , 
▁ xxmaj weak men must fall ; for heaven still guards the right . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup salisbury 

▁ xxmaj welcome , my lord . xxmaj how far off lies your power ? 
▁ xxup salisbury . xxmaj nor near nor farther off , my gracious lord , 
▁ xxmaj than this weak arm . xxmaj discomfort guides my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj and bids me speak of nothing but despair . 
▁ xxmaj one day too late , i fear me , noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj hath clouded all thy happy days on earth . 
▁ xxup o , call back yesterday , bid time return , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt have twelve thousand fighting men ! 
▁ xxmaj to - day , to - day , unhappy day , too late , 
▁ xxmaj o'erthrows thy joys , friends , fortune , and thy state ; 
▁ xxmaj for all the xxmaj welshmen , hearing thou wert dead , 
▁ xxmaj are gone to xxmaj bolingbroke , dispers'd , and fled . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj comfort , my liege , why looks your xxmaj grace so pale ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj but now the blood of twenty thousand men 
▁ xxmaj did triumph in my face , and they are fled ; 
▁ xxmaj and , till so much blood thither come again , 
▁ xxmaj have i not reason to look pale and dead ? 
▁ xxmaj all souls that will be safe , fly from my side ; 
▁ xxmaj for time hath set a blot upon my pride . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj comfort , my liege ; remember who you are . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i had forgot myself ; am i not xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj awake , thou coward majesty ! thou sleepest . 
▁ xxmaj is not the xxmaj king 's name twenty thousand names ? 
▁ xxmaj arm , arm , my name ! a puny subject strikes 
▁ xxmaj at thy great glory . xxmaj look not to the ground , 
▁ xxmaj ye favourites of a king ; are we not high ? 
▁ xxmaj high be our thoughts . i know my uncle xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj hath power enough to serve our turn . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup scroop 
▁
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj more health and happiness betide my liege 
▁ xxmaj than can my care - tun'd tongue deliver him . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj mine ear is open and my heart prepar'd . 
▁ xxmaj the worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold . 
▁ xxmaj say , is my kingdom lost ? xxmaj why , ' twas my care , 
▁ xxmaj and what loss is it to be rid of care ? 
▁ xxmaj strives xxmaj bolingbroke to be as great as we ? 
▁ xxmaj greater he shall not be ; if he serve xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll serve him too , and be his fellow so . 
▁ xxmaj revolt our subjects ? xxmaj that we can not mend ; 
▁ xxmaj they break their faith to xxmaj god as well as us . 
▁ xxmaj cry woe , destruction , ruin , and decay- 
▁ xxmaj the worst is death , and death will have his day . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj glad am i that your xxmaj highness is so arm'd 
▁ xxmaj to bear the tidings of calamity . 
▁ xxmaj like an unseasonable stormy day 
▁ xxmaj which makes the silver rivers drown their shores , 
▁ xxmaj as if the world were all dissolv'd to tears , 
▁ xxmaj so high above his limits swells the rage 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj bolingbroke , covering your fearful land 
▁ xxmaj with hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel . 
▁ xxmaj white - beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps 
▁ xxmaj against thy majesty ; boys , with women 's voices , 
▁ xxmaj strive to speak big , and clap their female joints 
▁ xxmaj in stiff unwieldy arms against thy crown ; 
▁ xxmaj thy very beadsmen learn to bend their bows 
▁ xxmaj of double - fatal yew against thy state ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , distaff - women manage rusty bills 
▁ xxmaj against thy seat : both young and old rebel , 
▁ xxmaj and all goes worse than i have power to tell . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj too well , too well thou tell'st a tale so in . 
▁ xxmaj where is the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire ? xxmaj where is xxmaj bagot ? 
▁ xxmaj what is become of xxmaj bushy ? xxmaj where is xxmaj green ? 
▁ xxmaj that they have let the dangerous enemy 
▁ xxmaj measure our confines with such peaceful steps ? 
▁ xxmaj if we prevail , their heads shall pay for it . 
▁ i warrant they have made peace with xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj peace have they made with him indeed , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . o villains , vipers , damn'd without redemption ! 
▁ xxmaj dogs , easily won to fawn on any man ! 
▁ xxmaj snakes , in my heart - blood warm'd , that sting my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj three xxmaj judases , each one thrice worse than xxmaj judas ! 
▁ xxmaj would they make peace ? xxmaj terrible hell make war 
▁ xxmaj upon their spotted souls for this offence ! 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj sweet love , i see , changing his property , 
▁ xxmaj turns to the sourest and most deadly hate . 
▁ xxmaj again uncurse their souls ; their peace is made 
▁ xxmaj with heads , and not with hands ; those whom you curse 
▁ xxmaj have felt the worst of death 's destroying wound 
▁ xxmaj and lie full low , grav'd in the hollow ground . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj is xxmaj bushy , xxmaj green , and the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire dead ? 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj ay , all of them at xxmaj bristow lost their heads . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj where is the xxmaj duke my father with his power ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj no matter where - of comfort no man speak . 
▁ xxmaj let 's talk of graves , of worms , and epitaphs ; 
▁ xxmaj make dust our paper , and with rainy eyes 
▁ xxmaj write sorrow on the bosom of the earth . 
▁ xxmaj let 's choose executors and talk of wills ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet not so - for what can we bequeath 
▁ xxmaj save our deposed bodies to the ground ? 
▁ xxmaj our lands , our lives , and an , are xxmaj bolingbroke 's . 
▁ xxmaj and nothing can we can our own but death 
▁ xxmaj and that small model of the barren earth 
▁ xxmaj which serves as paste and cover to our bones . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake let us sit upon the ground 
▁ xxmaj and tell sad stories of the death of kings : 
▁ xxmaj how some have been depos'd , some slain in war , 
▁ xxmaj some haunted by the ghosts they have depos'd , 
▁ xxmaj some poison'd by their wives , some sleeping kill'd , 
▁ xxmaj all murder'd - for within the hollow crown 
▁ xxmaj that rounds the mortal temples of a king 
▁ xxmaj keeps xxmaj death his court ; and there the antic sits , 
▁ xxmaj scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp ; 
▁ xxmaj allowing him a breath , a little scene , 
▁ xxmaj to monarchize , be fear'd , and kill with looks ; 
▁ xxmaj infusing him with self and vain conceit , 
▁ xxmaj as if this flesh which walls about our life 
▁ xxmaj were brass impregnable ; and , humour'd thus , 
▁ xxmaj comes at the last , and with a little pin 
▁ xxmaj bores through his castle wall , and farewell , king ! 
▁ xxmaj cover your heads , and mock not flesh and blood 
▁ xxmaj with solemn reverence ; throw away respect , 
▁ xxmaj tradition , form , and ceremonious duty ; 
▁ xxmaj for you have but mistook me all this while . 
▁ i live with bread like you , feel want , 
▁ xxmaj taste grief , need friends : subjected thus , 
▁ xxmaj how can you say to me i am a king ? 
▁ xxup carlisle . xxmaj my lord , wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes , 
▁ xxmaj but presently prevent the ways to wail . 
▁ xxmaj to fear the foe , since fear oppresseth strength , 
▁ xxmaj gives , in your weakness , strength unto your foe , 
▁ xxmaj and so your follies fight against yourself . 
▁ xxmaj fear and be slain - no worse can come to fight ; 
▁ xxmaj and fight and die is death destroying death , 
▁ xxmaj where fearing dying pays death servile breath . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj my father hath a power ; inquire of him , 
▁ xxmaj and learn to make a body of a limb . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thou chid'st me well . xxmaj proud xxmaj bolingbroke , i come 
▁ xxmaj to change blows with thee for our day of doom . 
▁ xxmaj this ague fit of fear is over - blown ; 
▁ xxmaj an easy task it is to win our own . 
▁ xxmaj say , xxmaj scroop , where lies our uncle with his power ? 
▁ xxmaj speak sweetly , man , although thy looks be sour . 
▁ xxup scroop . xxmaj men judge by the complexion of the sky 
▁ xxmaj the state in inclination of the day ; 
▁ xxmaj so may you by my dull and heavy eye , 
▁ xxmaj my tongue hath but a heavier tale to say . 
▁ i play the torturer , by small and small 
▁ xxmaj to lengthen out the worst that must be spoken : 
▁ xxmaj your uncle xxmaj york is join'd with xxmaj bolingbroke ; 
▁ xxmaj and all your northern castles yielded up , 
▁ xxmaj and all your southern gentlemen in arms 
▁ xxmaj upon his party . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thou hast said enough . 
▁ [ to xxup aumerle ] xxmaj beshrew thee , cousin , which didst lead me forth 
▁ xxmaj of that sweet way i was in to despair ! 
▁ xxmaj what say you now ? xxmaj what comfort have we now ? 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj i 'll hate him everlastingly 
▁ xxmaj that bids me be of comfort any more . 
▁ xxmaj go to xxmaj flint xxmaj castle ; there xxmaj i 'll pine away ; 
▁ a king , woe 's slave , shall kingly woe obey . 
▁ xxmaj that power i have , discharge ; and let them go 
▁ xxmaj to ear the land that hath some hope to grow , 
▁ xxmaj for i have none . xxmaj let no man speak again 
▁ xxmaj to alter this , for counsel is but vain . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj my liege , one word . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj he does me double wrong 
▁ xxmaj that wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue . 
▁ xxmaj discharge my followers ; let them hence away , 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj richard 's night to xxmaj bolingbroke 's fair day . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj wales . xxmaj before xxmaj flint xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter , with drum and colours , xxup bolingbroke , xxup york , xxup northumberland , 
 and forces 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj so that by this intelligence we learn 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj welshmen are dispers'd ; and xxmaj salisbury 
▁ xxmaj is gone to meet the xxmaj king , who lately landed 
▁ xxmaj with some few private friends upon this coast . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj the news is very fair and good , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj richard not far from hence hath hid his head . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj it would beseem the xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland 
▁ xxmaj to say ' king xxmaj richard . ' xxmaj alack the heavy day 
▁ xxmaj when such a sacred king should hide his head ! 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj your xxmaj grace mistakes ; only to be brief , 
▁ xxmaj left i his title out . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj the time hath been , 
▁ xxmaj would you have been so brief with him , he would 
▁ xxmaj have been so brief with you to shorten you , 
▁ xxmaj for taking so the head , your whole head 's length . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj mistake not , uncle , further than you should . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj take not , good cousin , further than you should , 
▁ xxmaj lest you mistake . xxmaj the heavens are over our heads . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i know it , uncle ; and oppose not myself 
▁ xxmaj against their will . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup percy 

▁ xxmaj welcome , xxmaj harry . xxmaj what , will not this castle yield ? 
▁ xxup piercy . xxmaj the castle royally is mann'd , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj against thy entrance . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj royally ! 
▁ xxmaj why , it contains no king ? 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj yes , my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj it doth contain a king ; xxmaj king xxmaj richard lies 
▁ xxmaj within the limits of yon lime and stone ; 
▁ xxmaj and with him are the xxmaj lord xxmaj aumerle , xxmaj lord xxmaj salisbury , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj stephen xxmaj scroop , besides a clergyman 
▁ xxmaj of holy reverence ; who , i can not learn . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxup o , belike it is the xxmaj bishop of xxmaj carlisle . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . [ to xxup northumberland ] xxmaj noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle ; 
▁ xxmaj through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley 
▁ xxmaj into his ruin'd ears , and thus deliver : 
▁ xxmaj henry xxmaj bolingbroke 
▁ xxmaj on both his knees doth kiss xxmaj king xxmaj richard 's hand , 
▁ xxmaj and sends allegiance and true faith of heart 
▁ xxmaj to his most royal person ; hither come 
▁ xxmaj even at his feet to lay my arms and power , 
▁ xxmaj provided that my banishment repeal'd 
▁ xxmaj and lands restor'd again be freely granted ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , xxmaj i 'll use the advantage of my power 
▁ xxmaj and lay the summer 's dust with showers of blood 
▁ xxmaj rain'd from the wounds of slaughtered xxmaj englishmen ; 
▁ xxmaj the which how far off from the mind of xxmaj bolingbroke 
▁ xxmaj it is such crimson tempest should bedrench 
▁ xxmaj the fresh green lap of fair xxmaj king xxmaj richard 's land , 
▁ xxmaj my stooping duty tenderly shall show . 
▁ xxmaj go , signify as much , while here we march 
▁ xxmaj upon the grassy carpet of this plain . 
▁ [ northumberland advances to the xxmaj castle , with a trumpet ] 
▁ xxmaj let 's march without the noise of threat'ning drum , 
▁ xxmaj that from this castle 's tottered battlements 
▁ xxmaj our fair appointments may be well perus'd . 
▁ xxmaj methinks xxmaj king xxmaj richard and myself should meet 
▁ xxmaj with no less terror than the elements 
▁ xxmaj of fire and water , when their thund'ring shock 
▁ xxmaj at meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven . 
▁ xxmaj be he the fire , xxmaj i 'll be the yielding water ; 
▁ xxmaj the rage be his , whilst on the earth i rain 
▁ xxmaj my waters - on the earth , and not on him . 
▁ xxmaj march on , and mark xxmaj king xxmaj richard how he looks . 

▁ xxmaj parle without , and answer within ; then a flourish . 
▁ xxmaj enter on the walls , the xxup king , the xxup bishop xxup of xxup carlisle , 
▁ xxup aumerle , xxup scroop , and xxup salisbury 

▁ xxmaj see , see , xxmaj king xxmaj richard doth himself appear , 
▁ xxmaj as doth the blushing discontented sun 
▁ xxmaj from out the fiery portal of the east , 
▁ xxmaj when he perceives the envious clouds are bent 
▁ xxmaj to dim his glory and to stain the track 
▁ xxmaj of his bright passage to the occident . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj yet he looks like a king . xxmaj behold , his eye , 
▁ xxmaj as bright as is the eagle 's , lightens forth 
▁ xxmaj controlling majesty . xxmaj alack , alack , for woe , 
▁ xxmaj that any harm should stain so fair a show ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . [ to xxup northumberland ] xxmaj we are amaz'd ; and thus long 
▁ have we stood 
▁ xxmaj to watch the fearful bending of thy knee , 
▁ xxmaj because we thought ourself thy lawful xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj and if we be , how dare thy joints forget 
▁ xxmaj to pay their awful duty to our presence ? 
▁ xxmaj if we be not , show us the hand of xxmaj god 
▁ xxmaj that hath dismiss'd us from our stewardship ; 
▁ xxmaj for well we know no hand of blood and bone 
▁ xxmaj can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre , 
▁ xxmaj unless he do profane , steal , or usurp . 
▁ xxmaj and though you think that all , as you have done , 
▁ xxmaj have torn their souls by turning them from us , 
▁ xxmaj and we are barren and bereft of friends , 
▁ xxmaj yet know - my master , xxmaj god omnipotent , 
▁ xxmaj is mustering in his clouds on our behalf 
▁ xxmaj armies of pestilence ; and they shall strike 
▁ xxmaj your children yet unborn and unbegot , 
▁ xxmaj that lift your vassal hands against my head 
▁ xxmaj and threat the glory of my precious crown . 
▁ xxmaj tell xxmaj bolingbroke , for yon methinks he stands , 
▁ xxmaj that every stride he makes upon my land 
▁ xxmaj is dangerous treason ; he is come to open 
▁ xxmaj the purple testament of bleeding war ; 
▁ xxmaj but ere the crown he looks for live in peace , 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers ' sons 
▁ xxmaj shall ill become the flower of xxmaj england 's face , 
▁ xxmaj change the complexion of her maid - pale peace 
▁ xxmaj to scarlet indignation , and bedew 
▁ xxmaj her pastures ' grass with faithful xxmaj english blood . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj the xxmaj king of xxmaj heaven forbid our lord the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj should so with civil and uncivil arms 
▁ xxmaj be rush'd upon ! xxmaj thy thrice noble cousin , 
▁ xxmaj harry xxmaj bolingbroke , doth humbly kiss thy hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and by the honourable tomb he swears 
▁ xxmaj that stands upon your royal grandsire 's bones , 
▁ xxmaj and by the royalties of both your bloods , 
▁ xxmaj currents that spring from one most gracious head , 
▁ xxmaj and by the buried hand of warlike xxmaj gaunt , 
▁ xxmaj and by the worth and honour of himself , 
▁ xxmaj comprising all that may be sworn or said , 
▁ xxmaj his coming hither hath no further scope 
▁ xxmaj than for his lineal royalties , and to beg 
▁ xxmaj enfranchisement immediate on his knees ; 
▁ xxmaj which on thy royal party granted once , 
▁ xxmaj his glittering arms he will commend to rust , 
▁ xxmaj his barbed steeds to stables , and his heart 
▁ xxmaj to faithful service of your xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxmaj this swears he , as he is a prince , is just ; 
▁ xxmaj and as i am a gentleman i credit him . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj northumberland , say thus the xxmaj king returns : 
▁ xxmaj his noble cousin is right welcome hither ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the number of his fair demands 
▁ xxmaj shall be accomplish'd without contradiction . 
▁ xxmaj with all the gracious utterance thou hast 
▁ xxmaj speak to his gentle hearing kind commends . 
▁ [ to xxup aumerle ] xxmaj we do debase ourselves , cousin , do we not , 
▁ xxmaj to look so poorly and to speak so fair ? 
▁ xxmaj shall we call back xxmaj northumberland , and send 
▁ xxmaj defiance to the traitor , and so die ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj no , good my lord ; let 's fight with gentle words 
▁ xxmaj till time lend friends , and friends their helpful swords . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . o xxmaj god , o xxmaj god ! that e'er this tongue of mine 
▁ xxmaj that laid the sentence of dread banishment 
▁ xxmaj on yon proud man should take it off again 
▁ xxmaj with words of sooth ! o that i were as great 
▁ xxmaj as is my grief , or lesser than my name ! 
▁ xxmaj or that i could forget what i have been ! 
▁ xxmaj or not remember what i must be now ! 
▁ xxmaj swell'st thou , proud heart ? xxmaj i 'll give thee scope to beat , 
▁ xxmaj since foes have scope to beat both thee and me . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj northumberland comes back from xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what must the xxmaj king do now ? xxmaj must he submit ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king shall do it . xxmaj must he be depos'd ? 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king shall be contented . xxmaj must he lose 
▁ xxmaj the name of king ? a xxmaj god 's name , let it go . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give my jewels for a set of beads ,