xxbos xxmaj my gorgeous palace for a hermitage , 
▁ xxmaj my gay apparel for an almsman 's gown , 
▁ xxmaj my figur'd goblets for a dish of wood , 
▁ xxmaj my sceptre for a palmer 's walking staff , 
▁ xxmaj my subjects for a pair of carved saints , 
▁ xxmaj and my large kingdom for a little grave , 
▁ a little little grave , an obscure grave- 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj i 'll be buried in the king 's high way , 
▁ xxmaj some way of common trade , where subjects ' feet 
▁ xxmaj may hourly trample on their sovereign 's head ; 
▁ xxmaj for on my heart they tread now whilst i live , 
▁ xxmaj and buried once , why not upon my head ? 
▁ xxmaj aumerle , thou weep'st , my tender - hearted cousin ! 
▁ xxmaj we 'll make foul weather with despised tears ; 
▁ xxmaj our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn 
▁ xxmaj and make a dearth in this revolting land . 
▁ xxmaj or shall we play the wantons with our woes 
▁ xxmaj and make some pretty match with shedding tears ? 
▁ xxmaj as thus : to drop them still upon one place 
▁ xxmaj till they have fretted us a pair of graves 
▁ xxmaj within the earth ; and , therein laid - there lies 
▁ xxmaj two kinsmen digg'd their graves with weeping eyes . 
▁ xxmaj would not this ill do well ? xxmaj well , well , i see 
▁ i talk but idly , and you laugh at me . 
▁ xxmaj most mighty prince , my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj what says xxmaj king xxmaj bolingbroke ? xxmaj will his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj give xxmaj richard leave to live till xxmaj richard die ? 
▁ xxmaj you make a leg , and xxmaj bolingbroke says ay . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj my lord , in the base court he doth attend 
▁ xxmaj to speak with you ; may it please you to come down ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj down , down i come , like glist'ring xxmaj phaethon , 
▁ xxmaj wanting the manage of unruly jades . 
▁ xxmaj in the base court ? xxmaj base court , where kings grow base , 
▁ xxmaj to come at traitors ' calls , and do them grace . 
▁ xxmaj in the base court ? xxmaj come down ? xxmaj down , court ! down , king ! 
▁ xxmaj for night - owls shriek where mounting larks should sing . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt from above 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj what says his xxmaj majesty ? 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj sorrow and grief of heart 
▁ xxmaj makes him speak fondly , like a frantic man ; 
▁ xxmaj yet he is come . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup king , and his attendants , below 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj stand all apart , 
▁ xxmaj and show fair duty to his xxmaj majesty . [ he kneels down ] 
▁ xxmaj my gracious lord- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj fair cousin , you debase your princely knee 
▁ xxmaj to make the base earth proud with kissing it . 
▁ xxmaj me rather had my heart might feel your love 
▁ xxmaj than my unpleas'd eye see your courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj up , cousin , up ; your heart is up , i know , 
▁ [ touching his own head ] xxmaj thus high at least , although your 
▁ knee be low . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj my gracious lord , i come but for mine own . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj your own is yours , and i am yours , and all . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj so far be mine , my most redoubted lord , 
▁ xxmaj as my true service shall deserve your love . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj well you deserve . xxmaj they well deserve to have 
▁ xxmaj that know the strong'st and surest way to get . 
▁ xxmaj uncle , give me your hands ; nay , dry your eyes : 
▁ xxmaj tears show their love , but want their remedies . 
▁ xxmaj cousin , i am too young to be your father , 
▁ xxmaj though you are old enough to be my heir . 
▁ xxmaj what you will have , xxmaj i 'll give , and willing too ; 
▁ xxmaj for do we must what force will have us do . 
▁ xxmaj set on towards xxmaj london . xxmaj cousin , is it so ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj yea , my good lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then i must not say no . xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj the xxup duke xxup of york 's garden 

 xxmaj enter the xxup queen and two xxup ladies 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj what sport shall we devise here in this garden 
▁ xxmaj to drive away the heavy thought of care ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj madam , we 'll play at bowls . 
▁ xxup queen . ' twill make me think the world is full of rubs 
▁ xxmaj and that my fortune runs against the bias . 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj madam , we 'll dance . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj my legs can keep no measure in delight , 
▁ xxmaj when my poor heart no measure keeps in grief ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore no dancing , girl ; some other sport . 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj madam , we 'll tell tales . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj of sorrow or of joy ? 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj of either , madam . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj of neither , girl ; 
▁ xxmaj for if of joy , being altogether wanting , 
▁ xxmaj it doth remember me the more of sorrow ; 
▁ xxmaj or if of grief , being altogether had , 
▁ xxmaj it adds more sorrow to my want of joy ; 
▁ xxmaj for what i have i need not to repeat , 
▁ xxmaj and what i want it boots not to complain . 
▁ xxup lady . xxmaj madam , xxmaj i 'll sing . 
▁ xxup queen . ' tis well ' that thou hast cause ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou shouldst please me better wouldst thou weep . 
▁ xxup lady . i could weep , madam , would it do you good . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and i could sing , would weeping do me good , 
▁ xxmaj and never borrow any tear of thee . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup gardener and two xxup servants 

▁ xxmaj but stay , here come the gardeners . 
▁ xxmaj let 's step into the shadow of these trees . 
▁ xxmaj my wretchedness unto a row of pins , 
▁ xxmaj they will talk of state , for every one doth so 
▁ xxmaj against a change : woe is forerun with woe . 
▁ [ queen and xxup ladies retire ] 
▁ xxup gardener . xxmaj go , bind thou up yon dangling apricocks , 
▁ xxmaj which , like unruly children , make their sire 
▁ xxmaj stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight ; 
▁ xxmaj give some supportance to the bending twigs . 
▁ xxmaj go thou , and xxmaj eke an executioner 
▁ xxmaj cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays 
▁ xxmaj that look too lofty in our commonwealth : 
▁ xxmaj all must be even in our government . 
▁ xxmaj you thus employ'd , i will go root away 
▁ xxmaj the noisome weeds which without profit suck 
▁ xxmaj the soil 's fertility from wholesome flowers . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj why should we , in the compass of a pale , 
▁ xxmaj keep law and form and due proportion , 
▁ xxmaj showing , as in a model , our firm estate , 
▁ xxmaj when our sea - walled garden , the whole land , 
▁ xxmaj is full of weeds ; her fairest flowers chok'd up , 
▁ xxmaj her fruit trees all unprun'd , her hedges ruin'd , 
▁ xxmaj her knots disordered , and her wholesome herbs 
▁ xxmaj swarming with caterpillars ? 
▁ xxup gardener . xxmaj hold thy peace . 
▁ xxmaj he that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring 
▁ xxmaj hath now himself met with the fall of leaf ; 
▁ xxmaj the weeds which his broad - spreading leaves did shelter , 
▁ xxmaj that seem'd in eating him to hold him up , 
▁ xxmaj are pluck'd up root and all by xxmaj bolingbroke- 
▁ i mean the xxmaj earl of xxmaj wiltshire , xxmaj bushy , xxmaj green . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj what , are they dead ? 
▁ xxup gardener . xxmaj they are ; and xxmaj bolingbroke 
▁ xxmaj hath seiz'd the wasteful xxmaj king . xxup o , what pity is it 
▁ xxmaj that he had not so trimm'd and dress'd his land 
▁ xxmaj as we this garden ! xxmaj we at time of year 
▁ xxmaj do wound the bark , the skin of our fruit trees , 
▁ xxmaj lest , being over - proud in sap and blood , 
▁ xxmaj with too much riches it confound itself ; 
▁ xxmaj had he done so to great and growing men , 
▁ xxmaj they might have xxmaj ev'd to bear , and he to taste 
▁ xxmaj their fruits of duty . xxmaj superfluous branches 
▁ xxmaj we lop away , that bearing boughs may live ; 
▁ xxmaj had he done so , himself had home the crown , 
▁ xxmaj which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj what , think you the xxmaj king shall be deposed ? 
▁ xxup gardener . xxmaj depress'd he is already , and depos'd 
▁ ' tis doubt he will be . xxmaj letters came last night 
▁ xxmaj to a dear friend of the good xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 's 
▁ xxmaj that tell black tidings . 
▁ xxup queen . xxup o , i am press'd to death through want of speaking ! 
▁ [ coming forward ] 
▁ xxmaj thou , old xxmaj adam 's likeness , set to dress this garden , 
▁ xxmaj how dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news ? 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj eve , what serpent , hath suggested the 
▁ xxmaj to make a second fall of cursed man ? 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou say xxmaj king xxmaj richard is depos'd ? 
▁ xxmaj dar'st thou , thou little better thing than earth , 
▁ xxmaj divine his downfall ? xxmaj say , where , when , and how , 
▁ xxmaj cam'st thou by this ill tidings ? xxmaj speak , thou wretch . 
▁ xxup gardener . xxmaj pardon me , madam ; little joy have 
▁ xxmaj to breathe this news ; yet what i say is true . 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj richard , he is in the mighty hold 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj bolingbroke . xxmaj their fortunes both are weigh'd . 
▁ xxmaj in your lord 's scale is nothing but himself , 
▁ xxmaj and some few vanities that make him light ; 
▁ xxmaj but in the balance of great xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxmaj besides himself , are all the xxmaj english peers , 
▁ xxmaj and with that odds he weighs xxmaj king xxmaj richard down . 
▁ xxmaj post you to xxmaj london , and you will find it so ; 
▁ i speak no more than every one doth know . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj nimble mischance , that art so light of foot , 
▁ xxmaj doth not thy embassage belong to me , 
▁ xxmaj and am i last that knows it ? xxup o , thou thinkest 
▁ xxmaj to serve me last , that i may longest keep 
▁ xxmaj thy sorrow in my breast . xxmaj come , ladies , go 
▁ xxmaj to meet at xxmaj london xxmaj london 's xxmaj king in woe . 
▁ xxmaj what , was i born to this , that my sad look 
▁ xxmaj should grace the triumph of great xxmaj bolingbroke ? 
▁ xxmaj gard'ner , for telling me these news of woe , 
▁ xxmaj pray xxmaj god the plants thou graft'st may never grow ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup queen and xxup ladies 
▁ xxup gardener . xxmaj poor xxmaj queen , so that thy state might be no worse , 
▁ i would my skill were subject to thy curse . 
▁ xxmaj here did she fall a tear ; here in this place 
▁ xxmaj i 'll set a bank of rue , sour herb of grace . 
▁ xxmaj rue , even for ruth , here shortly shall be seen , 
▁ xxmaj in the remembrance of a weeping queen . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj westminster xxmaj hall 

 xxmaj enter , as to the xxmaj parliament , xxup bolingbroke , xxup aumerle , xxup northumberland , xxup percy , 
 xxup fitzwater , xxup surrey , the xxup bishop xxup of xxup carlisle , the xxup abbot xxup of xxup westminster , 
 and others ; xxup herald , xxup officers , and xxup bagot 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj call forth xxmaj bagot . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj bagot , freely speak thy mind- 
▁ xxmaj what thou dost know of noble xxmaj gloucester 's death ; 
▁ xxmaj who wrought it with the xxmaj king , and who perform'd 
▁ xxmaj the bloody office of his timeless end . 
▁ xxup bagot . xxmaj then set before my face the xxmaj lord xxmaj aumerle . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj cousin , stand forth , and look upon that man . 
▁ xxup bagot . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj aumerle , i know your daring tongue 
▁ xxmaj scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd . 
▁ xxmaj in that dead time when xxmaj gloucester 's death was plotted 
▁ i heard you say ' is not my arm of length , 
▁ xxmaj that reacheth from the restful xxmaj english xxmaj court 
▁ xxmaj as far as xxmaj calais , to mine uncle 's head ? ' 
▁ xxmaj amongst much other talk that very time 
▁ i heard you say that you had rather refuse 
▁ xxmaj the offer of an hundred thousand crowns 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj bolingbroke 's return to xxmaj england ; 
▁ xxmaj adding withal , how blest this land would be 
▁ xxmaj in this your cousin 's death . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj princes , and noble lords , 
▁ xxmaj what answer shall i make to this base man ? 
▁ xxmaj shall i so much dishonour my fair stars 
▁ xxmaj on equal terms to give him chastisement ? 
▁ xxmaj either i must , or have mine honour soil'd 
▁ xxmaj with the attainder of his slanderous lips . 
▁ xxmaj there is my gage , the manual seal of death 
▁ xxmaj that marks thee out for hell . i say thou liest , 
▁ xxmaj and will maintain what thou hast said is false 
▁ xxmaj in thy heart - blood , through being all too base 
▁ xxmaj to stain the temper of my knightly sword . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj bagot , forbear ; thou shalt not take it up . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj excepting one , i would he were the best 
▁ xxmaj in all this presence that hath mov'd me so . 
▁ xxup fitzwater . xxmaj if that thy valour stand on sympathy , 
▁ xxmaj there is my gage , xxmaj aumerle , in gage to thine . 
▁ xxmaj by that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st , 
▁ i heard thee say , and vauntingly thou spak'st it , 
▁ xxmaj that thou wert cause of noble xxmaj gloucester 's death . 
▁ xxmaj if thou deniest it twenty times , thou liest ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will turn thy falsehood to thy heart , 
▁ xxmaj where it was forged , with my rapier 's point . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj thou dar'st not , coward , live to see that day . 
▁ xxup fitzwater . xxmaj now , by my soul , i would it were this hour . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj fitzwater , thou art damn'd to hell for this . 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj aumerle , thou liest ; his honour is as true 
▁ xxmaj in this appeal as thou art an unjust ; 
▁ xxmaj and that thou art so , there i throw my gage , 
▁ xxmaj to prove it on thee to the extremest point 
▁ xxmaj of mortal breathing . xxmaj seize it , if thou dar'st . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj an if i do not , may my hands rot of 
▁ xxmaj and never brandish more revengeful steel 
▁ xxmaj over the glittering helmet of my foe ! 
▁ xxup another xxup lord . i task the earth to the like , forsworn xxmaj aumerle ; 
▁ xxmaj and spur thee on with fun as many lies 
▁ xxmaj as may be halloa'd in thy treacherous ear 
▁ xxmaj from sun to sun . xxmaj there is my honour 's pawn ; 
▁ xxmaj engage it to the trial , if thou darest . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj who sets me else ? xxmaj by heaven , xxmaj i 'll throw at all ! 
▁ i have a thousand spirits in one breast 
▁ xxmaj to answer twenty thousand such as you . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj fitzwater , i do remember well 
▁ xxmaj the very time xxmaj aumerle and you did talk . 
▁ xxup fitzwater . ' tis very true ; you were in presence then , 
▁ xxmaj and you can witness with me this is true . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj as false , by heaven , as heaven itself is true . 
▁ xxup fitzwater . xxmaj surrey , thou liest . 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj dishonourable boy ! 
▁ xxmaj that lie shall lie so heavy on my sword 
▁ xxmaj that it shall render vengeance and revenge 
▁ xxmaj till thou the lie - giver and that lie do he 
▁ xxmaj in earth as quiet as thy father 's skull . 
▁ xxmaj in proof whereof , there is my honour 's pawn ; 
▁ xxmaj engage it to the trial , if thou dar'st . 
▁ xxup fitzwater . xxmaj how fondly dost thou spur a forward horse ! 
▁ xxmaj if i dare eat , or drink , or breathe , or live , 
▁ i dare meet xxmaj surrey in a wilderness , 
▁ xxmaj and spit upon him whilst i say he lies , 
▁ xxmaj and lies , and lies . xxmaj there is my bond of faith , 
▁ xxmaj to tie thee to my strong correction . 
▁ xxmaj as i intend to thrive in this new world , 
▁ xxmaj aumerle is guilty of my true appeal . 
▁ xxmaj besides , i heard the banish'd xxmaj norfolk say 
▁ xxmaj that thou , xxmaj aumerle , didst send two of thy men 
▁ xxmaj to execute the noble xxmaj duke at xxmaj calais . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj some honest xxmaj christian trust me with a gage 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj norfolk lies . xxmaj here do i throw down this , 
▁ xxmaj if he may be repeal'd to try his honour . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj these differences shall all rest under gage 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj norfolk be repeal'd - repeal'd he shall be 
▁ xxmaj and , though mine enemy , restor'd again 
▁ xxmaj to all his lands and signories . xxmaj when he is return'd , 
▁ xxmaj against xxmaj aumerle we will enforce his trial . 
▁ xxup carlisle . xxmaj that honourable day shall never be seen . 
▁ xxmaj many a time hath banish'd xxmaj norfolk fought 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj jesu xxmaj christ in glorious xxmaj christian field , 
▁ xxmaj streaming the ensign of the xxmaj christian cross 
▁ xxmaj against black pagans , xxmaj turks , and xxmaj saracens ; 
▁ xxmaj and , toil'd with works of war , retir'd himself 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj italy ; and there , at xxmaj venice , gave 
▁ xxmaj his body to that pleasant country 's earth , 
▁ xxmaj and his pure soul unto his captain , xxmaj christ , 
▁ xxmaj under whose colours he had fought so long . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj why , xxmaj bishop , is xxmaj norfolk dead ? 
▁ xxup carlisle . xxmaj as surely as i live , my lord . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom 
▁ xxmaj of good old xxmaj abraham ! xxmaj lords appellants , 
▁ xxmaj your differences shall all rest under gage 
▁ xxmaj till we assign you to your days of trial 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york , attended 

▁ xxup york . xxmaj great xxmaj duke of xxmaj lancaster , i come to the 
▁ xxmaj from plume - pluck'd xxmaj richard , who with willing soul 
▁ xxmaj adopts thee heir , and his high sceptre yields 
▁ xxmaj to the possession of thy royal hand . 
▁ xxmaj ascend his throne , descending now from him- 
▁ xxmaj and long live xxmaj henry , fourth of that name ! 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj in xxmaj god 's name , xxmaj i 'll ascend the regal throne . 
▁ xxup carlisle . xxmaj marry , xxmaj god forbid ! 
▁ xxmaj worst in this royal presence may i speak , 
▁ xxmaj yet best beseeming me to speak the truth . 
▁ xxmaj would xxmaj god that any in this noble presence 
▁ xxmaj were enough noble to be upright judge 
▁ xxmaj of noble xxmaj richard ! xxmaj then true noblesse would 
▁ xxmaj learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong . 
▁ xxmaj what subject can give sentence on his king ? 
▁ xxmaj and who sits here that is not xxmaj richard 's subject ? 
▁ xxmaj thieves are not judg'd but they are by to hear , 
▁ xxmaj although apparent guilt be seen in them ; 
▁ xxmaj and shall the figure of xxmaj god 's majesty , 
▁ xxmaj his captain , steward , deputy elect , 
▁ xxmaj anointed , crowned , planted many years , 
▁ xxmaj be judg'd by subject and inferior breath , 
▁ xxmaj and he himself not present ? xxup o , forfend it , xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj that in a xxmaj christian climate souls refin'd 
▁ xxmaj should show so heinous , black , obscene a deed ! 
▁ i speak to subjects , and a subject speaks , 
▁ xxmaj stirr'd up by xxmaj god , thus boldly for his king . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj hereford here , whom you call king , 
▁ xxmaj is a foul traitor to proud xxmaj hereford 's king ; 
▁ xxmaj and if you crown him , let me prophesy- 
▁ xxmaj the blood of xxmaj english shall manure the ground , 
▁ xxmaj and future ages groan for this foul act ; 
▁ xxmaj peace shall go sleep with xxmaj turks and infidels , 
▁ xxmaj and in this seat of peace tumultuous wars 
▁ xxmaj shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound ; 
▁ xxmaj disorder , horror , fear , and mutiny , 
▁ xxmaj shall here inhabit , and this land be call'd 
▁ xxmaj the field of xxmaj golgotha and dead men 's skulls . 
▁ xxup o , if you raise this house against this house , 
▁ xxmaj it will the woefullest division prove 
▁ xxmaj that ever fell upon this cursed earth . 
▁ xxmaj prevent it , resist it , let it not be so , 
▁ xxmaj lest child , child 's children , cry against you woe . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj well have you argued , sir ; and , for your pains , 
▁ xxmaj of capital treason we arrest you here . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj westminster , be it your charge 
▁ xxmaj to keep him safely till his day of trial . 
▁ xxmaj may it please you , lords , to grant the commons ' suit ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj fetch hither xxmaj richard , that in common view 
▁ xxmaj he may surrender ; so we shall proceed 
▁ xxmaj without suspicion . 
▁ xxup york . i will be his conduct . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj lords , you that here are under our arrest , 
▁ xxmaj procure your sureties for your days of answer . 
▁ xxmaj little are we beholding to your love , 
▁ xxmaj and little look'd for at your helping hands . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup york , with xxup king xxup richard , and xxup officers 
▁ bearing the regalia 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj alack , why am i sent for to a king , 
▁ xxmaj before i have shook off the regal thoughts 
▁ xxmaj wherewith i reign'd ? i hardly yet have learn'd 
▁ xxmaj to insinuate , flatter , bow , and bend my knee . 
▁ xxmaj give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me 
▁ xxmaj to this submission . xxmaj yet i well remember 
▁ xxmaj the favours of these men . xxmaj were they not mine ? 
▁ xxmaj did they not sometime cry ' all hail ! ' to me ? 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj judas did to xxmaj christ ; but he , in twelve , 
▁ xxmaj found truth in all but one ; xxup i , in twelve thousand , none . 
▁ xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! xxmaj will no man say amen ? 
▁ xxmaj am i both priest and clerk ? xxmaj well then , amen . 
▁ xxmaj god save the xxmaj king ! although i be not he ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , amen , if heaven do think him me . 
▁ xxmaj to do what service am i sent for hither ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj to do that office of thine own good will 
▁ xxmaj which tired majesty did make thee offer- 
▁ xxmaj the resignation of thy state and crown 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj henry xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj give me the crown . xxmaj here , cousin , seize the crown . 
▁ xxmaj here , cousin , 
▁ xxmaj on this side my hand , and on that side thine . 
▁ xxmaj now is this golden crown like a deep well 
▁ xxmaj that owes two buckets , filling one another ; 
▁ xxmaj the emptier ever dancing in the air , 
▁ xxmaj the other down , unseen , and full of water . 
▁ xxmaj that bucket down and fun of tears am xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj drinking my griefs , whilst you mount up on high . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i thought you had been willing to resign . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj my crown i am ; but still my griefs are mine . 
▁ xxmaj you may my glories and my state depose , 
▁ xxmaj but not my griefs ; still am i king of those . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj part of your cares you give me with your crown . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj your cares set up do not pluck my cares down . 
▁ xxmaj my care is loss of care , by old care done ; 
▁ xxmaj your care is gain of care , by new care won . 
▁ xxmaj the cares i give i have , though given away ; 
▁ xxmaj they tend the crown , yet still with me they stay . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj are you contented to resign the crown ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , no ; no , ay ; for i must nothing be ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore no no , for i resign to thee . 
▁ xxmaj now mark me how i will undo myself : 
▁ i give this heavy weight from off my head , 
▁ xxmaj and this unwieldy sceptre from my hand , 
▁ xxmaj the pride of kingly sway from out my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj with mine own tears i wash away my balm , 
▁ xxmaj with mine own hands i give away my crown , 
▁ xxmaj with mine own tongue deny my sacred state , 
▁ xxmaj with mine own breath release all duteous oaths ; 
▁ xxmaj all pomp and majesty i do forswear ; 
▁ xxmaj my manors , rents , revenues , i forgo ; 
▁ xxmaj my acts , decrees , and statutes , i deny . 
▁ xxmaj god pardon all oaths that are broke to me ! 
▁ xxmaj god keep all vows unbroke are made to thee ! 
▁ xxmaj make me , that nothing have , with nothing griev'd , 
▁ xxmaj and thou with all pleas'd , that hast an achiev'd . 
▁ xxmaj long mayst thou live in xxmaj richard 's seat to sit , 
▁ xxmaj and soon lie xxmaj richard in an earthly pit . 
▁ xxmaj god save xxmaj king xxmaj henry , unking'd xxmaj richard says , 
▁ xxmaj and send him many years of sunshine days ! 
▁ xxmaj what more remains ? 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj no more ; but that you read 
▁ xxmaj these accusations , and these grievous crimes 
▁ xxmaj committed by your person and your followers 
▁ xxmaj against the state and profit of this land ; 
▁ xxmaj that , by confessing them , the souls of men 
▁ xxmaj may deem that you are worthily depos'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj must i do so ? xxmaj and must i ravel out 
▁ xxmaj my weav'd - up follies ? xxmaj gentle xxmaj northumberland , 
▁ xxmaj if thy offences were upon record , 
▁ xxmaj would it not shame thee in so fair a troop 
▁ xxmaj to read a lecture of them ? xxmaj if thou wouldst , 
▁ xxmaj there shouldst thou find one heinous article , 
▁ xxmaj containing the deposing of a king 
▁ xxmaj and cracking the strong warrant of an oath , 
▁ xxmaj mark'd with a blot , damn'd in the book of heaven . 
▁ xxmaj nay , all of you that stand and look upon me 
▁ xxmaj whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself , 
▁ xxmaj though some of you , with xxmaj pilate , wash your hands , 
▁ xxmaj showing an outward pity - yet you xxmaj pilates 
▁ xxmaj have here deliver'd me to my sour cross , 
▁ xxmaj and water can not wash away your sin . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj my lord , dispatch ; read o'er these 
▁ articles . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj mine eyes are full of tears ; i can not see . 
▁ xxmaj and yet salt water blinds them not so much 
▁ xxmaj but they can see a sort of traitors here . 
▁ xxmaj nay , if i turn mine eyes upon myself , 
▁ i find myself a traitor with the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have given here my soul 's consent 
▁ xxmaj t'undeck the pompous body of a king ; 
▁ xxmaj made glory base , and sovereignty a slave , 
▁ xxmaj proud majesty a subject , state a peasant . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj no lord of thine , thou haught insulting man , 
▁ xxmaj nor no man 's lord ; i have no name , no tide- 
▁ xxmaj no , not that name was given me at the font- 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis usurp'd . xxmaj alack the heavy day , 
▁ xxmaj that i have worn so many winters out , 
▁ xxmaj and know not now what name to call myself ! 
▁ o that i were a mockery king of snow , 
▁ xxmaj standing before the sun of xxmaj bolingbroke 
▁ xxmaj to melt myself away in water drops ! 
▁ xxmaj good king , great king , and yet not greatly good , 
▁ xxmaj an if my word be sterling yet in xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj let it command a mirror hither straight , 
▁ xxmaj that it may show me what a face i have 
▁ xxmaj since it is bankrupt of his majesty . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj go some of you and fetch a looking - glass . 
▁ xxmaj exit an attendant 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj read o'er this paper while the glass doth come . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj fiend , thou torments me ere i come to hell . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj urge it no more , my xxmaj lord xxmaj northumberland . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj the xxmaj commons will not , then , be satisfied . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj they shall be satisfied . xxmaj i 'll read enough , 
▁ xxmaj when i do see the very book indeed 
▁ xxmaj where all my sins are writ , and that 's myself . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter attendant with glass 

▁ xxmaj give me that glass , and therein will i read . 
▁ xxmaj no deeper wrinkles yet ? xxmaj hath sorrow struck 
▁ xxmaj so many blows upon this face of mine 
▁ xxmaj and made no deeper wounds ? o flatt'ring glass , 
▁ xxmaj like to my followers in prosperity , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost beguile me ! xxmaj was this face the face 
▁ xxmaj that every day under his household roof 
▁ xxmaj did keep ten thousand men ? xxmaj was this the face 
▁ xxmaj that like the sun did make beholders wink ? 
▁ xxmaj is this the face which fac'd so many follies 
▁ xxmaj that was at last out - fac'd by xxmaj bolingbroke ? 
▁ a brittle glory shineth in this face ; 
▁ xxmaj as brittle as the glory is the face ; 
▁ [ dashes the glass against the ground ] 
▁ xxmaj for there it is , crack'd in a hundred shivers . 
▁ xxmaj mark , silent king , the moral of this sport- 
▁ xxmaj how soon my sorrow hath destroy'd my face . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj the shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd 
▁ xxmaj the shadow of your face . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj say that again . 
▁ xxmaj the shadow of my sorrow ? xxmaj ha ! let 's see . 
▁ ' tis very true : my grief lies all within ; 
▁ xxmaj and these external manner of laments 
▁ xxmaj are merely shadows to the unseen grief 
▁ xxmaj that swells with silence in the tortur'd soul . 
▁ xxmaj there lies the substance ; and i thank thee , king , 
▁ xxmaj for thy great bounty , that not only giv'st 
▁ xxmaj me cause to wail , but teachest me the way 
▁ xxmaj how to lament the cause . xxmaj i 'll beg one boon , 
▁ xxmaj and then be gone and trouble you no more . 
▁ xxmaj shall i obtain it ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj name it , fair cousin . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj fair cousin ! i am greater than a king ; 
▁ xxmaj for when i was a king , my flatterers 
▁ xxmaj were then but subjects ; being now a subject , 
▁ i have a king here to my flatterer . 
▁ xxmaj being so great , i have no need to beg . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj yet ask . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and shall i have ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj you shall . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then give me leave to go . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj whither ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj whither you will , so i were from your sights . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj go , some of you convey him to the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxup o , good ! xxmaj convey ! xxmaj conveyers are you all , 
▁ xxmaj that rise thus nimbly by a true king 's fall . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup king xxup richard , some xxmaj lords and a xxmaj guard 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj on xxmaj wednesday next we solemnly set down 
▁ xxmaj our coronation . xxmaj lords , prepare yourselves . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup abbot xxup of xxup westminster , the 
▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup carlisle , and xxup aumerle 
▁ xxup abbot . a woeful pageant have we here beheld . 
▁ xxup carlisle . xxmaj the woe 's to come ; the children yet unborn 
▁ xxmaj shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj you holy clergymen , is there no plot 
▁ xxmaj to rid the realm of this pernicious blot ? 
▁ xxup abbot . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj before i freely speak my mind herein , 
▁ xxmaj you shall not only take the sacrament 
▁ xxmaj to bury mine intents , but also to effect 
▁ xxmaj whatever i shall happen to devise . 
▁ i see your brows are full of discontent , 
▁ xxmaj your hearts of sorrow , and your eyes of tears . 
▁ xxmaj come home with me to supper ; i will lay 
▁ a plot shall show us all a merry day . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj london . a street leading to the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj enter the xxup queen , with her attendants 

▁ xxup queen . xxmaj this way the xxmaj king will come ; this is the way 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar 's ill - erected tower , 
▁ xxmaj to whose flint bosom my condemned lord 
▁ xxmaj is doom'd a prisoner by proud xxmaj bolingbroke . 
▁ xxmaj here let us rest , if this rebellious earth 
▁ xxmaj have any resting for her true xxmaj king 's queen . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup richard and xxmaj guard 

▁ xxmaj but soft , but see , or rather do not see , 
▁ xxmaj my fair rose wither . xxmaj yet look up , behold , 
▁ xxmaj that you in pity may dissolve to dew , 
▁ xxmaj and wash him fresh again with true - love tears . 
▁ xxmaj ah , thou , the model where old xxmaj troy did stand ; 
▁ xxmaj thou map of honour , thou xxmaj king xxmaj richard 's tomb , 
▁ xxmaj and not xxmaj king xxmaj richard ; thou most beauteous inn , 
▁ xxmaj why should hard - favour'd grief be lodg'd in thee , 
▁ xxmaj when triumph is become an alehouse guest ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj join not with grief , fair woman , do not so , 
▁ xxmaj to make my end too sudden . xxmaj learn , good soul , 
▁ xxmaj to think our former state a happy dream ; 
▁ xxmaj from which awak'd , the truth of what we are 
▁ xxmaj shows us but this : i am sworn brother , sweet , 
▁ xxmaj to grim xxmaj necessity ; and he and 
▁ xxmaj will keep a league till death . xxmaj hie thee to xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and cloister thee in some religious house . 
▁ xxmaj our holy lives must win a new world 's crown , 
▁ xxmaj which our profane hours here have thrown down . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj what , is my xxmaj richard both in shape and mind 
▁ xxmaj transform'd and weak'ned ? xxmaj hath xxmaj bolingbroke depos'd 
▁ xxmaj thine intellect ? xxmaj hath he been in thy heart ? 
▁ xxmaj the lion dying thrusteth forth his paw 
▁ xxmaj and wounds the earth , if nothing else , with rage 
▁ xxmaj to be o'erpow'r'd ; and wilt thou , pupil - like , 
▁ xxmaj take the correction mildly , kiss the rod , 
▁ xxmaj and fawn on rage with base humility , 
▁ xxmaj which art a lion and the king of beasts ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . a king of beasts , indeed ! xxmaj if aught but beasts , 
▁ i had been still a happy king of men . 
▁ xxmaj good sometimes queen , prepare thee hence for xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj think i am dead , and that even here thou takest , 
▁ xxmaj as from my death - bed , thy last living leave . 
▁ xxmaj in winter 's tedious nights sit by the fire 
▁ xxmaj with good old folks , and let them tell thee tales 
▁ xxmaj of woeful ages long ago betid ; 
▁ xxmaj and ere thou bid good night , to quit their griefs 
▁ xxmaj tell thou the lamentable tale of me , 
▁ xxmaj and send the hearers weeping to their beds ; 
▁ xxmaj for why , the senseless brands will sympathize 
▁ xxmaj the heavy accent of thy moving tongue , 
▁ xxmaj and in compassion weep the fire out ; 
▁ xxmaj and some will mourn in ashes , some coal - black , 
▁ xxmaj for the deposing of a rightful king . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup northumberland attended 

▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj my lord , the mind of xxmaj bolingbroke is chang'd ; 
▁ xxmaj you must to xxmaj pomfret , not unto the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxmaj and , madam , there is order ta'en for you : 
▁ xxmaj with all swift speed you must away to xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj northumberland , thou ladder wherewithal 
▁ xxmaj the mounting xxmaj bolingbroke ascends my throne , 
▁ xxmaj the time shall not be many hours of age 
▁ xxmaj more than it is , ere foul sin gathering head 
▁ xxmaj shall break into corruption . xxmaj thou shalt think 
▁ xxmaj though he divide the realm and give thee half 
▁ xxmaj it is too little , helping him to all ; 
▁ xxmaj and he shall think that thou , which knowest the way 
▁ xxmaj to plant unrightful kings , wilt know again , 
▁ xxmaj being ne'er so little urg'd , another way 
▁ xxmaj to pluck him headlong from the usurped throne . 
▁ xxmaj the love of wicked men converts to fear ; 
▁ xxmaj that fear to hate ; and hate turns one or both 
▁ xxmaj to worthy danger and deserved death . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj my guilt be on my head , and there an end . 
▁ xxmaj take leave , and part ; for you must part forthwith . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj doubly divorc'd ! xxmaj bad men , you violate 
▁ a twofold marriage-'twixt my crown and me , 
▁ xxmaj and then betwixt me and my married wife . 
▁ xxmaj let me unkiss the oath ' twixt thee and me ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet not so , for with a kiss ' twas made . 
▁ xxmaj part us , xxmaj northumberland ; i towards the north , 
▁ xxmaj where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime ; 
▁ xxmaj my wife to xxmaj france , from whence set forth in pomp , 
▁ xxmaj she came adorned hither like sweet xxmaj may , 
▁ xxmaj sent back like xxmaj hallowmas or short'st of day . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj and must we be divided ? xxmaj must we part ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , hand from hand , my love , and heart from heart . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj banish us both , and send the xxmaj king with me . 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj that were some love , but little policy . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj then whither he goes thither let me go . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj so two , together weeping , make one woe . 
▁ xxmaj weep thou for me in xxmaj france , i for thee here ; 
▁ xxmaj better far off than near , be ne'er the near . 
▁ xxmaj go , count thy way with sighs ; i mine with groans . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj so longest way shall have the longest moans . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj twice for one step xxmaj i 'll groan , the way being short , 
▁ xxmaj and piece the way out with a heavy heart . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , in wooing sorrow let 's be brief , 
▁ xxmaj since , wedding it , there is such length in grief . 
▁ xxmaj one kiss shall stop our mouths , and dumbly part ; 
▁ xxmaj thus give i mine , and thus take i thy heart . 
▁ xxup queen . xxmaj give me mine own again ; ' twere no good part 
▁ xxmaj to take on me to keep and kill thy heart . 
▁ xxmaj so , now i have mine own again , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj that i may strive to kill it with a groan . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj we make woe wanton with this fond delay . 
▁ xxmaj once more , adieu ; the rest let sorrow say . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj the xxup duke xxup of york 's palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup duke xxup of xxup york and the xxup duchess 

▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj my xxmaj lord , you told me you would tell the rest , 
▁ xxmaj when weeping made you break the story off , 
▁ xxmaj of our two cousins ' coming into xxmaj london . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj where did i leave ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj at that sad stop , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj where rude misgoverned hands from windows ' tops 
▁ xxmaj threw dust and rubbish on xxmaj king xxmaj richard 's head . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj then , as i said , the xxmaj duke , great xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxmaj mounted upon a hot and fiery steed 
▁ xxmaj which his aspiring rider seem'd to know , 
▁ xxmaj with slow but stately pace kept on his course , 
▁ xxmaj whilst all tongues cried ' god save thee , xxmaj bolingbroke ! ' 
▁ xxmaj you would have thought the very windows spake , 
▁ xxmaj so many greedy looks of young and old 
▁ xxmaj through casements darted their desiring eyes 
▁ xxmaj upon his visage ; and that all the walls 
▁ xxmaj with painted imagery had said at once 
▁ ' jesu preserve thee ! xxmaj welcome , xxmaj bolingbroke ! ' 
▁ xxmaj whilst he , from the one side to the other turning , 
▁ xxmaj bareheaded , lower than his proud steed 's neck , 
▁ xxmaj bespake them thus , ' i thank you , countrymen . ' 
▁ xxmaj and thus still doing , thus he pass'd along . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj alack , poor xxmaj richard ! where rode he the whilst ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj as in a theatre the eyes of men 
▁ xxmaj after a well - grac'd actor leaves the stage 
▁ xxmaj are idly bent on him that enters next , 
▁ xxmaj thinking his prattle to be tedious ; 
▁ xxmaj even so , or with much more contempt , men 's eyes 
▁ xxmaj did scowl on gentle xxmaj richard ; no man cried ' god save him ! ' 
▁ xxmaj no joyful tongue gave him his welcome home ; 
▁ xxmaj but dust was thrown upon his sacred head ; 
▁ xxmaj which with such gentle sorrow he shook off , 
▁ xxmaj his face still combating with tears and smiles , 
▁ xxmaj the badges of his grief and patience , 
▁ xxmaj that had not xxmaj god , for some strong purpose , steel'd 
▁ xxmaj the hearts of men , they must perforce have melted , 
▁ xxmaj and barbarism itself have pitied him . 
▁ xxmaj but heaven hath a hand in these events , 
▁ xxmaj to whose high will we bound our calm contents . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now , 
▁ xxmaj whose state and honour i for aye allow . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj here comes my son xxmaj aumerle . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj aumerle that was 
▁ xxmaj but that is lost for being xxmaj richard 's friend , 
▁ xxmaj and madam , you must call him xxmaj rudand now . 
▁ i am in xxmaj parliament pledge for his truth 
▁ xxmaj and lasting fealty to the new - made king . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aumerle 

▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj welcome , my son . xxmaj who are the violets now 
▁ xxmaj that strew the green lap of the new come spring ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj madam , i know not , nor i greatly care not . 
▁ xxmaj god knows i had as lief be none as one . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj well , bear you well in this new spring of time , 
▁ xxmaj lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime . 
▁ xxmaj what news from xxmaj oxford ? xxmaj do these justs and triumphs hold ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj for aught i know , my lord , they do . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj you will be there , i know . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj if xxmaj god prevent not , i purpose so . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj what seal is that that without thy bosom ? 
▁ xxmaj yea , look'st thou pale ? xxmaj let me see the writing . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj my lord , ' tis nothing . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj no matter , then , who see it . 
▁ i will be satisfied ; let me see the writing . 
▁ xxup aumerle . i do beseech your xxmaj grace to pardon me ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a matter of small consequence 
▁ xxmaj which for some reasons i would not have seen . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj which for some reasons , sir , i mean to see . 
▁ i fear , i fear- 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what should you fear ? 
▁ ' tis nothing but some bond that he is ent'red into 
▁ xxmaj for gay apparel ' gainst the triumph - day . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj bound to himself ! xxmaj what doth he with a bond 
▁ xxmaj that he is bound to ? xxmaj wife , thou art a fool . 
▁ xxmaj boy , let me see the writing . 
▁ xxup aumerle . i do beseech you , pardon me ; i may not show it . 
▁ xxup york . i will be satisfied ; let me see it , i say . 
▁ [ he plucks it out of his bosom , and reads it ] 
▁ xxmaj treason , foul treason ! xxmaj villain ! traitor ! slave ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what is the matter , my lord ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj ho ! who is within there ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a servant 

▁ xxmaj saddle my horse . 
▁ xxmaj god for his mercy , what treachery is here ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj why , xxmaj york , what is it , my lord ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj give me my boots , i say ; saddle my horse . 
▁ xxmaj exit servant 
▁ xxmaj now , by mine honour , by my life , my troth , 
▁ i will appeach the villain . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what is the matter ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj peace , foolish woman . 
▁ xxup duchess . i will not peace . xxmaj what is the matter , xxmaj aumerle ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj good mother , be content ; it is no more 
▁ xxmaj than my poor life must answer . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj thy life answer ! 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj bring me my boots . i will unto the xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj his man enters with his boots 

▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj strike him , xxmaj aumerle . xxmaj poor boy , thou art amaz'd . 
▁ xxmaj hence , villain ! never more come in my sight . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj give me my boots , i say . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj why , xxmaj york , what wilt thou do ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own ? 
▁ xxmaj have we more sons ? or are we like to have ? 
▁ xxmaj is not my teeming date drunk up with time ? 
▁ xxmaj and wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age 
▁ xxmaj and rob me of a happy mother 's name ? 
▁ xxmaj is he not like thee ? xxmaj is he not thine own ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj thou fond mad woman , 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy ? 
▁ a dozen of them here have ta'en the sacrament , 
▁ xxmaj and interchangeably set down their hands 
▁ xxmaj to kill the xxmaj king at xxmaj oxford . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj he shall be none ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll keep him here . xxmaj then what is that to him ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj away , fond woman ! were he twenty times my son 
▁ i would appeach him . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj hadst thou groan'd for him 
▁ xxmaj as i have done , thou wouldst be more pitiful . 
▁ xxmaj but now i know thy mind : thou dost suspect 
▁ xxmaj that i have been disloyal to thy bed 
▁ xxmaj and that he is a bastard , not thy son . 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj york , sweet husband , be not of that mind . 
▁ xxmaj he is as like thee as a man may be 
▁ xxmaj not like to me , or any of my kin , 
▁ xxmaj and yet i love him . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj make way , unruly woman ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj after , xxmaj aumerle ! xxmaj mount thee upon his horse ; 
▁ xxmaj spur post , and get before him to the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not be long behind ; though i be old , 
▁ i doubt not but to ride as fast as xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj and never will i rise up from the ground 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj bolingbroke have pardon'd thee . xxmaj away , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj windsor xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup bolingbroke as xxmaj king , xxup percy , and other xxup lords 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj can no man tell me of my unthrifty son ? 
▁ ' tis full three months since i did see him last . 
▁ xxmaj if any plague hang over us , ' tis he . 
▁ i would to xxmaj god , my lords , he might be found . 
▁ xxmaj inquire at xxmaj london , ' mongst the taverns there , 
▁ xxmaj for there , they say , he daily doth frequent 
▁ xxmaj with unrestrained loose companions , 
▁ xxmaj even such , they say , as stand in narrow lanes 
▁ xxmaj and beat our watch and rob our passengers , 
▁ xxmaj which he , young wanton and effeminate boy , 
▁ xxmaj takes on the point of honour to support 
▁ xxmaj so dissolute a crew . 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj my lord , some two days since i saw the xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj and told him of those triumphs held at xxmaj oxford . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj and what said the gallant ? 
▁ xxup percy . xxmaj his answer was , he would unto the stews , 
▁ xxmaj and from the common'st creature pluck a glove 
▁ xxmaj and wear it as a favour ; and with that 
▁ xxmaj he would unhorse the lustiest challenger . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj as dissolute as desperate ; yet through both 
▁ i see some sparks of better hope , which elder years 
▁ xxmaj may happily bring forth . xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aumerle amazed 

▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj where is the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj what means our cousin that he stares and looks 
▁ xxmaj so wildly ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj god save your xxmaj grace ! i do beseech your xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj to have some conference with your xxmaj grace alone . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj withdraw yourselves , and leave us here alone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup percy and xxup lords 
▁ xxmaj what is the matter with our cousin now ? 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj for ever may my knees grow to the earth , 
▁ [ kneels ] 
▁ xxmaj my tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth , 
▁ xxmaj unless a pardon ere i rise or speak . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj intended or committed was this fault ? 
▁ xxmaj if on the first , how heinous e'er it be , 
▁ xxmaj to win thy after - love i pardon thee . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj then give me leave that i may turn the key , 
▁ xxmaj that no man enter till my tale be done . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj have thy desire . 
▁ [ the xxup duke xxup of xxup york knocks at the door and crieth ] 
▁ xxup york . [ within ] xxmaj my liege , beware ; look to thyself ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hast a traitor in thy presence there . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . [ drawing ] xxmaj villain , xxmaj i 'll make thee safe . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj stay thy revengeful hand ; thou hast no cause to fear . 
▁ xxup york . [ within ] xxmaj open the door , secure , foolhardy xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj shall xxup i , for love , speak treason to thy face ? 
▁ xxmaj open the door , or i will break it open . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup york 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj what is the matter , uncle ? xxmaj speak ; 
▁ xxmaj recover breath ; tell us how near is danger , 
▁ xxmaj that we may arm us to encounter it . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj peruse this writing here , and thou shalt know 
▁ xxmaj the treason that my haste forbids me show . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj remember , as thou read'st , thy promise pass'd . 
▁ i do repent me ; read not my name there ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart is not confederate with my hand . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj it was , villain , ere thy hand did set it down . 
▁ i tore it from the traitor 's bosom , xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj fear , and not love , begets his penitence . 
▁ xxmaj forget to pity him , lest thy pity prove 
▁ a serpent that will sting thee to the heart . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . o heinous , strong , and bold conspiracy ! 
▁ o loyal father of a treacherous son ! 
▁ xxmaj thou sheer , immaculate , and silver fountain , 
▁ xxmaj from whence this stream through muddy passages 
▁ xxmaj hath held his current and defil'd himself ! 
▁ xxmaj thy overflow of good converts to bad ; 
▁ xxmaj and thy abundant goodness shall excuse 
▁ xxmaj this deadly blot in thy digressing son . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj so shall my virtue be his vice 's bawd ; 
▁ xxmaj and he shall spend mine honour with his shame , 
▁ xxmaj as thriftless sons their scraping fathers ' gold . 
▁ xxmaj mine honour lives when his dishonour dies , 
▁ xxmaj or my sham'd life in his dishonour lies . 
▁ xxmaj thou kill'st me in his life ; giving him breath , 
▁ xxmaj the traitor lives , the true man 's put to death . 
▁ xxup duchess . [ within ] i xxmaj what ho , my liege , for xxmaj god 's sake , let me in . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj what shrill - voic'd suppliant makes this eager cry ? 
▁ xxup duchess . [ within ] a woman , and thine aunt , great xxmaj king ; ' tis xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj speak with me , pity me , open the door . 
▁ a beggar begs that never begg'd before . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj our scene is alt'red from a serious thing , 
▁ xxmaj and now chang'd to ' the xxmaj beggar and the xxmaj king . ' 
▁ xxmaj my dangerous cousin , let your mother in . 
▁ i know she is come to pray for your foul sin . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj if thou do pardon whosoever pray , 
▁ xxmaj more sins for this forgiveness prosper may . 
▁ xxmaj this fest'red joint cut off , the rest rest sound ; 
▁ xxmaj this let alone will all the rest confound . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duchess 
▁
▁ xxup duchess . o xxmaj king , believe not this hard - hearted man ! 
▁ xxmaj love loving not itself , none other can . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj thou frantic woman , what dost thou make here ? 
▁ xxmaj shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj sweet xxmaj york , be patient . xxmaj hear me , gentle liege . 
▁ [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj rise up , good aunt . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj not yet , i thee beseech . 
▁ xxmaj for ever will i walk upon my knees , 
▁ xxmaj and never see day that the happy sees 
▁ xxmaj till thou give joy ; until thou bid me joy 
▁ xxmaj by pardoning xxmaj rutland , my transgressing boy . 
▁ xxup aumerle . xxmaj unto my mother 's prayers i bend my knee . 
▁ [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj against them both , my true joints bended be . 
▁ [ kneels ] 
▁ xxmaj ill mayst thou thrive , if thou grant any grace ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj pleads he in earnest ? xxmaj look upon his face ; 
▁ xxmaj his eyes do drop no tears , his prayers are in jest ; 
▁ xxmaj his words come from his mouth , ours from our breast . 
▁ xxmaj he prays but faintly and would be denied ; 
▁ xxmaj we pray with heart and soul , and all beside . 
▁ xxmaj his weary joints would gladly rise , i know ; 
▁ xxmaj our knees still kneel till to the ground they grow . 
▁ xxmaj his prayers are full of false hypocrisy ; 
▁ xxmaj ours of true zeal and deep integrity . 
▁ xxmaj our prayers do out - pray his ; then let them have 
▁ xxmaj that mercy which true prayer ought to have . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj good aunt , stand up . 
▁ xxup duchess . do not say ' stand up ' ; 
▁ xxmaj say ' pardon ' first , and afterwards ' stand up . ' 
▁ xxmaj an if i were thy nurse , thy tongue to teach , 
▁ ' pardon ' should be the first word of thy speech . 
▁ i never long'd to hear a word till now ; 
▁ xxmaj say ' pardon , ' xxmaj king ; let pity teach thee how . 
▁ xxmaj the word is short , but not so short as sweet ; 
▁ xxmaj no word like ' pardon ' for kings ' mouths so meet . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj speak it in xxmaj french , xxmaj king , say ' pardonne moy . ' 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , my sour husband , my hard - hearted lord , 
▁ xxmaj that sets the word itself against the word ! 
▁ xxmaj speak ' pardon ' as ' tis current in our land ; 
▁ xxmaj the chopping xxmaj french we do not understand . 
▁ xxmaj thine eye begins to speak , set thy tongue there ;