xxbos xxmaj or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear , 
▁ xxmaj that hearing how our plaints and prayers do pierce , 
▁ xxmaj pity may move thee ' pardon ' to rehearse . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj good aunt , stand up . 
▁ xxup duchess . i do not sue to stand ; 
▁ xxmaj pardon is all the suit i have in hand . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . i pardon him , as xxmaj god shall pardon me . 
▁ xxup duchess . o happy vantage of a kneeling knee ! 
▁ xxmaj yet am i sick for fear . xxmaj speak it again . 
▁ xxmaj twice saying ' pardon ' doth not pardon twain , 
▁ xxmaj but makes one pardon strong . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj with all my heart 
▁ i pardon him . 
▁ xxup duchess . a god on earth thou art . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj but for our trusty brother - in - law and the xxmaj abbot , 
▁ xxmaj with all the rest of that consorted crew , 
▁ xxmaj destruction straight shall dog them at the heels . 
▁ xxmaj good uncle , help to order several powers 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj oxford , or where'er these traitors are . 
▁ xxmaj they shall not live within this world , i swear , 
▁ xxmaj but i will have them , if i once know where . 
▁ xxmaj uncle , farewell ; and , cousin , adieu ; 
▁ xxmaj your mother well hath pray'd , and prove you true . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj come , my old son ; i pray xxmaj god make thee new . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj windsor xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup pierce xxup of xxup exton and a servant 

▁ xxup exton . xxmaj didst thou not mark the xxmaj king , what words he spake ? 
▁ ' have i no friend will rid me of this living fear ? ' 
▁ xxmaj was it not so ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj these were his very words . 
▁ xxup exton . ' have i no friend ? ' quoth he . xxmaj he spake it twice 
▁ xxmaj and urg'd it twice together , did he not ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he did . 
▁ xxup exton . xxmaj and , speaking it , he wishtly look'd on me , 
▁ xxmaj as who should say ' i would thou wert the man 
▁ xxmaj that would divorce this terror from my heart ' ; 
▁ xxmaj meaning the xxmaj king at xxmaj pomfret . xxmaj come , let 's go . 
▁ i am the xxmaj king 's friend , and will rid his foe . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 5 . 
 xxmaj pomfret xxmaj castle . xxmaj the dungeon of the xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup richard 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . i have been studying how i may compare 
▁ xxmaj this prison where i live unto the world 
▁ xxmaj and , for because the world is populous 
▁ xxmaj and here is not a creature but myself , 
▁ i can not do it . xxmaj yet xxmaj i 'll hammer it out . 
▁ xxmaj my brain xxmaj i 'll prove the female to my soul , 
▁ xxmaj my soul the father ; and these two beget 
▁ a generation of still - breeding thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj and these same thoughts people this little world , 
▁ xxmaj in humours like the people of this world , 
▁ xxmaj for no thought is contented . xxmaj the better sort , 
▁ xxmaj as thoughts of things divine , are intermix'd 
▁ xxmaj with scruples , and do set the word itself 
▁ xxmaj against the word , 
▁ xxmaj as thus : ' come , little ones ' ; and then again , 
▁ ' it is as hard to come as for a camel 
▁ xxmaj to thread the postern of a small needle 's eye . ' 
▁ xxmaj thoughts tending to ambition , they do plot 
▁ xxmaj unlikely wonders : how these vain weak nails 
▁ xxmaj may tear a passage through the flinty ribs 
▁ xxmaj of this hard world , my ragged prison walls ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for they can not , die in their own pride . 
▁ xxmaj thoughts tending to content flatter themselves 
▁ xxmaj that they are not the first of fortune 's slaves , 
▁ xxmaj nor shall not be the last ; like silly beggars 
▁ xxmaj who , sitting in the stocks , refuge their shame , 
▁ xxmaj that many have and others must sit there ; 
▁ xxmaj and in this thought they find a kind of ease , 
▁ xxmaj bearing their own misfortunes on the back 
▁ xxmaj of such as have before endur'd the like . 
▁ xxmaj thus play i in one person many people , 
▁ xxmaj and none contented . xxmaj sometimes am i king ; 
▁ xxmaj then treasons make me wish myself a beggar , 
▁ xxmaj and so i am . xxmaj then crushing penury 
▁ xxmaj persuades me i was better when a king ; 
▁ xxmaj then am i king'd again ; and by and by 
▁ xxmaj think that i am unking'd by xxmaj bolingbroke , 
▁ xxmaj and straight am nothing . xxmaj but whate'er i be , 
▁ xxmaj nor xxup i , nor any man that but man is , 
▁ xxmaj with nothing shall be pleas'd till he be eas'd 
▁ xxmaj with being nothing . [ the music plays ] 
▁ xxmaj music do i hear ? 
▁ xxmaj ha , ha ! keep time . xxmaj how sour sweet music is 
▁ xxmaj when time is broke and no proportion kept ! 
▁ xxmaj so is it in the music of men 's lives . 
▁ xxmaj and here have i the daintiness of ear 
▁ xxmaj to check time broke in a disorder'd string ; 
▁ xxmaj but , for the concord of my state and time , 
▁ xxmaj had not an ear to hear my true time broke . 
▁ i wasted time , and now doth time waste me ; 
▁ xxmaj for now hath time made me his numb'ring clock : 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts are minutes ; and with sighs they jar 
▁ xxmaj their watches on unto mine eyes , the outward watch , 
▁ xxmaj whereto my finger , like a dial 's point , 
▁ xxmaj is pointing still , in cleansing them from tears . 
▁ xxmaj now sir , the sound that tells what hour it is 
▁ xxmaj are clamorous groans which strike upon my heart , 
▁ xxmaj which is the bell . xxmaj so sighs , and tears , and groans , 
▁ xxmaj show minutes , times , and hours ; but my time 
▁ xxmaj runs posting on in xxmaj bolingbroke 's proud joy , 
▁ xxmaj while i stand fooling here , his xxmaj jack of the clock . 
▁ xxmaj this music mads me . xxmaj let it sound no more ; 
▁ xxmaj for though it have holp madmen to their wits , 
▁ xxmaj in me it seems it will make wise men mad . 
▁ xxmaj yet blessing on his heart that gives it me ! 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a sign of love ; and love to xxmaj richard 
▁ xxmaj is a strange brooch in this all - hating world . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup groom of the stable 

▁ xxup groom . xxmaj hail , royal xxmaj prince ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thanks , noble peer ! 
▁ xxmaj the cheapest of us is ten groats too dear . 
▁ xxmaj what art thou ? and how comest thou hither , 
▁ xxmaj where no man never comes but that sad dog 
▁ xxmaj that brings me food to make misfortune live ? 
▁ xxup groom . i was a poor groom of thy stable , xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj when thou wert king ; who , travelling towards xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj with much ado at length have gotten leave 
▁ xxmaj to look upon my sometimes royal master 's face . 
▁ xxup o , how it ern'd my heart , when i beheld , 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj london streets , that coronation - day , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj bolingbroke rode on roan xxmaj barbary- 
▁ xxmaj that horse that thou so often hast bestrid , 
▁ xxmaj that horse that i so carefully have dress'd ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj rode he on xxmaj barbary ? xxmaj tell me , gentle friend , 
▁ xxmaj how went he under him ? 
▁ xxup groom . xxmaj so proudly as if he disdain'd the ground . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj so proud that xxmaj bolingbroke was on his back ! 
▁ xxmaj that jade hath eat bread from my royal hand ; 
▁ xxmaj this hand hath made him proud with clapping him . 
▁ xxmaj would he not stumble ? would he not fall down , 
▁ xxmaj since pride must have a fall , and break the neck 
▁ xxmaj of that proud man that did usurp his back ? 
▁ xxmaj forgiveness , horse ! xxmaj why do i rail on thee , 
▁ xxmaj since thou , created to be aw'd by man , 
▁ xxmaj wast born to bear ? i was not made a horse ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i bear a burden like an ass , 
▁ xxmaj spurr'd , gall'd , and tir'd , by jauncing xxmaj bolingbroke . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup keeper with meat 

▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj fellow , give place ; here is no longer stay . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj if thou love me , ' tis time thou wert away . 
▁ xxup groom . my tongue dares not , that my heart shall say . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj my lord , will't please you to fall to ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj taste of it first as thou art wo nt to do . 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj my lord , i dare not . xxmaj sir xxmaj pierce of xxmaj exton , 
▁ xxmaj who lately came from the xxmaj king , commands the contrary . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj the devil take xxmaj henry of xxmaj lancaster and thee ! 
▁ xxmaj patience is stale , and i am weary of it . 
▁ [ beats the xxup keeper ] 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj help , help , help ! 
▁ xxmaj the murderers , xxup exton and servants , rush in , armed 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what means death in this rude assault ? 
▁ xxmaj villain , thy own hand yields thy death 's instrument . 
▁ [ snatching a weapon and killing one ] 
▁ xxmaj go thou and fill another room in hell . 
▁ [ he kills another , then xxup exton strikes him down ] 
▁ xxmaj that hand shall burn in never - quenching fire 
▁ xxmaj that staggers thus my person . xxmaj exton , thy fierce hand 
▁ xxmaj hath with the xxmaj king 's blood stain'd the xxmaj king 's own land . 
▁ xxmaj mount , mount , my soul ! thy seat is up on high ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst my gross flesh sinks downward , here to die . 
▁ [ dies ] 
▁ xxup exton . xxmaj as full of valour as of royal blood . 
▁ xxmaj both have i spill'd . xxup o , would the deed were good ! 
▁ xxmaj for now the devil , that told me i did well , 
▁ xxmaj says that this deed is chronicled in hell . 
▁ xxmaj this dead xxmaj king to the living xxmaj king xxmaj i 'll bear . 
▁ xxmaj take hence the rest , and give them burial here . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 6 . 
 xxmaj windsor xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup bolingbroke , the xxup duke xxup of xxup york , xxmaj with other xxup lords 
 and attendants 

▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj kind uncle xxmaj york , the latest news we hear 
▁ xxmaj is that the rebels have consum'd with fire 
▁ xxmaj our town of xxmaj ciceter in xxmaj gloucestershire ; 
▁ xxmaj but whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup northumberland 

▁ xxmaj welcome , my lord . xxmaj what is the news ? 
▁ xxup northumberland . xxmaj first , to thy sacred state wish i all happiness . 
▁ xxmaj the next news is , i have to xxmaj london sent 
▁ xxmaj the heads of xxmaj salisbury , xxmaj spencer , xxmaj blunt , and xxmaj kent . 
▁ xxmaj the manner of their taking may appear 
▁ xxmaj at large discoursed in this paper here . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj we thank thee , gentle xxmaj percy , for thy pains ; 
▁ xxmaj and to thy worth will add right worthy gains . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup fitzwater 

▁ xxup fitzwater . xxmaj my lord , i have from xxmaj oxford sent to xxmaj london 
▁ xxmaj the heads of xxmaj brocas and xxmaj sir xxmaj bennet xxmaj seely ; 
▁ xxmaj two of the dangerous consorted traitors 
▁ xxmaj that sought at xxmaj oxford thy dire overthrow . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj thy pains , xxmaj fitzwater , shall not be forgot ; 
▁ xxmaj right noble is thy merit , well i wot . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup percy , xxmaj with the xxup bishop xxup of xxup carlisle 

▁ xxup percy . xxmaj the grand conspirator , xxmaj abbot of xxmaj westminster , 
▁ xxmaj with clog of conscience and sour melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj hath yielded up his body to the grave ; 
▁ xxmaj but here is xxmaj carlisle living , to abide 
▁ xxmaj thy kingly doom , and sentence of his pride . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj carlisle , this is your doom : 
▁ xxmaj choose out some secret place , some reverend room , 
▁ xxmaj more than thou hast , and with it joy thy life ; 
▁ xxmaj so as thou liv'st in peace , die free from strife ; 
▁ xxmaj for though mine enemy thou hast ever been , 
▁ xxmaj high sparks of honour in thee have i seen . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup exton , with attendants , hearing a coffin 

▁ xxup exton . xxmaj great xxmaj king , within this coffin i present 
▁ xxmaj thy buried fear . xxmaj herein all breathless lies 
▁ xxmaj the mightiest of thy greatest enemies , 
▁ xxmaj richard of xxmaj bordeaux , by me hither brought . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj exton , i thank thee not ; for thou hast wrought 
▁ a deed of slander with thy fatal hand 
▁ xxmaj upon my head and all this famous land . 
▁ xxup exton . xxmaj from your own mouth , my lord , did i this deed . 
▁ xxup bolingbroke . xxmaj they love not poison that do poison need , 
▁ xxmaj nor do i thee . xxmaj though i did wish him dead , 
▁ i hate the murderer , love him murdered . 
▁ xxmaj the guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour , 
▁ xxmaj but neither my good word nor princely favour ; 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj cain go wander thorough shades of night , 
▁ xxmaj and never show thy head by day nor light . 
▁ xxmaj lords , i protest my soul is full of woe 
▁ xxmaj that blood should sprinkle me to make me grow . 
▁ xxmaj come , mourn with me for what i do lament , 
▁ xxmaj and put on sullen black incontinent . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make a voyage to the xxmaj holy xxmaj land , 
▁ xxmaj to wash this blood off from my guilty hand . 
▁ xxmaj march sadly after ; grace my mournings here 
▁ xxmaj in weeping after this untimely bier . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1593 

 xxup king xxup richard xxrep 3 i 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 


 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup edward xxup the xxup fourth 

▁ xxmaj sons to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup edward , xxup prince xxup of xxup wales afterwards xxup king xxup edward v 
▁ xxup richard , xxup duke xxup of xxup york , 

▁ xxmaj brothers to the xxmaj king 
▁ xxup george , xxup duke xxup of xxup clarence , 
▁ xxup richard , xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , afterwards xxup king xxup richard xxrep 3 i 

▁ a xxup young xxup son xxup of xxup clarence ( edward , xxmaj earl of xxmaj warwick ) 
▁ xxup henry , xxup earl xxup of xxup richmond , afterwards xxup king xxup henry xxup vii 
▁ xxup cardinal xxup bourchier , xxup archbishop xxup of xxup canterbury 
▁ xxup thomas xxup rotherham , xxup archbishop xxup of xxup york 
▁ xxup john xxup morton , xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup buckingham 
▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup norfolk 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup surrey , his son 
▁ xxup earl xxup rivers , brother to xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's xxmaj queen 
▁ xxup marquis xxup of xxup dorset and xxup lord xxup grey , her sons 
▁ xxup earl xxup of xxup oxford 
▁ xxup lord xxup hastings 
▁ xxup lord xxup lovel 
▁ xxup lord xxup stanley , called also xxup earl xxup of xxup derby 
▁ xxup sir xxup thomas xxup vaughan 
▁ xxup sir xxup richard xxup ratcliff 
▁ xxup sir xxup william xxup catesby 
▁ xxup sir xxup james xxup tyrrel 
▁ xxup sir xxup james xxup blount 
▁ xxup sir xxup walter xxup herbert 
▁ xxup sir xxup william xxup brandon 
▁ xxup sir xxup robert xxup brakenbury , xxmaj lieutenant of the xxmaj tower 
▁ xxup christopher xxup urswick , a priest 
▁ xxup lord xxup mayor xxup of xxup london 
▁ xxup sheriff xxup of xxup wiltshire 
▁ xxup hastings , a pursuivant 
▁ xxup tressel and xxup berkeley , gentlemen attending on xxmaj lady xxmaj anne 
▁ xxup elizabeth , xxmaj queen to xxmaj king xxmaj edward xxup iv 
▁ xxup margaret , widow of xxmaj king xxmaj henry xxup vi 
▁ xxup duchess xxup of xxup york , mother to xxmaj king xxmaj edward xxup iv 
▁ xxup lady xxup anne , widow of xxmaj edward , xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , son to xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj henry xxup vi ; afterwards married to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 
▁ a xxup young xxup daughter xxup of xxup clarence ( margaret xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj countess of xxmaj salisbury ) 
▁ xxmaj ghosts , of xxmaj richard 's victims 
▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj gentlemen , and xxmaj attendants ; xxmaj priest , xxmaj scrivener , xxmaj page , xxmaj bishops , 
▁ xxmaj aldermen , xxmaj citizens , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj messengers , xxmaj murderers , xxmaj keeper 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : xxmaj england 

 xxmaj king xxmaj richard the xxmaj third 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup richard , xxup duke xxup of xxup gloucester , solus 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now is the winter of our discontent 
▁ xxmaj made glorious summer by this sun of xxmaj york ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the clouds that lour'd upon our house 
▁ xxmaj in the deep bosom of the ocean buried . 
▁ xxmaj now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths ; 
▁ xxmaj our bruised arms hung up for monuments ; 
▁ xxmaj our stern alarums chang'd to merry meetings , 
▁ xxmaj our dreadful marches to delightful measures . 
▁ xxmaj grim - visag'd war hath smooth'd his wrinkled front , 
▁ xxmaj and now , instead of mounting barbed steeds 
▁ xxmaj to fright the souls of fearful adversaries , 
▁ xxmaj he capers nimbly in a lady 's chamber 
▁ xxmaj to the lascivious pleasing of a lute . 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i - that am not shap'd for sportive tricks , 
▁ xxmaj nor made to court an amorous looking - glass- 
▁ xxmaj i - that am rudely stamp'd , and want love 's majesty 
▁ xxmaj to strut before a wanton ambling nymph- 
▁ xxmaj i - that am curtail'd of this fair proportion , 
▁ xxmaj cheated of feature by dissembling nature , 
▁ xxmaj deform'd , unfinish'd , sent before my time 
▁ xxmaj into this breathing world scarce half made up , 
▁ xxmaj and that so lamely and unfashionable 
▁ xxmaj that dogs bark at me as i halt by them- 
▁ xxmaj why , xxup i , in this weak piping time of peace , 
▁ xxmaj have no delight to pass away the time , 
▁ xxmaj unless to spy my shadow in the sun 
▁ xxmaj and descant on mine own deformity . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , since i can not prove a lover 
▁ xxmaj to entertain these fair well - spoken days , 
▁ i am determined to prove a villain 
▁ xxmaj and hate the idle pleasures of these days . 
▁ xxmaj plots have i laid , inductions dangerous , 
▁ xxmaj by drunken prophecies , libels , and dreams , 
▁ xxmaj to set my brother xxmaj clarence and the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj in deadly hate the one against the other ; 
▁ xxmaj and if xxmaj king xxmaj edward be as true and just 
▁ xxmaj as i am subtle , false , and treacherous , 
▁ xxmaj this day should xxmaj clarence closely be mew'd up- 
▁ xxmaj about a prophecy which says that g 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj edward 's heirs the murderer shall be . 
▁ xxmaj dive , thoughts , down to my soul . xxmaj here xxmaj clarence comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clarence , guarded , and xxup brakenbury 

▁ xxmaj brother , good day . xxmaj what means this armed guard 
▁ xxmaj that waits upon your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj his xxmaj majesty , 
▁ xxmaj tend'ring my person 's safety , hath appointed 
▁ xxmaj this conduct to convey me to th ' xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj upon what cause ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj because my name is xxmaj george . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj alack , my lord , that fault is none of yours : 
▁ xxmaj he should , for that , commit your godfathers . 
▁ xxup o , belike his xxmaj majesty hath some intent 
▁ xxmaj that you should be new - christ'ned in the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxmaj but what 's the matter , xxmaj clarence ? xxmaj may i know ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj yea , xxmaj richard , when i know ; for i protest 
▁ xxmaj as yet i do not ; but , as i can learn , 
▁ xxmaj he hearkens after prophecies and dreams , 
▁ xxmaj and from the cross - row plucks the letter xxup g , 
▁ xxmaj and says a wizard told him that by g 
▁ xxmaj his issue disinherited should be ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for my name of xxmaj george begins with xxup g , 
▁ xxmaj it follows in his thought that i am he . 
▁ xxmaj these , as i learn , and such like toys as these 
▁ xxmaj hath mov'd his xxmaj highness to commit me now . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , this it is when men are rul'd by women : 
▁ ' tis not the xxmaj king that sends you to the xxmaj tower ; 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lady xxmaj grey his wife , xxmaj clarence , ' tis she 
▁ xxmaj that tempers him to this extremity . 
▁ xxmaj was it not she and that good man of worship , 
▁ xxmaj antony xxmaj woodville , her brother there , 
▁ xxmaj that made him send xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings to the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj from whence this present day he is delivered ? 
▁ xxmaj we are not safe , xxmaj clarence ; we are not safe . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj by heaven , i think there is no man is secure 
▁ xxmaj but the xxmaj queen 's kindred , and night - walking heralds 
▁ xxmaj that trudge betwixt the xxmaj king and xxmaj mistress xxmaj shore . 
▁ xxmaj heard you not what an humble suppliant 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings was , for her delivery ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj humbly complaining to her deity 
▁ xxmaj got my xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain his liberty . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell you what - i think it is our way , 
▁ xxmaj if we will keep in favour with the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj to be her men and wear her livery : 
▁ xxmaj the jealous o'er - worn widow , and herself , 
▁ xxmaj since that our brother dubb'd them gentlewomen , 
▁ xxmaj are mighty gossips in our monarchy . 
▁ xxup brakenbury . i beseech your xxmaj graces both to pardon me : 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj majesty hath straitly given in charge 
▁ xxmaj that no man shall have private conference , 
▁ xxmaj of what degree soever , with your brother . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj even so ; an't please your worship , xxmaj brakenbury , 
▁ xxmaj you may partake of any thing we say : 
▁ xxmaj we speak no treason , man ; we say the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj is wise and virtuous , and his noble queen 
▁ xxmaj well struck in years , fair , and not jealous ; 
▁ xxmaj we say that xxmaj shore 's wife hath a pretty foot , 
▁ a cherry lip , a bonny eye , a passing pleasing tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj and that the xxmaj queen 's kindred are made gentlefolks . 
▁ xxmaj how say you , sir ? xxmaj can you deny all this ? 
▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj with this , my lord , myself have naught to do . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj naught to do with xxmaj mistress xxmaj shore ! i tell thee , 
▁ fellow , 
▁ xxmaj he that doth naught with her , excepting one , 
▁ xxmaj were best to do it secretly alone . 
▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj what one , my lord ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj her husband , knave ! xxmaj wouldst thou betray me ? 
▁ xxup brakenbury . i do beseech your xxmaj grace to pardon me , and 
▁ withal 
▁ xxmaj forbear your conference with the noble xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj we know thy charge , xxmaj brakenbury , and will 
▁ obey . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj we are the xxmaj queen 's abjects and must obey . 
▁ xxmaj brother , farewell ; i will unto the xxmaj king ; 
▁ xxmaj and whatsoe'er you will employ me in- 
▁ xxmaj were it to call xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's widow sister- 
▁ i will perform it to enfranchise you . 
▁ xxmaj meantime , this deep disgrace in brotherhood 
▁ xxmaj touches me deeper than you can imagine . 
▁ xxup clarence . i know it pleaseth neither of us well . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well , your imprisonment shall not be long ; 
▁ i will deliver or else lie for you . 
▁ xxmaj meantime , have patience . 
▁ xxup clarence . i must perforce . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup clarence , xxup brakenbury , and guard 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return . 
▁ xxmaj simple , plain xxmaj clarence , i do love thee so 
▁ xxmaj that i will shortly send thy soul to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj if heaven will take the present at our hands . 
▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? xxmaj the new - delivered xxmaj hastings ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup hastings 

▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj good time of day unto my gracious lord ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj as much unto my good xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain ! 
▁ xxmaj well are you welcome to the open air . 
▁ xxmaj how hath your lordship brook'd imprisonment ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj with patience , noble lord , as prisoners must ; 
▁ xxmaj but i shall live , my lord , to give them thanks 
▁ xxmaj that were the cause of my imprisonment . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj no doubt , no doubt ; and so shall xxmaj clarence too ; 
▁ xxmaj for they that were your enemies are his , 
▁ xxmaj and have prevail'd as much on him as you . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj more pity that the eagles should be mew'd 
▁ xxmaj whiles kites and buzzards prey at liberty . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what news abroad ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj no news so bad abroad as this at home : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king is sickly , weak , and melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj and his physicians fear him mightily . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj now , by xxmaj saint xxmaj john , that news is bad indeed . 
▁ xxup o , he hath kept an evil diet long 
▁ xxmaj and overmuch consum'd his royal person ! 
▁ ' tis very grievous to be thought upon . 
▁ xxmaj where is he ? xxmaj in his bed ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj he is . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj go you before , and i will follow you . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup hastings 
▁ xxmaj he can not live , i hope , and must not die 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj george be pack'd with posthorse up to heaven . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll in to urge his hatred more to xxmaj clarence 
▁ xxmaj with lies well steel'd with weighty arguments ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if i fail not in my deep intent , 
▁ xxmaj clarence hath not another day to live ; 
▁ xxmaj which done , xxmaj god take xxmaj king xxmaj edward to his mercy , 
▁ xxmaj and leave the world for me to bustle in ! 
▁ xxmaj for then xxmaj i 'll marry xxmaj warwick 's youngest daughter . 
▁ xxmaj what though i kill'd her husband and her father ? 
▁ xxmaj the readiest way to make the wench amends 
▁ xxmaj is to become her husband and her father ; 
▁ xxmaj the which will xxmaj i - not all so much for love 
▁ xxmaj as for another secret close intent 
▁ xxmaj by marrying her which i must reach unto . 
▁ xxmaj but yet i run before my horse to market . 
▁ xxmaj clarence still breathes ; xxmaj edward still lives and reigns ; 
▁ xxmaj when they are gone , then must i count my gains . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj another street 

 xxmaj enter corpse of xxup king xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth , with halberds to guard it ; 
 xxup lady xxup anne being the mourner , attended by xxup tressel and xxup berkeley 

▁ xxup anne . xxmaj set down , set down your honourable load- 
▁ xxmaj if honour may be shrouded in a hearse ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst i awhile obsequiously lament 
▁ xxmaj th ' untimely fall of virtuous xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxmaj poor key - cold figure of a holy king ! 
▁ xxmaj pale ashes of the house of xxmaj lancaster ! 
▁ xxmaj thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood ! 
▁ xxmaj be it lawful that i invocate thy ghost 
▁ xxmaj to hear the lamentations of poor xxmaj anne , 
▁ xxmaj wife to thy xxmaj edward , to thy slaughtered son , 
▁ xxmaj stabb'd by the self - same hand that made these wounds . 
▁ xxmaj lo , in these windows that let forth thy life 
▁ i pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes . 
▁ xxup o , cursed be the hand that made these holes ! 
▁ xxmaj cursed the heart that had the heart to do it ! 
▁ xxmaj cursed the blood that let this blood from hence ! 
▁ xxmaj more direful hap betide that hated wretch 
▁ xxmaj that makes us wretched by the death of thee 
▁ xxmaj than i can wish to adders , spiders , toads , 
▁ xxmaj or any creeping venom'd thing that lives ! 
▁ xxmaj if ever he have child , abortive be it , 
▁ xxmaj prodigious , and untimely brought to light , 
▁ xxmaj whose ugly and unnatural aspect 
▁ xxmaj may fright the hopeful mother at the view , 
▁ xxmaj and that be heir to his unhappiness ! 
▁ xxmaj if ever he have wife , let her be made 
▁ xxmaj more miserable by the death of him 
▁ xxmaj than i am made by my young lord and thee ! 
▁ xxmaj come , now towards xxmaj chertsey with your holy load , 
▁ xxmaj taken from xxmaj paul 's to be interred there ; 
▁ xxmaj and still as you are weary of this weight 
▁ xxmaj rest you , whiles i lament xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's corse . 
▁ [ the bearers take up the coffin ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj stay , you that bear the corse , and set it down . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj what black magician conjures up this fiend 
▁ xxmaj to stop devoted charitable deeds ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj villains , set down the corse ; or , by xxmaj saint xxmaj paul , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make a corse of him that disobeys ! 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj my lord , stand back , and let the coffin 
▁ pass . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj unmannerd dog ! xxmaj stand thou , when i command . 
▁ xxmaj advance thy halberd higher than my breast , 
▁ xxmaj or , by xxmaj saint xxmaj paul , xxmaj i 'll strike thee to my foot 
▁ xxmaj and spurn upon thee , beggar , for thy boldness . 
▁ [ the bearers set down the coffin ] 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj what , do you tremble ? xxmaj are you all afraid ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , i blame you not , for you are mortal , 
▁ xxmaj and mortal eyes can not endure the devil . 
▁ xxmaj avaunt , thou dreadful minister of hell ! 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst but power over his mortal body , 
▁ xxmaj his soul thou canst not have ; therefore , be gone . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sweet saint , for charity , be not so curst . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj foul devil , for xxmaj god 's sake , hence and trouble us not ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou hast made the happy earth thy hell 
▁ xxmaj fill'd it with cursing cries and deep exclaims . 
▁ xxmaj if thou delight to view thy heinous deeds , 
▁ xxmaj behold this pattern of thy butcheries . 
▁ xxup o , gentlemen , see , see ! xxmaj dead xxmaj henry 's wounds 
▁ xxmaj open their congeal'd mouths and bleed afresh . 
▁ xxmaj blush , blush , thou lump of foul deformity , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis thy presence that exhales this blood 
▁ xxmaj from cold and empty veins where no blood dwells ; 
▁ xxmaj thy deeds inhuman and unnatural 
▁ xxmaj provokes this deluge most unnatural . 
▁ o xxmaj god , which this blood mad'st , revenge his death ! 
▁ o earth , which this blood drink'st , revenge his death ! 
▁ xxmaj either , heav'n , with lightning strike the murd'rer dead ; 
▁ xxmaj or , earth , gape open wide and eat him quick , 
▁ xxmaj as thou dost swallow up this good king 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj which his hell - govern'd arm hath butchered . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj lady , you know no rules of charity , 
▁ xxmaj which renders good for bad , blessings for curses . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj villain , thou knowest nor law of xxmaj god nor man : 
▁ xxmaj no beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj but i know none , and therefore am no beast . 
▁ xxup anne . o wonderful , when devils tell the truth ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj more wonderful when angels are so angry . 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe , divine perfection of a woman , 
▁ xxmaj of these supposed crimes to give me leave 
▁ xxmaj by circumstance but to acquit myself . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj vouchsafe , diffus'd infection of a man , 
▁ xxmaj of these known evils but to give me leave 
▁ xxmaj by circumstance to accuse thy cursed self . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj fairer than tongue can name thee , let me have 
▁ xxmaj some patient leisure to excuse myself . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj fouler than heart can think thee , thou canst make 
▁ xxmaj no excuse current but to hang thyself . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj by such despair i should accuse myself . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj and by despairing shalt thou stand excused 
▁ xxmaj for doing worthy vengeance on thyself 
▁ xxmaj that didst unworthy slaughter upon others . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj say that i slew them not ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj then say they were not slain . 
▁ xxmaj but dead they are , and , devilish slave , by thee . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i did not kill your husband . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj why , then he is alive . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj nay , he is dead , and slain by xxmaj edward 's hands . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj in thy foul throat thou liest : xxmaj queen xxmaj margaret saw 
▁ xxmaj thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood ; 
▁ xxmaj the which thou once didst bend against her breast , 
▁ xxmaj but that thy brothers beat aside the point . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i was provoked by her sland'rous tongue 
▁ xxmaj that laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind , 
▁ xxmaj that never dream'st on aught but butcheries . 
▁ xxmaj didst thou not kill this king ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . i grant ye . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj dost grant me , hedgehog ? xxmaj then , xxmaj god grant me to 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed ! 
▁ xxup o , he was gentle , mild , and virtuous ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the better for the xxmaj king of xxmaj heaven , that hath 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj he is in heaven , where thou shalt never come . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj let him thank me that holp to send him 
▁ thither , 
▁ xxmaj for he was fitter for that place than earth . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj and thou unfit for any place but hell . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj yes , one place else , if you will hear me name it . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj some dungeon . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj your bed - chamber . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj so will it , madam , till i lie with you . 
▁ xxup anne . i hope so . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i know so . xxmaj but , gentle xxmaj lady xxmaj anne , 
▁ xxmaj to leave this keen encounter of our wits , 
▁ xxmaj and fall something into a slower method- 
▁ xxmaj is not the causer of the timeless deaths 
▁ xxmaj of these xxmaj plantagenets , xxmaj henry and xxmaj edward , 
▁ xxmaj as blameful as the executioner ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj thou wast the cause and most accurs'd effect . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj your beauty was the cause of that effect- 
▁ xxmaj your beauty that did haunt me in my sleep 
▁ xxmaj to undertake the death of all the world 
▁ xxmaj so i might live one hour in your sweet bosom . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj if i thought that , i tell thee , homicide , 
▁ xxmaj these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj these eyes could not endure that beauty 's 
▁ wreck ; 
▁ xxmaj you should not blemish it if i stood by . 
▁ xxmaj as all the world is cheered by the sun , 
▁ xxmaj so i by that ; it is my day , my life . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj black night o'ershade thy day , and death thy life ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj curse not thyself , fair creature ; thou art both . 
▁ xxup anne . i would i were , to be reveng'd on thee . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj it is a quarrel most unnatural , 
▁ xxmaj to be reveng'd on him that loveth thee . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj it is a quarrel just and reasonable , 
▁ xxmaj to be reveng'd on him that kill'd my husband . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he that bereft thee , lady , of thy husband 
▁ xxmaj did it to help thee to a better husband . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj his better doth not breathe upon the earth . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he lives that loves thee better than he could . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj name him . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj plantagenet . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj why , that was he . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the self - same name , but one of better nature . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj here . [ she spits at him ] xxmaj why dost thou spit 
▁ at me ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj would it were mortal poison , for thy sake ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj never came poison from so sweet a place . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj never hung poison on a fouler toad . 
▁ xxmaj out of my sight ! xxmaj thou dost infect mine eyes . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj thine eyes , sweet lady , have infected mine . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj would they were basilisks to strike thee dead ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . i would they were , that i might die at once ; 
▁ xxmaj for now they kill me with a living death . 
▁ xxmaj those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears , 
▁ xxmaj sham'd their aspects with store of childish drops- 
▁ xxmaj these eyes , which never shed remorseful tear , 
▁ xxmaj no , when my father xxmaj york and xxmaj edward wept 
▁ xxmaj to hear the piteous moan that xxmaj rutland made 
▁ xxmaj when black - fac'd xxmaj clifford shook his sword at him ; 
▁ xxmaj nor when thy warlike father , like a child , 
▁ xxmaj told the sad story of my father 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and twenty times made pause to sob and weep 
▁ xxmaj that all the standers - by had wet their cheeks 
▁ xxmaj like trees bedash'd with rain - in that sad time 
▁ xxmaj my manly eyes did scorn an humble tear ; 
▁ xxmaj and what these sorrows could not thence exhale 
▁ xxmaj thy beauty hath , and made them blind with weeping . 
▁ i never sued to friend nor enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj my tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word ; 
▁ xxmaj but , now thy beauty is propos'd my fee , 
▁ xxmaj my proud heart sues , and prompts my tongue to speak . 
▁ [ she looks scornfully at him ] 
▁ xxmaj teach not thy lip such scorn ; for it was made 
▁ xxmaj for kissing , lady , not for such contempt . 
▁ xxmaj if thy revengeful heart can not forgive , 
▁ xxmaj lo here i lend thee this sharp - pointed sword ; 
▁ xxmaj which if thou please to hide in this true breast 
▁ xxmaj and let the soul forth that adoreth thee , 
▁ i lay it naked to the deadly stroke , 
▁ xxmaj and humbly beg the death upon my knee . 
▁ [ he lays his breast open ; she offers at it with his sword ] 
▁ xxmaj nay , do not pause ; for i did kill xxmaj king xxmaj henry- 
▁ xxmaj but ' twas thy beauty that provoked me . 
▁ xxmaj nay , now dispatch ; ' twas i that stabb'd young xxmaj edward- 
▁ xxmaj but ' twas thy heavenly face that set me on . 
▁ [ she falls the sword ] 
▁ xxmaj take up the sword again , or take up me . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj arise , dissembler ; though i wish thy death , 
▁ i will not be thy executioner . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj then bid me kill myself , and i will do it ; 
▁ xxup anne . i have already . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj that was in thy rage . 
▁ xxmaj speak it again , and even with the word 
▁ xxmaj this hand , which for thy love did kill thy love , 
▁ xxmaj shall for thy love kill a far truer love ; 
▁ xxmaj to both their deaths shalt thou be accessary . 
▁ xxup anne . i would i knew thy heart . 
▁ xxup gloucester . ' tis figur'd in my tongue . 
▁ xxup anne . i fear me both are false . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj then never was man true . 
▁ xxup anne . well put up your sword . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj say , then , my peace is made . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj that shalt thou know hereafter . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj but shall i live in hope ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj all men , i hope , live so . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj vouchsafe to wear this ring . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj to take is not to give . [ puts on the ring ] 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj look how my ring encompasseth thy finger , 
▁ xxmaj even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart ; 
▁ xxmaj wear both of them , for both of them are thine . 
▁ xxmaj and if thy poor devoted servant may 
▁ xxmaj but beg one favour at thy gracious hand , 
▁ xxmaj thou dost confirm his happiness for ever . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj what is it ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj that it may please you leave these sad designs 
▁ xxmaj to him that hath most cause to be a mourner , 
▁ xxmaj and presently repair to xxmaj crosby xxmaj house ; 
▁ xxmaj where - after i have solemnly interr'd 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj chertsey monast'ry this noble king , 
▁ xxmaj and wet his grave with my repentant tears- 
▁ i will with all expedient duty see you . 
▁ xxmaj for divers unknown reasons , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj grant me this boon . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj with all my heart ; and much it joys me too 
▁ xxmaj to see you are become so penitent . 
▁ xxmaj tressel and xxmaj berkeley , go along with me . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj bid me farewell . 
▁ xxup anne . ' tis more than you deserve ; 
▁ xxmaj but since you teach me how to flatter you , 
▁ xxmaj imagine i have said farewell already . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt two xxup gentlemen xxmaj with xxup lady xxup anne 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sirs , take up the corse . 
▁ xxup gentlemen . xxmaj towards xxmaj chertsey , noble lord ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj no , to xxmaj white xxmaj friars ; there attend my coming . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup gloucester 
▁ xxmaj was ever woman in this humour woo'd ? 
▁ xxmaj was ever woman in this humour won ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have her ; but i will not keep her long . 
▁ xxmaj what ! i that kill'd her husband and his father- 
▁ xxmaj to take her in her heart 's extremest hate , 
▁ xxmaj with curses in her mouth , tears in her eyes , 
▁ xxmaj the bleeding witness of my hatred by ; 
▁ xxmaj having xxmaj god , her conscience , and these bars against me , 
▁ xxmaj and i no friends to back my suit at all 
▁ xxmaj but the plain devil and dissembling looks , 
▁ xxmaj and yet to win her , all the world to nothing ! 
▁ xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj hath she forgot already that brave prince , 
▁ xxmaj edward , her lord , whom xxup i , some three months since , 
▁ xxmaj stabb'd in my angry mood at xxmaj tewksbury ? 
▁ a sweeter and a lovelier gentleman- 
▁ xxmaj fram'd in the prodigality of nature , 
▁ xxmaj young , valiant , wise , and no doubt right royal- 
▁ xxmaj the spacious world can not again afford ; 
▁ xxmaj and will she yet abase her eyes on me , 
▁ xxmaj that cropp'd the golden prime of this sweet prince 
▁ xxmaj and made her widow to a woeful bed ? 
▁ xxmaj on me , whose all not equals xxmaj edward 's moiety ? 
▁ xxmaj on me , that halts and am misshapen thus ? 
▁ xxmaj my dukedom to a beggarly denier , 
▁ i do mistake my person all this while . 
▁ xxmaj upon my life , she finds , although i can not , 
▁ xxmaj myself to be a marv'llous proper man . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be at charges for a looking - glass , 
▁ xxmaj and entertain a score or two of tailors 
▁ xxmaj to study fashions to adorn my body . 
▁ xxmaj since i am crept in favour with myself , 
▁ i will maintain it with some little cost . 
▁ xxmaj but first xxmaj i 'll turn yon fellow in his grave , 
▁ xxmaj and then return lamenting to my love . 
▁ xxmaj shine out , fair sun , till i have bought a glass , 
▁ xxmaj that i may see my shadow as i pass . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup elizabeth , xxup lord xxup rivers , and xxup lord xxup grey 

▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj have patience , madam ; there 's no doubt his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj will soon recover his accustom'd health . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj in that you brook it ill , it makes him worse ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , for xxmaj god 's sake , entertain good comfort , 
▁ xxmaj and cheer his xxmaj grace with quick and merry eyes . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj if he were dead , what would betide on 
▁ me ? 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj no other harm but loss of such a lord . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj the loss of such a lord includes all 
▁ harms . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj the heavens have bless'd you with a goodly son 
▁ xxmaj to be your comforter when he is gone . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ah , he is young ; and his minority 
▁ xxmaj is put unto the trust of xxmaj richard xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ a man that loves not me , nor none of you . 
▁ xxup river . xxmaj is it concluded he shall be xxmaj protector ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj it is determin'd , not concluded yet ; 
▁ xxmaj but so it must be , if the xxmaj king miscarry . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham and xxup derby 

▁ xxup grey . xxmaj here come the xxmaj lords of xxmaj buckingham and xxmaj derby . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj good time of day unto your royal xxmaj grace ! 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj god make your xxmaj majesty joyful as you have been . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj the xxmaj countess xxmaj richmond , good my xxmaj lord 
▁ of xxmaj derby , 
▁ xxmaj to your good prayer will scarcely say amen . 
▁ xxmaj yet , xxmaj derby , notwithstanding she 's your wife 
▁ xxmaj and loves not me , be you , good lord , assur'd 
▁ i hate not you for her proud arrogance . 
▁ xxup derby . i do beseech you , either not believe 
▁ xxmaj the envious slanders of her false accusers ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if she be accus'd on true report , 
▁ xxmaj bear with her weakness , which i think proceeds 
▁ xxmaj from wayward sickness and no grounded malice . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj saw you the xxmaj king to - day , my xxmaj lord of 
▁ xxmaj derby ? 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj but now the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham and i 
▁ xxmaj are come from visiting his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj what likelihood of his amendment , 
▁ xxmaj lords ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj madam , good hope ; his xxmaj grace speaks 
▁ cheerfully . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj god grant him health ! xxmaj did you confer 
▁ with him ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj ay , madam ; he desires to make atonement 
▁ xxmaj between the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester and your brothers , 
▁ xxmaj and between them and my xxmaj lord xxmaj chamberlain ; 
▁ xxmaj and sent to warn them to his royal presence . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj would all were well ! xxmaj but that will 
▁ never be . 
▁ i fear our happiness is at the height . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester , xxup hastings , and xxup dorset 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj they do me wrong , and i will not endure it . 
▁ xxmaj who is it that complains unto the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , forsooth , am stern and love them not ? 
▁ xxmaj by holy xxmaj paul , they love his xxmaj grace but lightly 
▁ xxmaj that fill his ears with such dissentious rumours . 
▁ xxmaj because i can not flatter and look fair , 
▁ xxmaj smile in men 's faces , smooth , deceive , and cog , 
▁ xxmaj duck with xxmaj french nods and apish courtesy , 
▁ i must be held a rancorous enemy . 
▁ xxmaj can not a plain man live and think no harm 
▁ xxmaj but thus his simple truth must be abus'd 
▁ xxmaj with silken , sly , insinuating xxmaj jacks ? 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj to who in all this presence speaks your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj to thee , that hast nor honesty nor grace . 
▁ xxmaj when have i injur'd thee ? when done thee wrong , 
▁ xxmaj or thee , or thee , or any of your faction ? 
▁ a plague upon you all ! xxmaj his royal xxmaj grace- 
▁ xxmaj whom xxmaj god preserve better than you would wish!- 
▁ xxmaj can not be quiet searce a breathing while 
▁ xxmaj but you must trouble him with lewd complaints . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj brother of xxmaj gloucester , you mistake the 
▁ matter . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king , on his own royal disposition 
▁ xxmaj and not provok'd by any suitor else- 
▁ xxmaj aiming , belike , at your interior hatred 
▁ xxmaj that in your outward action shows itself 
▁ xxmaj against my children , brothers , and myself- 
▁ xxmaj makes him to send that he may learn the ground . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i can not tell ; the world is grown so bad 
▁ xxmaj that wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch . 
▁ xxmaj since every xxmaj jack became a gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj there 's many a gentle person made a xxmaj jack . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj come , come , we know your meaning , 
▁ brother xxmaj gloucester : 
▁ xxmaj you envy my advancement and my friends ' ; 
▁ xxmaj god grant we never may have need of you ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj meantime , xxmaj god grants that i have need of you . 
▁ xxmaj our brother is imprison'd by your means , 
▁ xxmaj myself disgrac'd , and the nobility 
▁ xxmaj held in contempt ; while great promotions 
▁ xxmaj are daily given to ennoble those 
▁ xxmaj that scarce some two days since were worth a noble . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj by xxmaj him that rais'd me to this careful 
▁ height 
▁ xxmaj from that contented hap which i enjoy'd , 
▁ i never did incense his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj against the xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence , but have been 
▁ xxmaj an earnest advocate to plead for him . 
▁ xxmaj my lord , you do me shameful injury 
▁ xxmaj falsely to draw me in these vile suspects . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj you may deny that you were not the mean 
▁ xxmaj of my xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings ' late imprisonment . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj she may , my lord ; for- 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj she may , xxmaj lord xxmaj rivers ? xxmaj why , who knows 
▁ not so ? 
▁ xxmaj she may do more , sir , than denying that : 
▁ xxmaj she may help you to many fair preferments 
▁ xxmaj and then deny her aiding hand therein , 
▁ xxmaj and lay those honours on your high desert . 
▁ xxmaj what may she not ? xxmaj she may - ay , marry , may she- 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj what , marry , may she ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what , marry , may she ? xxmaj marry with a king , 
▁ a bachelor , and a handsome stripling too . 
▁ xxmaj iwis your grandam had a worser match . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester , i have too long 
▁ borne 
▁ xxmaj your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs . 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i will acquaint his xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj of those gross taunts that oft i have endur'd . 
▁ i had rather be a country servant - maid 
▁ xxmaj than a great queen with this condition- 
▁ xxmaj to be so baited , scorn'd , and stormed at . 

▁ xxmaj enter old xxup queen xxup margaret , behind 

▁ xxmaj small joy have i in being xxmaj england 's xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj and less'ned be that small , xxmaj god , i 
▁ beseech xxmaj him ! 
▁ xxmaj thy honour , state , and seat , is due to me . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what ! xxmaj threat you me with telling of the 
▁ xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxmaj tell him and spare not . xxmaj look what i have said 
▁ i will avouch't in presence of the xxmaj king . 
▁ i dare adventure to be sent to th ' xxmaj tow'r . 
▁ ' tis time to speak - my pains are quite forgot . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj out , devil ! i do remember them to 
▁ well : 
▁ xxmaj thou kill'dst my husband xxmaj henry in the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj edward , my poor son , at xxmaj tewksbury . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ere you were queen , ay , or your husband 
▁ xxmaj king , 
▁ i was a pack - horse in his great affairs , 
▁ a weeder - out of his proud adversaries , 
▁ a liberal rewarder of his friends ; 
▁ xxmaj to royalize his blood i spent mine own . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj ay , and much better blood than his or 
▁ thine . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj in all which time you and your husband xxmaj grey