xxbos xxmaj were factious for the house of xxmaj lancaster ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj rivers , so were you . xxmaj was not your husband 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj margaret 's battle at xxmaj saint xxmaj albans slain ? 
▁ xxmaj let me put in your minds , if you forget , 
▁ xxmaj what you have been ere this , and what you are ; 
▁ xxmaj withal , what i have been , and what i am . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . a murd'rous villain , and so still thou art . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj poor xxmaj clarence did forsake his father , xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj ay , and forswore himself - which xxmaj jesu pardon!- 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj which xxmaj god revenge ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj to fight on xxmaj edward 's party for the crown ; 
▁ xxmaj and for his meed , poor lord , he is mewed up . 
▁ i would to xxmaj god my heart were flint like xxmaj edward 's , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj edward 's soft and pitiful like mine . 
▁ i am too childish - foolish for this world . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj hie thee to hell for shame and leave this 
▁ world , 
▁ xxmaj thou cacodemon ; there thy kingdom is . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester , in those busy days 
▁ xxmaj which here you urge to prove us enemies , 
▁ xxmaj we follow'd then our lord , our sovereign king . 
▁ xxmaj so should we you , if you should be our king . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj if i should be ! i had rather be a pedlar . 
▁ xxmaj far be it from my heart , the thought thereof ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj as little joy , my lord , as you suppose 
▁ xxmaj you should enjoy were you this country 's king , 
▁ xxmaj as little joy you may suppose in me 
▁ xxmaj that i enjoy , being the xxmaj queen thereof . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj as little joy enjoys the xxmaj queen thereof ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am she , and altogether joyless . 
▁ i can no longer hold me patient . [ advancing ] 
▁ xxmaj hear me , you wrangling pirates , that fall out 
▁ xxmaj in sharing that which you have pill'd from me . 
▁ xxmaj which of you trembles not that looks on me ? 
▁ xxmaj if not that , i am xxmaj queen , you bow like subjects , 
▁ xxmaj yet that , by you depos'd , you quake like rebels ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , gentle villain , do not turn away ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj foul wrinkled witch , what mak'st thou in my 
▁ sight ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj but repetition of what thou hast marr'd , 
▁ xxmaj that will i make before i let thee go . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj wert thou not banished on pain of death ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . i was ; but i do find more pain in 
▁ banishment 
▁ xxmaj than death can yield me here by my abode . 
▁ a husband and a son thou ow'st to me ; 
▁ xxmaj and thou a kingdom ; all of you allegiance . 
▁ xxmaj this sorrow that i have by right is yours ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the pleasures you usurp are mine . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj the curse my noble father laid on thee , 
▁ xxmaj when thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper 
▁ xxmaj and with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and then to dry them gav'st the xxmaj duke a clout 
▁ xxmaj steep'd in the faultless blood of pretty xxmaj rutland- 
▁ xxmaj his curses then from bitterness of soul 
▁ xxmaj denounc'd against thee are all fall'n upon thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj god , not we , hath plagu'd thy bloody deed . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj so just is xxmaj god to right the innocent . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxup o , ' twas the foulest deed to slay that babe , 
▁ xxmaj and the most merciless that e'er was heard of ! 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj tyrants themselves wept when it was reported . 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj no man but prophesied revenge for it . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj northumberland , then present , wept to see it . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj what , were you snarling all before i came , 
▁ xxmaj ready to catch each other by the throat , 
▁ xxmaj and turn you all your hatred now on me ? 
▁ xxmaj did xxmaj york 's dread curse prevail so much with heaven 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj henry 's death , my lovely xxmaj edward 's death , 
▁ xxmaj their kingdom 's loss , my woeful banishment , 
▁ xxmaj should all but answer for that peevish brat ? 
▁ xxmaj can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven ? 
▁ xxmaj why then , give way , dull clouds , to my quick curses ! 
▁ xxmaj though not by war , by surfeit die your king , 
▁ xxmaj as ours by murder , to make him a king ! 
▁ xxmaj edward thy son , that now is xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj edward our son , that was xxmaj prince of xxmaj wales , 
▁ xxmaj die in his youth by like untimely violence ! 
▁ xxmaj thyself a queen , for me that was a queen , 
▁ xxmaj outlive thy glory , like my wretched self ! 
▁ xxmaj long mayest thou live to wail thy children 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and see another , as i see thee now , 
▁ xxmaj deck'd in thy rights , as thou art stall'd in mine ! 
▁ xxmaj long die thy happy days before thy death ; 
▁ xxmaj and , after many length'ned hours of grief , 
▁ xxmaj die neither mother , wife , nor xxmaj england 's xxmaj queen ! 
▁ xxmaj rivers and xxmaj dorset , you were standers by , 
▁ xxmaj and so wast thou , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , when my son 
▁ xxmaj was stabb'd with bloody daggers . xxmaj god , i pray him , 
▁ xxmaj that none of you may live his natural age , 
▁ xxmaj but by some unlook'd accident cut off ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj have done thy charm , thou hateful wither'd 
▁ hag . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj and leave out thee ? xxmaj stay , dog , for thou 
▁ shalt hear me . 
▁ xxmaj if heaven have any grievous plague in store 
▁ xxmaj exceeding those that i can wish upon thee , 
▁ xxup o , let them keep it till thy sins be ripe , 
▁ xxmaj and then hurl down their indignation 
▁ xxmaj on thee , the troubler of the poor world 's peace ! 
▁ xxmaj the worm of conscience still be - gnaw thy soul ! 
▁ xxmaj thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv'st , 
▁ xxmaj and take deep traitors for thy dearest friends ! 
▁ xxmaj no sleep close up that deadly eye of thine , 
▁ xxmaj unless it be while some tormenting dream 
▁ xxmaj affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils ! 
▁ xxmaj thou elvish - mark'd , abortive , rooting hog , 
▁ xxmaj thou that wast seal'd in thy nativity 
▁ xxmaj the slave of nature and the son of hell , 
▁ xxmaj thou slander of thy heavy mother 's womb , 
▁ xxmaj thou loathed issue of thy father 's loins , 
▁ xxmaj thou rag of honour , thou detested- 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj margaret ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj richard ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ha ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . i call thee not . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i cry thee mercy then , for i did think 
▁ xxmaj that thou hadst call'd me all these bitter names . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj why , so i did , but look'd for no reply . 
▁ xxup o , let me make the period to my curse ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . ' tis done by me , and ends in - margaret . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj thus have you breath'd your curse 
▁ against yourself . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj poor painted queen , vain flourish of my 
▁ fortune ! 
▁ xxmaj why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider 
▁ xxmaj whose deadly web ensnareth thee about ? 
▁ xxmaj fool , fool ! thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself . 
▁ xxmaj the day will come that thou shalt wish for me 
▁ xxmaj to help thee curse this poisonous bunch - back'd toad . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj false - boding woman , end thy frantic curse , 
▁ xxmaj lest to thy harm thou move our patience . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj foul shame upon you ! you have all 
▁ mov'd mine . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj were you well serv'd , you would be taught your 
▁ duty . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj to serve me well you all should do me 
▁ duty , 
▁ xxmaj teach me to be your queen and you my subjects . 
▁ xxup o , serve me well , and teach yourselves that duty ! 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj dispute not with her ; she is lunatic . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj peace , xxmaj master xxmaj marquis , you are malapert ; 
▁ xxmaj your fire - new stamp of honour is scarce current . 
▁ xxup o , that your young nobility could judge 
▁ xxmaj what ' twere to lose it and be miserable ! 
▁ xxmaj they that stand high have many blasts to shake them , 
▁ xxmaj and if they fall they dash themselves to pieces . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj good counsel , marry ; learn it , learn it , xxmaj marquis . 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj it touches you , my lord , as much as me . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , and much more ; but i was born so high , 
▁ xxmaj our aery buildeth in the cedar 's top , 
▁ xxmaj and dallies with the wind , and scorns the sun . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj and turns the sun to shade - alas ! alas ! 
▁ xxmaj witness my son , now in the shade of death , 
▁ xxmaj whose bright out - shining beams thy cloudy wrath 
▁ xxmaj hath in eternal darkness folded up . 
▁ xxmaj your aery buildeth in our aery 's nest . 
▁ o xxmaj god that seest it , do not suffer it ; 
▁ xxmaj as it is won with blood , lost be it so ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj peace , peace , for shame , if not for charity ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj urge neither charity nor shame to me . 
▁ xxmaj uncharitably with me have you dealt , 
▁ xxmaj and shamefully my hopes by you are butcher'd . 
▁ xxmaj my charity is outrage , life my shame ; 
▁ xxmaj and in that shame still live my sorrow 's rage ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj have done , have done . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . o princely xxmaj buckingham , xxmaj i 'll kiss thy 
▁ hand 
▁ xxmaj in sign of league and amity with thee . 
▁ xxmaj now fair befall thee and thy noble house ! 
▁ xxmaj thy garments are not spotted with our blood , 
▁ xxmaj nor thou within the compass of my curse . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj nor no one here ; for curses never pass 
▁ xxmaj the lips of those that breathe them in the air . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . i will not think but they ascend the sky 
▁ xxmaj and there awake xxmaj god 's gentle - sleeping peace . 
▁ o xxmaj buckingham , take heed of yonder dog ! 
▁ xxmaj look when he fawns , he bites ; and when he bites , 
▁ xxmaj his venom tooth will rankle to the death : 
▁ xxmaj have not to do with him , beware of him ; 
▁ xxmaj sin , death , and hell , have set their marks on him , 
▁ xxmaj and all their ministers attend on him . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what doth she say , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj buckingham ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj nothing that i respect , my gracious lord . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj what , dost thou scorn me for my gentle 
▁ counsel , 
▁ xxmaj and soothe the devil that i warn thee from ? 
▁ xxup o , but remember this another day , 
▁ xxmaj when he shall split thy very heart with sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj and say poor xxmaj margaret was a prophetess ! 
▁ xxmaj live each of you the subjects to his hate , 
▁ xxmaj and he to yours , and all of you to xxmaj god 's ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my hair doth stand an end to hear her curses . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj and so doth mine . i muse why she 's at liberty . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i can not blame her ; by xxmaj god 's holy xxmaj mother , 
▁ xxmaj she hath had too much wrong ; and i repent 
▁ xxmaj my part thereof that i have done to her . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . i never did her any to my knowledge . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj yet you have all the vantage of her wrong . 
▁ i was too hot to do somebody good 
▁ xxmaj that is too cold in thinking of it now . 
▁ xxmaj marry , as for xxmaj clarence , he is well repaid ; 
▁ xxmaj he is frank'd up to fatting for his pains ; 
▁ xxmaj god pardon them that are the cause thereof ! 
▁ xxup rivers . a virtuous and a xxmaj christian - like conclusion , 
▁ xxmaj to pray for them that have done scathe to us ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj so do i ever- [ aside ] being well advis'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for had i curs'd now , i had curs'd myself . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup catesby 

▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj madam , his xxmaj majesty doth can for you , 
▁ xxmaj and for your xxmaj grace , and you , my gracious lords . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj catesby , i come . xxmaj lords , will you go 
▁ with me ? 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj we wait upon your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup gloucester 
▁ xxup gloucester . i do the wrong , and first begin to brawl . 
▁ xxmaj the secret mischiefs that i set abroach 
▁ i lay unto the grievous charge of others . 
▁ xxmaj clarence , who i indeed have cast in darkness , 
▁ i do beweep to many simple gulls ; 
▁ xxmaj namely , to xxmaj derby , xxmaj hastings , xxmaj buckingham ; 
▁ xxmaj and tell them ' tis the xxmaj queen and her allies 
▁ xxmaj that stir the xxmaj king against the xxmaj duke my brother . 
▁ xxmaj now they believe it , and withal whet me 
▁ xxmaj to be reveng'd on xxmaj rivers , xxmaj dorset , xxmaj grey ; 
▁ xxmaj but then i sigh and , with a piece of xxmaj scripture , 
▁ xxmaj tell them that xxmaj god bids us do good for evil . 
▁ xxmaj and thus i clothe my naked villainy 
▁ xxmaj with odd old ends stol'n forth of holy writ , 
▁ xxmaj and seem a saint when most i play the devil . 

▁ xxmaj enter two xxup murderers 

▁ xxmaj but , soft , here come my executioners . 
▁ xxmaj how now , my hardy stout resolved mates ! 
▁ xxmaj are you now going to dispatch this thing ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj we are , my lord , and come to have the 
▁ warrant , 
▁ xxmaj that we may be admitted where he is . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj well thought upon ; i have it here about me . 
▁ [ gives the warrant ] 
▁ xxmaj when you have done , repair to xxmaj crosby xxmaj place . 
▁ xxmaj but , sirs , be sudden in the execution , 
▁ xxmaj withal obdurate , do not hear him plead ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj clarence is well - spoken , and perhaps 
▁ xxmaj may move your hearts to pity , if you mark him . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj tut , tut , my lord , we will not stand to 
▁ prate ; 
▁ xxmaj talkers are no good doers . xxmaj be assur'd 
▁ xxmaj we go to use our hands and not our tongues . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj your eyes drop millstones when fools ' eyes fall 
▁ tears . 
▁ i like you , lads ; about your business straight ; 
▁ xxmaj go , go , dispatch . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj we will , my noble lord . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj enter xxup clarence and xxup keeper 

▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj why looks your xxmaj grace so heavily to - day ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxup o , i have pass'd a miserable night , 
▁ xxmaj so full of fearful dreams , of ugly sights , 
▁ xxmaj that , as i am a xxmaj christian faithful man , 
▁ i would not spend another such a night 
▁ xxmaj though ' twere to buy a world of happy days- 
▁ xxmaj so full of dismal terror was the time ! 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj what was your dream , my lord ? i pray you 
▁ tell me . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj methoughts that i had broken from the xxmaj tower 
▁ xxmaj and was embark'd to cross to xxmaj burgundy ; 
▁ xxmaj and in my company my brother xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj who from my cabin tempted me to walk 
▁ xxmaj upon the hatches . xxmaj thence we look'd toward xxmaj england , 
▁ xxmaj and cited up a thousand heavy times , 
▁ xxmaj during the wars of xxmaj york and xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj that had befall'n us . xxmaj as we pac'd along 
▁ xxmaj upon the giddy footing of the hatches , 
▁ xxmaj methought that xxmaj gloucester stumbled , and in falling 
▁ xxmaj struck me , that thought to stay him , overboard 
▁ xxmaj into the tumbling billows of the main . 
▁ o xxmaj lord , methought what pain it was to drown , 
▁ xxmaj what dreadful noise of waters in my ears , 
▁ xxmaj what sights of ugly death within my eyes ! 
▁ xxmaj methoughts i saw a thousand fearful wrecks , 
▁ a thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon , 
▁ xxmaj wedges of gold , great anchors , heaps of pearl , 
▁ xxmaj inestimable stones , unvalued jewels , 
▁ xxmaj all scatt'red in the bottom of the sea ; 
▁ xxmaj some lay in dead men 's skulls , and in the holes 
▁ xxmaj where eyes did once inhabit there were crept , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere in scorn of eyes , reflecting gems , 
▁ xxmaj that woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep 
▁ xxmaj and mock'd the dead bones that lay scatt'red by . 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj had you such leisure in the time of death 
▁ xxmaj to gaze upon these secrets of the deep ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj methought i had ; and often did i strive 
▁ xxmaj to yield the ghost , but still the envious flood 
▁ xxmaj stopp'd in my soul and would not let it forth 
▁ xxmaj to find the empty , vast , and wand'ring air ; 
▁ xxmaj but smother'd it within my panting bulk , 
▁ xxmaj who almost burst to belch it in the sea . 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj awak'd you not in this sore agony ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj no , no , my dream was lengthen'd after life . 
▁ xxup o , then began the tempest to my soul ! 
▁ i pass'd , methought , the melancholy flood 
▁ xxmaj with that sour ferryman which poets write of , 
▁ xxmaj unto the kingdom of perpetual night . 
▁ xxmaj the first that there did greet my stranger soul 
▁ xxmaj was my great father - in - law , renowned xxmaj warwick , 
▁ xxmaj who spake aloud ' what scourge for perjury 
▁ xxmaj can this dark monarchy afford false xxmaj clarence ? ' 
▁ xxmaj and so he vanish'd . xxmaj then came wand'ring by 
▁ a shadow like an angel , with bright hair 
▁ xxmaj dabbled in blood , and he shriek'd out aloud 
▁ ' clarence is come - false , fleeting , perjur'd xxmaj clarence , 
▁ xxmaj that stabb'd me in the field by xxmaj tewksbury . 
▁ xxmaj seize on him , xxmaj furies , take him unto torment ! ' 
▁ xxmaj with that , methoughts , a legion of foul fiends 
▁ xxmaj environ'd me , and howled in mine ears 
▁ xxmaj such hideous cries that , with the very noise , 
▁ i trembling wak'd , and for a season after 
▁ xxmaj could not believe but that i was in hell , 
▁ xxmaj such terrible impression made my dream . 
▁ xxup keeper . xxmaj no marvel , lord , though it affrighted you ; 
▁ i am afraid , methinks , to hear you tell it . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj ah , xxmaj keeper , xxmaj keeper , i have done these things 
▁ xxmaj that now give evidence against my soul 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj edward 's sake , and see how he requites me ! 
▁ o xxmaj god ! xxmaj if my deep prayers can not appease xxmaj thee , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj thou wilt be aveng'd on my misdeeds , 
▁ xxmaj yet execute xxmaj thy wrath in me alone ; 
▁ xxup o , spare my guiltless wife and my poor children ! 
▁ xxup keeper , i prithee sit by me awhile ; 
▁ xxmaj my soul is heavy , and i fain would sleep . 
▁ xxup keeper . i will , my lord . xxmaj god give your xxmaj grace good rest . 
▁ [ clarence sleeps ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup brakenbury the xxmaj lieutenant 

▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours , 
▁ xxmaj makes the night morning and the noontide night . 
▁ xxmaj princes have but their titles for their glories , 
▁ xxmaj an outward honour for an inward toil ; 
▁ xxmaj and for unfelt imaginations 
▁ xxmaj they often feel a world of restless cares , 
▁ xxmaj so that between their tides and low name 
▁ xxmaj there 's nothing differs but the outward fame . 

▁ xxmaj enter the two xxup murderers 

▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj ho ! who 's here ? 
▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj what wouldst thou , fellow , and how cam'st 
▁ thou hither ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . i would speak with xxmaj clarence , and i came 
▁ hither on my legs . 
▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj what , so brief ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . ' tis better , sir , than to be tedious . xxmaj let 
▁ him see our commission and talk no more . 
▁ [ brakenbury reads it ] 
▁ xxup brakenbury . i am , in this , commanded to deliver 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj duke of xxmaj clarence to your hands . 
▁ i will not reason what is meant hereby , 
▁ xxmaj because i will be guiltless from the meaning . 
▁ xxmaj there lies the xxmaj duke asleep ; and there the keys . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj king and signify to him 
▁ xxmaj that thus i have resign'd to you my charge . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj you may , sir ; ' tis a point of wisdom . xxmaj fare 
▁ you well . xxmaj exeunt xxup brakenbury and xxup keeper 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj what , shall i stab him as he sleeps ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj no ; he 'll say ' twas done cowardly , when 
▁ he wakes . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj why , he shall never wake until the great 
▁ judgment - day . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj why , then he 'll say we stabb'd him 
▁ sleeping . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj the urging of that word judgment hath 
▁ bred a kind of remorse in me . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj what , art thou afraid ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj not to kill him , having a warrant ; but to 
▁ be damn'd for killing him , from the which no warrant can 
▁ defend me . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . i thought thou hadst been resolute . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj so i am , to let him live . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj i 'll back to the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester and 
▁ tell him so . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj nay , i prithee , stay a little . i hope this 
▁ passionate humour of mine will change ; it was wo nt to 
▁ hold me but while one tells twenty . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj how dost thou feel thyself now ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj faith , some certain dregs of conscience 
▁ are yet within me . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj remember our reward , when the deed 's 
▁ done . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj zounds , he dies ; i had forgot the reward . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj where 's thy conscience now ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxup o , in the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester 's purse ! 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj when he opens his purse to give us our 
▁ reward , thy conscience flies out . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . ' tis no matter ; let it go ; there 's few or 
▁ none will entertain it . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj what if it come to thee again ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj i 'll not meddle with it - it makes a man 
▁ coward : a man can not steal , but it accuseth him ; a man 
▁ can not swear , but it checks him ; a man can not lie with his 
▁ neighbour 's wife , but it detects him . ' tis a blushing shame- 
▁ fac'd spirit that mutinies in a man 's bosom ; it fills a man 
▁ full of obstacles : it made me once restore a purse of gold 
▁ that - by chance i found . xxmaj it beggars any man that keeps it . 
▁ xxmaj it is turn'd out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing ; 
▁ and every man that means to live well endeavours to trust 
▁ to himself and live without it . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj zounds , ' tis even now at my elbow , 
▁ persuading me not to kill the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj take the devil in thy mind and believe 
▁ him not ; he would insinuate with thee but to make the 
▁ sigh . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . i am strong - fram'd ; he can not prevail with 
▁ me . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj spoke like a tall man that respects thy 
▁ reputation . xxmaj come , shall we fall to work ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj take him on the costard with the hilts of 
▁ thy sword , and then chop him in the malmsey - butt in the 
▁ next room . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . o excellent device ! and make a sop of 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj soft ! he wakes . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj strike ! 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj no , we 'll reason with him . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj where art thou , xxmaj keeper ? xxmaj give me a cup of wine . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj you shall have wine enough , my lord , 
▁ anon . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj in xxmaj god 's name , what art thou ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . a man , as you are . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj but not as i am , royal . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj nor you as we are , loyal . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj thy voice is thunder , but thy looks are humble . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj my voice is now the xxmaj king 's , my looks 
▁ mine own . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj how darkly and how deadly dost thou speak ! 
▁ xxmaj your eyes do menace me . xxmaj why look you pale ? 
▁ xxmaj who sent you hither ? xxmaj wherefore do you come ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj to , to , to- 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj to murder me ? 
▁ xxup both xxup murderers . xxmaj ay , ay . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj you scarcely have the hearts to tell me so , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore can not have the hearts to do it . 
▁ xxmaj wherein , my friends , have i offended you ? 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj offended us you have not , but the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup clarence . i shall be reconcil'd to him again . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj never , my lord ; therefore prepare to die . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj are you drawn forth among a world of men 
▁ xxmaj to slay the innocent ? xxmaj what is my offence ? 
▁ xxmaj where is the evidence that doth accuse me ? 
▁ xxmaj what lawful quest have given their verdict up 
▁ xxmaj unto the frowning judge , or who pronounc'd 
▁ xxmaj the bitter sentence of poor xxmaj clarence ' death ? 
▁ xxmaj before i be convict by course of law , 
▁ xxmaj to threaten me with death is most unlawful . 
▁ i charge you , as you hope to have redemption 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj christ 's dear blood shed for our grievous sins , 
▁ xxmaj that you depart and lay no hands on me . 
▁ xxmaj the deed you undertake is damnable . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj what we will do , we do upon command . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj and he that hath commanded is our 
▁ xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj erroneous vassals ! the great xxmaj king of kings 
▁ xxmaj hath in the tables of his law commanded 
▁ xxmaj that thou shalt do no murder . xxmaj will you then 
▁ xxmaj spurn at his edict and fulfil a man 's ? 
▁ xxmaj take heed ; for he holds vengeance in his hand 
▁ xxmaj to hurl upon their heads that break his law . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj and that same vengeance doth he hurl 
▁ on thee 
▁ xxmaj for false forswearing , and for murder too ; 
▁ xxmaj thou didst receive the sacrament to fight 
▁ xxmaj in quarrel of the house of xxmaj lancaster . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj and like a traitor to the name of xxmaj god 
▁ xxmaj didst break that vow ; and with thy treacherous blade 
▁ xxmaj unripp'dst the bowels of thy sov'reign 's son . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj whom thou wast sworn to cherish and 
▁ defend . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj how canst thou urge xxmaj god 's dreadful law 
▁ to us , 
▁ xxmaj when thou hast broke it in such dear degree ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj alas ! for whose sake did i that ill deed ? 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj edward , for my brother , for his sake . 
▁ xxmaj he sends you not to murder me for this , 
▁ xxmaj for in that sin he is as deep as xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj god will be avenged for the deed , 
▁ xxup o , know you yet xxmaj he doth it publicly . 
▁ xxmaj take not the quarrel from xxmaj his pow'rful arm ; 
▁ xxmaj he needs no indirect or lawless course 
▁ xxmaj to cut off those that have offended xxmaj him . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj who made thee then a bloody minister 
▁ xxmaj when gallant - springing brave xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj that princely novice , was struck dead by thee ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj my brother 's love , the devil , and my rage . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj thy brother 's love , our duty , and thy 
▁ faults , 
▁ xxmaj provoke us hither now to slaughter thee . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj if you do love my brother , hate not me ; 
▁ i am his brother , and i love him well . 
▁ xxmaj if you are hir'd for meed , go back again , 
▁ xxmaj and i will send you to my brother xxmaj gloucester , 
▁ xxmaj who shall reward you better for my life 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj edward will for tidings of my death . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj you are deceiv'd : your brother xxmaj gloucester 
▁ hates you . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxup o , no , he loves me , and he holds me dear . 
▁ xxmaj go you to him from me . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj ay , so we will . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj tell him when that our princely father xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj bless'd his three sons with his victorious arm 
▁ xxmaj and charg'd us from his soul to love each other , 
▁ xxmaj he little thought of this divided friendship . 
▁ xxmaj bid xxmaj gloucester think of this , and he will weep . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj ay , millstones ; as he lesson'd us to weep . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxup o , do not slander him , for he is kind . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj right , as snow in harvest . xxmaj come , you 
▁ deceive yourself : 
▁ ' tis he that sends us to destroy you here . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj it can not be ; for he bewept my fortune 
▁ xxmaj and hugg'd me in his arms , and swore with sobs 
▁ xxmaj that he would labour my delivery . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj why , so he doth , when he delivers you 
▁ xxmaj from this earth 's thraldom to the joys of heaven . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj make peace with xxmaj god , for you must die , 
▁ my lord . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj have you that holy feeling in your souls 
▁ xxmaj to counsel me to make my peace with xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj and are you yet to your own souls so blind 
▁ xxmaj that you will war with xxmaj god by murd'ring me ? 
▁ xxup o , sirs , consider : they that set you on 
▁ xxmaj to do this deed will hate you for the deed . 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj what shall we do ? 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj relent , and save your souls . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj relent ! xxmaj no , ' tis cowardly and womanish . 
▁ xxup clarence . xxmaj not to relent is beastly , savage , devilish . 
▁ xxmaj which of you , if you were a prince 's son , 
▁ xxmaj being pent from liberty as i am now , 
▁ xxmaj if two such murderers as yourselves came to you , 
▁ xxmaj would not entreat for life ? 
▁ xxmaj my friend , i spy some pity in thy looks ; 
▁ xxup o , if thine eye be not a flatterer , 
▁ xxmaj come thou on my side and entreat for me- 
▁ xxmaj as you would beg were you in my distress . 
▁ a begging prince what beggar pities not ? 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . xxmaj look behind you , my lord . 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . [ stabbing him ] xxmaj take that , and that . xxmaj if all 
▁ this will not do , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll drown you in the malmsey - butt within . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the body 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . a bloody deed , and desperately 
▁ dispatch'd ! 
▁ xxmaj how fain , like xxmaj pilate , would i wash my hands 
▁ xxmaj of this most grievous murder ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup first xxup murderer 

▁ xxup first murderer - how now , what mean'st thou that thou 
▁ help'st me not ? 
▁ xxmaj by heavens , the xxmaj duke shall know how slack you have 
▁ been ! 
▁ xxup second xxup murderer . i would he knew that i had sav'd his 
▁ brother ! 
▁ xxmaj take thou the fee , and tell him what i say ; 
▁ xxmaj for i repent me that the xxmaj duke is slain . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup murderer . xxmaj so do not xxup i. xxmaj go , coward as thou art . 
▁ xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll go hide the body in some hole , 
▁ xxmaj till that the xxmaj duke give order for his burial ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i have my meed , i will away ; 
▁ xxmaj for this will out , and then i must not stay . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup edward sick , xxup queen xxup elizabeth , xxup dorset , xxup rivers , 
 xxup hastings , xxup buckingham , xxup grey , and others 

▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj why , so . xxmaj now have i done a good day 's 
▁ work . 
▁ xxmaj you peers , continue this united league . 
▁ i every day expect an embassage 
▁ xxmaj from my xxmaj redeemer to redeem me hence ; 
▁ xxmaj and more at peace my soul shall part to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj since i have made my friends at peace on earth . 
▁ xxmaj hastings and xxmaj rivers , take each other 's hand ; 
▁ xxmaj dissemble not your hatred , swear your love . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj by heaven , my soul is purg'd from grudging hate ; 
▁ xxmaj and with my hand i seal my true heart 's love . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj so thrive xxup i , as i truly swear the like ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj take heed you dally not before your king ; 
▁ xxmaj lest xxmaj he that is the supreme xxmaj king of kings 
▁ xxmaj confound your hidden falsehood and award 
▁ xxmaj either of you to be the other 's end . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj so prosper xxup i , as i swear perfect love ! 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj and xxup i , as i love xxmaj hastings with my heart ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj madam , yourself is not exempt from this ; 
▁ xxmaj nor you , son xxmaj dorset ; xxmaj buckingham , nor you : 
▁ xxmaj you have been factious one against the other . 
▁ xxmaj wife , love xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , let him kiss your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and what you do , do it unfeignedly . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj there , xxmaj hastings ; i will never more 
▁ remember 
▁ xxmaj our former hatred , so thrive i and mine ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj dorset , embrace him ; xxmaj hastings , love xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj marquis . 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj this interchange of love , i here protest , 
▁ xxmaj upon my part shall be inviolable . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj and so swear xxup i. [ they embrace ] 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj now , princely xxmaj buckingham , seal thou this 
▁ league 
▁ xxmaj with thy embracements to my wife 's allies , 
▁ xxmaj and make me happy in your unity . 
▁ xxup buckingham . [ to the xxup queen ] xxmaj whenever xxmaj buckingham 
▁ doth turn his hate 
▁ xxmaj upon your xxmaj grace , but with all duteous love 
▁ xxmaj doth cherish you and yours , xxmaj god punish me 
▁ xxmaj with hate in those where i expect most love ! 
▁ xxmaj when i have most need to employ a friend 
▁ xxmaj and most assured that he is a friend , 
▁ xxmaj deep , hollow , treacherous , and full of guile , 
▁ xxmaj be he unto me ! xxmaj this do i beg of xxmaj god 
▁ xxmaj when i am cold in love to you or yours . 
▁ [ they embrace ] 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . a pleasing cordial , princely xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj is this thy vow unto my sickly heart . 
▁ xxmaj there wanteth now our brother xxmaj gloucester here 
▁ xxmaj to make the blessed period of this peace . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj and , in good time , 
▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj sir xxmaj richard xxmaj ratcliff and the xxmaj duke . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester , and xxup ratcliff 
▁
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj good morrow to my sovereign king and 
▁ xxmaj queen ; 
▁ xxmaj and , princely peers , a happy time of day ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj happy , indeed , as we have spent the day . 
▁ xxmaj gloucester , we have done deeds of charity , 
▁ xxmaj made peace of enmity , fair love of hate , 
▁ xxmaj between these swelling wrong - incensed peers . 
▁ xxup gloucester . a blessed labour , my most sovereign lord . 
▁ xxmaj among this princely heap , if any here , 
▁ xxmaj by false intelligence or wrong surmise , 
▁ xxmaj hold me a foe- 
▁ xxmaj if i unwittingly , or in my rage , 
▁ xxmaj have aught committed that is hardly borne 
▁ xxmaj to any in this presence , i desire 
▁ xxmaj to reconcile me to his friendly peace : 
▁ ' tis death to me to be at enmity ; 
▁ i hate it , and desire all good men 's love . 
▁ xxmaj first , madam , i entreat true peace of you , 
▁ xxmaj which i will purchase with my duteous service ; 
▁ xxmaj of you , my noble cousin xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj if ever any grudge were lodg'd between us ; 
▁ xxmaj of you , and you , xxmaj lord xxmaj rivers , and of xxmaj dorset , 
▁ xxmaj that all without desert have frown'd on me ; 
▁ xxmaj of you , xxmaj lord xxmaj woodville , and , xxmaj lord xxmaj scales , of you ; 
▁ xxmaj dukes , earls , lords , gentlemen - indeed , of all . 
▁ i do not know that xxmaj englishman alive 
▁ xxmaj with whom my soul is any jot at odds 
▁ xxmaj more than the infant that is born to - night . 
▁ i thank my xxmaj god for my humility . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . a holy day shall this be kept hereafter . 
▁ i would to xxmaj god all strifes were well compounded . 
▁ xxmaj my sovereign lord , i do beseech your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj to take our brother xxmaj clarence to your grace . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , madam , have i off'red love for this , 
▁ xxmaj to be so flouted in this royal presence ? 
▁ xxmaj who knows not that the gentle xxmaj duke is dead ? 
▁ [ they all start ] 
▁ xxmaj you do him injury to scorn his corse . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj who knows not he is dead ! xxmaj who knows 
▁ he is ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj all - seeing heaven , what a world is this ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj look i so pale , xxmaj lord xxmaj dorset , as the rest ? 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj ay , my good lord ; and no man in the presence 
▁ xxmaj but his red colour hath forsook his cheeks . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj is xxmaj clarence dead ? xxmaj the order was revers'd . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj but he , poor man , by your first order died , 
▁ xxmaj and that a winged xxmaj mercury did bear ; 
▁ xxmaj some tardy cripple bare the countermand 
▁ xxmaj that came too lag to see him buried . 
▁ xxmaj god grant that some , less noble and less loyal , 
▁ xxmaj nearer in bloody thoughts , an not in blood , 
▁ xxmaj deserve not worse than wretched xxmaj clarence did , 
▁ xxmaj and yet go current from suspicion ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup derby 

▁ xxup derby . a boon , my sovereign , for my service done ! 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . i prithee , peace ; my soul is full of sorrow . 
▁ xxup derby . i xxmaj will not rise unless your xxmaj highness hear me . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj then say at once what is it thou requests . 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj the forfeit , sovereign , of my servant 's life ; 
▁ xxmaj who slew to - day a riotous gentleman 
▁ xxmaj lately attendant on the xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk . 
▁ xxup king xxup edward . xxmaj have i a tongue to doom my brother 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and shall that tongue give pardon to a slave ? 
▁ xxmaj my brother killed no man - his fault was thought , 
▁ xxmaj and yet his punishment was bitter death . 
▁ xxmaj who sued to me for him ? xxmaj who , in my wrath , 
▁ xxmaj kneel'd at my feet , and bid me be advis'd ? 
▁ xxmaj who spoke of brotherhood ? xxmaj who spoke of love ? 
▁ xxmaj who told me how the poor soul did forsake 
▁ xxmaj the mighty xxmaj warwick and did fight for me ? 
▁ xxmaj who told me , in the field at xxmaj tewksbury 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj oxford had me down , he rescued me 
▁ xxmaj and said ' dear xxmaj brother , live , and be a king ' ? 
▁ xxmaj who told me , when we both lay in the field 
▁ xxmaj frozen almost to death , how he did lap me 
▁ xxmaj even in his garments , and did give himself , 
▁ xxmaj all thin and naked , to the numb cold night ? 
▁ xxmaj all this from my remembrance brutish wrath 
▁ xxmaj sinfully pluck'd , and not a man of you 
▁ xxmaj had so much race to put it in my mind . 
▁ xxmaj but when your carters or your waiting - vassals 
▁ xxmaj have done a drunken slaughter and defac'd 
▁ xxmaj the precious image of our dear xxmaj redeemer , 
▁ xxmaj you straight are on your knees for pardon , pardon ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , unjustly too , must grant it you . [ derby rises ] 
▁ xxmaj but for my brother not a man would speak ; 
▁ xxmaj nor xxup i , ungracious , speak unto myself 
▁ xxmaj for him , poor soul . xxmaj the proudest of you all 
▁ xxmaj have been beholding to him in his life ; 
▁ xxmaj yet none of you would once beg for his life . 
▁ o xxmaj god , i fear thy justice will take hold 
▁ xxmaj on me , and you , and mine , and yours , for this ! 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj hastings , help me to my closet . xxmaj ah , poor xxmaj clarence ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt some with xxup king and xxup queen 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj this is the fruits of rashness . xxmaj mark'd you not 
▁ xxmaj how that the guilty kindred of the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj look'd pale when they did hear of xxmaj clarence ' death ? 
▁ xxup o , they did urge it still unto the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxmaj god will revenge it . xxmaj come , lords , will you go 
▁ xxmaj to comfort xxmaj edward with our company ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj we wait upon your xxmaj grace . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the old xxup duchess xxup of xxup york , with the xxup son and xxup daughter of xxup clarence 

▁ xxup son . xxmaj good grandam , tell us , is our father dead ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj no , boy . 
▁ xxup daughter . xxmaj why do you weep so oft , and beat your breast , 
▁ xxmaj and cry ' o xxmaj clarence , my unhappy son ! ' ? 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj why do you look on us , and shake your head , 
▁ xxmaj and call us orphans , wretches , castaways , 
▁ xxmaj if that our noble father were alive ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj my pretty cousins , you mistake me both ; 
▁ i do lament the sickness of the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj as loath to lose him , not your father 's death ; 
▁ xxmaj it were lost sorrow to wail one that 's lost . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj then you conclude , my grandam , he is dead . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king mine uncle is to blame for it . 
▁ xxmaj god will revenge it ; whom i will importune 
▁ xxmaj with earnest prayers all to that effect . 
▁ xxup daughter . xxmaj and so will xxup i. 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj peace , children , peace ! xxmaj the xxmaj king doth love you 
▁ well . 
▁ xxmaj incapable and shallow innocents , 
▁ xxmaj you can not guess who caus'd your father 's death . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj grandam , we can ; for my good uncle xxmaj gloucester 
▁ xxmaj told me the xxmaj king , provok'd to it by the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj devis'd impeachments to imprison him . 
▁ xxmaj and when my uncle told me so , he wept , 
▁ xxmaj and pitied me , and kindly kiss'd my cheek ; 
▁ xxmaj bade me rely on him as on my father , 
▁ xxmaj and he would love me dearly as a child . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj ah , that deceit should steal such gentle shape , 
▁ xxmaj and with a virtuous vizor hide deep vice ! 
▁ xxmaj he is my son ; ay , and therein my shame ; 
▁ xxmaj yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit . 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj think you my uncle did dissemble , grandam ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj ay , boy . 
▁ xxup son . i can not think it . xxmaj hark ! what noise is this ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup elizabeth , with her hair about her 
▁ ears ; xxup rivers and xxup dorset after her 

▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ah , who shall hinder me to wail and 
▁ weep , 
▁ xxmaj to chide my fortune , and torment myself ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll join with black despair against my soul 
▁ xxmaj and to myself become an enemy . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what means this scene of rude impatience ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj to make an act of tragic violence . 
▁ xxup edward , my lord , thy son , our king , is dead . 
▁ xxmaj why grow the branches when the root is gone ? 
▁ xxmaj why wither not the leaves that want their sap ? 
▁ xxmaj if you will live , lament ; if die , be brief , 
▁ xxmaj that our swift - winged souls may catch the xxmaj king 's , 
▁ xxmaj or like obedient subjects follow him 
▁ xxmaj to his new kingdom of ne'er - changing night . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj ah , so much interest have i in thy sorrow 
▁ xxmaj as i had title in thy noble husband ! 
▁ i have bewept a worthy husband 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and liv'd with looking on his images ; 
▁ xxmaj but now two mirrors of his princely semblance 
▁ xxmaj are crack'd in pieces by malignant death , 
▁ xxmaj and i for comfort have but one false glass , 
▁ xxmaj that grieves me when i see my shame in him . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a widow , yet thou art a mother 
▁ xxmaj and hast the comfort of thy children left ; 
▁ xxmaj but death hath snatch'd my husband from mine arms 
▁ xxmaj and pluck'd two crutches from my feeble hands- 
▁ xxmaj clarence and xxmaj edward . xxup o , what cause have xxup i- 
▁ xxmaj thine being but a moiety of my moan- 
▁ xxmaj to overgo thy woes and drown thy cries ? 
▁ xxup son . xxmaj ah , aunt , you wept not for our father 's death ! 
▁ xxmaj how can we aid you with our kindred tears ? 
▁ xxup daughter . xxmaj our fatherless distress was left unmoan'd ; 
▁ xxmaj your widow - dolour likewise be unwept ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj give me no help in lamentation ; 
▁ i am not barren to bring forth complaints . 
▁ xxmaj all springs reduce their currents to mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , being govern'd by the watery moon , 
▁ xxmaj may send forth plenteous tears to drown the world ! 
▁ xxmaj ah for my husband , for my dear xxmaj lord xxmaj edward ! 
▁ xxup children . xxmaj ah for our father , for our dear xxmaj lord xxmaj clarence ! 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj alas for both , both mine , xxmaj edward and xxmaj clarence ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj what stay had i but xxmaj edward ? and he 's 
▁ gone . 
▁ xxup children . xxmaj what stay had we but xxmaj clarence ? and he 's gone . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what stays had i but they ? and they are gone . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj was never widow had so dear a loss . 
▁ xxup children . xxmaj were never orphans had so dear a loss . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj was never mother had so dear a loss . 
▁ xxmaj alas , i am the mother of these griefs ! 
▁ xxmaj their woes are parcell'd , mine is general . 
▁ xxmaj she for an xxmaj edward weeps , and so do xxup i : 
▁ i for a xxmaj clarence weep , so doth not she . 
▁ xxmaj these babes for xxmaj clarence weep , and so do xxup i : 
▁ i for an xxmaj edward weep , so do not they . 
▁ xxmaj alas , you three on me , threefold distress'd , 
▁ xxmaj pour all your tears ! i am your sorrow 's nurse , 
▁ xxmaj and i will pamper it with lamentation . 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj comfort , dear mother . xxmaj god is much displeas'd 
▁ xxmaj that you take with unthankfulness his doing . 
▁ xxmaj in common worldly things ' tis called ungrateful 
▁ xxmaj with dull unwillingness to repay a debt 
▁ xxmaj which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent ; 
▁ xxmaj much more to be thus opposite with heaven , 
▁ xxmaj for it requires the royal debt it lent you . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj madam , bethink you , like a careful mother , 
▁ xxmaj of the young prince your son . xxmaj send straight for him ; 
▁ xxmaj let him be crown'd ; in him your comfort lives . 
▁ xxmaj drown desperate sorrow in dead xxmaj edward 's grave , 
▁ xxmaj and plant your joys in living xxmaj edward 's throne . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester , xxup buckingham , xxup derby , 
▁ xxup hastings , and xxup ratcliff 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sister , have comfort . xxmaj all of us have cause 
▁ xxmaj to wail the dimming of our shining star ; 
▁ xxmaj but none can help our harms by wailing them . 
▁ xxmaj madam , my mother , i do cry you mercy ; 
▁ i did not see your xxmaj grace . xxmaj humbly on my knee 
▁ i crave your blessing . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj god bless thee ; and put meekness in thy breast , 
▁ xxmaj love , charity , obedience , and true duty ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj amen ! [ aside ] xxmaj and make me die a good old 
▁ man ! 
▁ xxmaj that is the butt end of a mother 's blessing ; 
▁ i marvel that her xxmaj grace did leave it out . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj you cloudy princes and heart - sorrowing 
▁ peers , 
▁ xxmaj that bear this heavy mutual load of moan , 
▁ xxmaj now cheer each other in each other 's love . 
▁ xxmaj though we have spent our harvest of this king , 
▁ xxmaj we are to reap the harvest of his son . 
▁ xxmaj the broken rancour of your high - swol'n hearts , 
▁ xxmaj but lately splinter'd , knit , and join'd together , 
▁ xxmaj must gently be preserv'd , cherish'd , and kept . 
▁ xxmaj me seemeth good that , with some little train , 
▁ xxmaj forthwith from xxmaj ludlow the young prince be fet 
▁ xxmaj hither to xxmaj london , to be crown'd our xxmaj king . 

▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj why with some little train , my xxmaj lord of 
▁ xxmaj buckingham ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj marry , my lord , lest by a multitude 
▁ xxmaj the new - heal'd wound of malice should break out , 
▁ xxmaj which would be so much the more dangerous 
▁ xxmaj by how much the estate is green and yet ungovern'd ; 
▁ xxmaj where every horse bears his commanding rein 
▁ xxmaj and may direct his course as please himself , 
▁ xxmaj as well the fear of harm as harm apparent , 
▁ xxmaj in my opinion , ought to be prevented . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i hope the xxmaj king made peace with all of us ; 
▁ xxmaj and the compact is firm and true in me . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj and so in me ; and so , i think , in an . 
▁ xxmaj yet , since it is but green , it should be put 
▁ xxmaj to no apparent likelihood of breach , 
▁ xxmaj which haply by much company might be urg'd ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore i say with noble xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxmaj that it is meet so few should fetch the xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj and so say xxup i. 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj then be it so ; and go we to determine 
▁ xxmaj who they shall be that straight shall post to xxmaj ludlow . 
▁ xxmaj madam , and you , my sister , will you go 
▁ xxmaj to give your censures in this business ? 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup buckingham and xxup gloucester 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord , whoever journeys to the xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god sake , let not us two stay at home ; 
▁ xxmaj for by the way xxmaj i 'll sort occasion , 
▁ xxmaj as index to the story we late talk'd of , 
▁ xxmaj to part the xxmaj queen 's proud kindred from the xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my other self , my counsel 's consistory , 
▁ xxmaj my oracle , my prophet , my dear cousin , 
▁ xxup i , as a child , will go by thy direction . 
▁ xxmaj toward xxmaj ludlow then , for we 'll not stay behind . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter one xxup citizen at one door , and another at the other 

▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj good morrow , neighbour . xxmaj whither away so 
▁ fast ? 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . i promise you , i scarcely know myself . 
▁ xxmaj hear you the news abroad ? 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj yes , that the xxmaj king is dead . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj ill news , by'r lady ; seldom comes the 
▁ better . 
▁ i fear , i fear ' twill prove a giddy world . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup citizen 

▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj neighbours , xxmaj god speed ! 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj give you good morrow , sir . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj doth the news hold of good xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's 
▁ death ? 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj ay , sir , it is too true ; xxmaj god help the while ! 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj then , masters , look to see a troublous 
▁ world . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj no , no ; by xxmaj god 's good grace , his son shall 
▁ reign . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj woe to that land that 's govern'd by a child . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj in him there is a hope of government , 
▁ xxmaj which , in his nonage , council under him , 
▁ xxmaj and , in his full and ripened years , himself , 
▁ xxmaj no doubt , shall then , and till then , govern well . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj so stood the state when xxmaj henry the xxmaj sixth 
▁ xxmaj was crown'd in xxmaj paris but at nine months old . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj stood the state so ? xxmaj no , no , good friends , 
▁ xxmaj god wot ; 
▁ xxmaj for then this land was famously enrich'd 
▁ xxmaj with politic grave counsel ; then the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj had virtuous uncles to protect his xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj why , so hath this , both by his father and 
▁ mother . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj better it were they all came by his father , 
▁ xxmaj or by his father there were none at all ; 
▁ xxmaj for emulation who shall now be nearest 
▁ xxmaj will touch us all too near , if xxmaj god prevent not . 
▁ xxup o , full of danger is the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester ! 
▁ xxmaj and the xxmaj queen 's sons and brothers haught and proud ; 
▁ xxmaj and were they to be rul'd , and not to rule , 
▁ xxmaj this sickly land might solace as before . 
▁ xxup first xxup citizen . xxmaj come , come , we fear the worst ; all will be 
▁ well . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj when clouds are seen , wise men put on 
▁ their cloaks ; 
▁ xxmaj when great leaves fall , then winter is at hand ; 
▁ xxmaj when the sun sets , who doth not look for night ? 
▁ xxmaj untimely storms make men expect a dearth . 
▁ xxmaj all may be well ; but , if xxmaj god sort it so , 
▁ ' tis more than we deserve or i expect . 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj truly , the hearts of men are fun of fear .