xxbos xxmaj you can not reason almost with a man 
▁ xxmaj that looks not heavily and fun of dread . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj before the days of change , still is it so ; 
▁ xxmaj by a divine instinct men 's minds mistrust 
▁ xxmaj ensuing danger ; as by proof we see 
▁ xxmaj the water swell before a boist'rous storm . 
▁ xxmaj but leave it all to xxmaj god . xxmaj whither away ? 
▁ xxup second xxup citizen . xxmaj marry , we were sent for to the justices . 
▁ xxup third xxup citizen . xxmaj and so was xxup i ; xxmaj i 'll bear you company . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup archbishop xxup of xxup york , the young xxup duke xxup of xxup york , xxup queen xxup elizabeth , 
 and the xxup duchess xxup of xxup york 

▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj last night , i hear , they lay at xxmaj stony xxmaj stratford , 
▁ xxmaj and at xxmaj northampton they do rest to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow or next day they will be here . 
▁ xxup duchess . i long with all my heart to see the xxmaj prince . 
▁ i hope he is much grown since last i saw him . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj but i hear no ; they say my son of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj has almost overta'en him in his growth . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj ay , mother ; but i would not have it so . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj why , my good cousin , it is good to grow . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj grandam , one night as we did sit at supper , 
▁ xxmaj my uncle xxmaj rivers talk'd how i did grow 
▁ xxmaj more than my brother . ' ay , ' quoth my uncle xxmaj gloucester 
▁ ' small herbs have grace : great weeds do grow apace . ' 
▁ xxmaj and since , methinks , i would not grow so fast , 
▁ xxmaj because sweet flow'rs are slow and weeds make haste . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj good faith , good faith , the saying did not hold 
▁ xxmaj in him that did object the same to thee . 
▁ xxmaj he was the wretched'st thing when he was young , 
▁ xxmaj so long a - growing and so leisurely 
▁ xxmaj that , if his rule were true , he should be gracious . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj and so no doubt he is , my gracious madam . 
▁ xxup duchess . i hope he is ; but yet let mothers doubt . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj now , by my troth , if i had been rememb'red , 
▁ i could have given my uncle 's xxmaj grace a flout 
▁ xxmaj to touch his growth nearer than he touch'd mine . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj how , my young xxmaj york ? i prithee let me hear it . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj marry , they say my uncle grew so fast 
▁ xxmaj that he could gnaw a crust at two hours old . 
▁ ' twas full two years ere i could get a tooth . 
▁ xxmaj grandam , this would have been a biting jest . 
▁ xxup duchess . i prithee , pretty xxmaj york , who told thee this ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj grandam , his nurse . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj his nurse ! xxmaj why she was dead ere thou wast 
▁ born . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj if ' twere not she , i can not tell who told me . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . a parlous boy ! xxmaj go to , you are too 
▁ shrewd . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj good madam , be not angry with the child . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj pitchers have ears . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj here comes a messenger . xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj such news , my lord , as grieves me to report . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj how doth the xxmaj prince ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj well , madam , and in health . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj what is thy news ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj lord xxmaj rivers and xxmaj lord xxmaj grey 
▁ xxmaj are sent to xxmaj pomfret , and with them 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj vaughan , prisoners . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj who hath committed them ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the mighty xxmaj dukes , xxmaj gloucester and xxmaj buckingham . 
▁ xxup archbishop . xxmaj for what offence ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj the sum of all i can , i have disclos'd . 
▁ xxmaj why or for what the nobles were committed 
▁ xxmaj is all unknown to me , my gracious lord . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ay me , i see the ruin of my house ! 
▁ xxmaj the tiger now hath seiz'd the gentle hind ; 
▁ xxmaj insulting tyranny begins to jet 
▁ xxmaj upon the innocent and aweless throne . 
▁ xxmaj welcome , destruction , blood , and massacre ! 
▁ i see , as in a map , the end of all . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj accursed and unquiet wrangling days , 
▁ xxmaj how many of you have mine eyes beheld ! 
▁ xxmaj my husband lost his life to get the crown ; 
▁ xxmaj and often up and down my sons were toss'd 
▁ xxmaj for me to joy and weep their gain and loss ; 
▁ xxmaj and being seated , and domestic broils 
▁ xxmaj clean over - blown , themselves the conquerors 
▁ xxmaj make war upon themselves - brother to brother , 
▁ xxmaj blood to blood , self against self . xxup o , preposterous 
▁ xxmaj and frantic outrage , end thy damned spleen , 
▁ xxmaj or let me die , to look on death no more ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj come , come , my boy ; we will to 
▁ sanctuary . 
▁ xxmaj madam , farewell . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj stay , i will go with you . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj you have no cause . 
▁ xxup archbishop . [ to the xxup queen ] xxmaj my gracious lady , go . 
▁ xxmaj and thither bear your treasure and your goods . 
▁ xxmaj for my part , xxmaj i 'll resign unto your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj the seal i keep ; and so betide to me 
▁ xxmaj as well i tender you and all of yours ! 
▁ xxmaj go , xxmaj i 'll conduct you to the sanctuary . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj the trumpets sound . xxmaj enter the xxup prince xxup of xxup wales , xxup gloucester , xxup buckingham , 
 xxup catesby , xxup cardinal xxup bourchier , and others 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj welcome , sweet xxmaj prince , to xxmaj london , to your 
▁ chamber . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj welcome , dear cousin , my thoughts ' sovereign . 
▁ xxmaj the weary way hath made you melancholy . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj no , uncle ; but our crosses on the way 
▁ xxmaj have made it tedious , wearisome , and heavy . 
▁ i want more uncles here to welcome me . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj sweet xxmaj prince , the untainted virtue of your 
▁ years 
▁ xxmaj hath not yet div'd into the world 's deceit ; 
▁ xxmaj nor more can you distinguish of a man 
▁ xxmaj than of his outward show ; which , xxmaj god xxmaj he knows , 
▁ xxmaj seldom or never jumpeth with the heart . 
▁ xxmaj those uncles which you want were dangerous ; 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace attended to their sug'red words 
▁ xxmaj but look'd not on the poison of their hearts . 
▁ xxmaj god keep you from them and from such false friends ! 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj god keep me from false friends ! but they were 
▁ none . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my lord , the xxmaj mayor of xxmaj london comes to greet 
▁ you . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup mayor and his train 

▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj god bless your xxmaj grace with health and happy days ! 
▁ xxup prince . i thank you , good my lord , and thank you all . 
▁ i thought my mother and my brother xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj would long ere this have met us on the way . 
▁ xxmaj fie , what a slug is xxmaj hastings , that he comes not 
▁ xxmaj to tell us whether they will come or no ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup hastings 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj and , in good time , here comes the sweating 
▁ xxmaj lord . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj welcome , my lord . xxmaj what , will our mother come ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj on what occasion , xxmaj god xxmaj he knows , not xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen your mother and your brother xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj have taken sanctuary . xxmaj the tender xxmaj prince 
▁ xxmaj would fain have come with me to meet your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj but by his mother was perforce withheld . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj fie , what an indirect and peevish course 
▁ xxmaj is this of hers ? xxmaj lord xxmaj cardinal , will your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj persuade the xxmaj queen to send the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj unto his princely brother presently ? 
▁ xxmaj if she deny , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , go with him 
▁ xxmaj and from her jealous arms pluck him perforce . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj buckingham , if my weak oratory 
▁ xxmaj can from his mother win the xxmaj duke of xxmaj york , 
▁ xxmaj anon expect him here ; but if she be obdurate 
▁ xxmaj to mild entreaties , xxmaj god in heaven forbid 
▁ xxmaj we should infringe the holy privilege 
▁ xxmaj of blessed sanctuary ! xxmaj not for all this land 
▁ xxmaj would i be guilty of so deep a sin . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj you are too senseless - obstinate , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj too ceremonious and traditional . 
▁ xxmaj weigh it but with the grossness of this age , 
▁ xxmaj you break not sanctuary in seizing him . 
▁ xxmaj the benefit thereof is always granted 
▁ xxmaj to those whose dealings have deserv'd the place 
▁ xxmaj and those who have the wit to claim the place . 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj prince hath neither claim'd it nor deserv'd it , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , in mine opinion , can not have it . 
▁ xxmaj then , taking him from thence that is not there , 
▁ xxmaj you break no privilege nor charter there . 
▁ xxmaj oft have i heard of sanctuary men ; 
▁ xxmaj but sanctuary children never till now . 
▁ xxup cardinal . xxmaj my lord , you shall o'errule my mind for once . 
▁ xxmaj come on , xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , will you go with me ? 
▁ xxup hastings . i go , my lord . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj good lords , make all the speedy haste you may . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cardinal and xxup hastings 
▁ xxmaj say , uncle xxmaj gloucester , if our brother come , 
▁ xxmaj where shall we sojourn till our coronation ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj where it seems best unto your royal self . 
▁ xxmaj if i may counsel you , some day or two 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj highness shall repose you at the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj then where you please and shall be thought most fit 
▁ xxmaj for your best health and recreation . 
▁ xxup prince . i do not like the xxmaj tower , of any place . 
▁ xxmaj did xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar build that place , my lord ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj he did , my gracious lord , begin that place , 
▁ xxmaj which , since , succeeding ages have re - edified . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj is it upon record , or else reported 
▁ xxmaj successively from age to age , he built it ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj upon record , my gracious lord . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj but say , my lord , it were not regist'red , 
▁ xxmaj methinks the truth should xxmaj eve from age to age , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere retail'd to all posterity , 
▁ xxmaj even to the general all - ending day . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj so wise so young , they say , do never 
▁ live long . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj what say you , uncle ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . i say , without characters , fame lives long . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj thus , like the formal vice , xxmaj iniquity , 
▁ i moralize two meanings in one word . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj that xxmaj julius xxmaj caesar was a famous man ; 
▁ xxmaj with what his valour did enrich his wit , 
▁ xxmaj his wit set down to make his valour live . 
▁ xxmaj death makes no conquest of this conqueror ; 
▁ xxmaj for now he lives in fame , though not in life . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell you what , my cousin xxmaj buckingham- 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj what , my gracious lord ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj an if i live until i be a man , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll win our ancient right in xxmaj france again , 
▁ xxmaj or die a soldier as i liv'd a king . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ aside ] xxmaj short summers lightly have a forward 
▁ spring . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hastings , young xxup york , and the xxup cardinal 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj now , in good time , here comes the xxmaj duke of 
▁ xxmaj york . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj richard of xxmaj york , how fares our loving brother ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj well , my dread lord ; so must i can you now . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj ay brother , to our grief , as it is yours . 
▁ xxmaj too late he died that might have kept that title , 
▁ xxmaj which by his death hath lost much majesty . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj how fares our cousin , noble xxmaj lord of xxmaj york ? 
▁ xxup york . i thank you , gentle uncle . xxup o , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you said that idle weeds are fast in growth . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince my brother hath outgrown me far . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he hath , my lord . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj and therefore is he idle ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxup o , my fair cousin , i must not say so . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj then he is more beholding to you than xxup i. 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he may command me as my sovereign ; 
▁ xxmaj but you have power in me as in a kinsman . 
▁ xxup york . i pray you , uncle , give me this dagger . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my dagger , little cousin ? xxmaj with all my heart ! 
▁ xxup prince . a beggar , brother ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj of my kind uncle , that i know will give , 
▁ xxmaj and being but a toy , which is no grief to give . 
▁ xxup gloucester . a greater gift than that xxmaj i 'll give my cousin . 
▁ xxup york . a greater gift ! xxup o , that 's the sword to it ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj ay , gentle cousin , were it light enough . 
▁ xxup york . xxup o , then , i see you will part but with light gifts : 
▁ xxmaj in weightier things you 'll say a beggar nay . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj it is too heavy for your xxmaj grace to wear . 
▁ xxup york . i weigh it lightly , were it heavier . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what , would you have my weapon , little 
▁ xxmaj lord ? 
▁ xxup york . i would , that i might thank you as you call me . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj how ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj little . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj york will still be cross in talk . 
▁ xxmaj uncle , your xxmaj grace knows how to bear with him . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj you mean , to bear me , not to bear with me . 
▁ xxmaj uncle , my brother mocks both you and me ; 
▁ xxmaj because that i am little , like an ape , 
▁ xxmaj he thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj with what a sharp - provided wit he reasons ! 
▁ xxmaj to mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle 
▁ xxmaj he prettily and aptly taunts himself . 
▁ xxmaj so cunning and so young is wonderful . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my lord , will't please you pass along ? 
▁ xxmaj myself and my good cousin xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxmaj will to your mother , to entreat of her 
▁ xxmaj to meet you at the xxmaj tower and welcome you . 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj what , will you go unto the xxmaj tower , my lord ? 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj protector needs will have it so . 
▁ xxup york . i shall not sleep in quiet at the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj why , what should you fear ? 
▁ xxup york . xxmaj marry , my uncle xxmaj clarence ' angry ghost . 
▁ xxmaj my grandam told me he was murder'd there . 
▁ xxup prince . i fear no uncles dead . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj nor none that live , i hope . 
▁ xxup prince . xxmaj an if they live , i hope i need not fear . 
▁ xxmaj but come , my lord ; and with a heavy heart , 
▁ xxmaj thinking on them , go i unto the xxmaj tower . 
▁ a sennet . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup gloucester , xxup buckingham , and xxup catesby 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj think you , my lord , this little prating xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj was not incensed by his subtle mother 
▁ xxmaj to taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj no doubt , no doubt . xxup o , ' tis a perilous boy ; 
▁ xxmaj bold , quick , ingenious , forward , capable . 
▁ xxmaj he is all the mother 's , from the top to toe . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj well , let them rest . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj catesby . 
▁ xxmaj thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend 
▁ xxmaj as closely to conceal what we impart . 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st our reasons urg'd upon the way . 
▁ xxmaj what think'st thou ? xxmaj is it not an easy matter 
▁ xxmaj to make xxmaj william xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings of our mind , 
▁ xxmaj for the instalment of this noble xxmaj duke 
▁ xxmaj in the seat royal of this famous isle ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj he for his father 's sake so loves the xxmaj prince 
▁ xxmaj that he will not be won to aught against him . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj what think'st thou then of xxmaj stanley ? xxmaj will 
▁ not he ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj he will do all in all as xxmaj hastings doth . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj well then , no more but this : go , gentle 
▁ xxmaj catesby , 
▁ xxmaj and , as it were far off , sound thou xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings 
▁ xxmaj how he doth stand affected to our purpose ; 
▁ xxmaj and summon him to - morrow to the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj to sit about the coronation . 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost find him tractable to us , 
▁ xxmaj encourage him , and tell him all our reasons ; 
▁ xxmaj if he be leaden , icy , cold , unwilling , 
▁ xxmaj be thou so too , and so break off the talk , 
▁ xxmaj and give us notice of his inclination ; 
▁ xxmaj for we to - morrow hold divided councils , 
▁ xxmaj wherein thyself shalt highly be employ'd . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj commend me to xxmaj lord xxmaj william . xxmaj tell him , 
▁ xxmaj catesby , 
▁ xxmaj his ancient knot of dangerous adversaries 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow are let blood at xxmaj pomfret xxmaj castle ; 
▁ xxmaj and bid my lord , for joy of this good news , 
▁ xxmaj give xxmaj mistress xxmaj shore one gentle kiss the more . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj good xxmaj catesby , go effect this business soundly . 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj my good lords both , with all the heed i can . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj shall we hear from you , xxmaj catesby , ere we sleep ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj you shall , my lord . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj at xxmaj crosby xxmaj house , there shall you find us both . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup catesby 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj now , my lord , what shall we do if we 
▁ perceive 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings will not yield to our complots ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj chop off his head - something we will 
▁ determine . 
▁ xxmaj and , look when i am xxmaj king , claim thou of me 
▁ xxmaj the earldom of xxmaj hereford and all the movables 
▁ xxmaj whereof the xxmaj king my brother was possess'd . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj i 'll claim that promise at your xxmaj grace 's hand . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and look to have it yielded with all kindness . 
▁ xxmaj come , let us sup betimes , that afterwards 
▁ xxmaj we may digest our complots in some form . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj before xxup lord xxup hasting 's house 

 xxmaj enter a xxup messenger to the door of xxup hastings 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord , my lord ! [ knocking ] 
▁ xxup hastings . [ within ] xxmaj who knocks ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj one from the xxmaj lord xxmaj stanley . 
▁ xxup hastings . [ within ] xxmaj what is't o'clock ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj upon the stroke of four . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup hastings 

▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj can not my xxmaj lord xxmaj stanley sleep these tedious 
▁ nights ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj so it appears by that i have to say . 
▁ xxmaj first , he commends him to your noble self . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj then certifies your lordship that this night 
▁ xxmaj he dreamt the boar had razed off his helm . 
▁ xxmaj besides , he says there are two councils kept , 
▁ xxmaj and that may be determin'd at the one 
▁ xxmaj which may make you and him to rue at th ' other . 
▁ xxmaj therefore he sends to know your lordship 's pleasure- 
▁ xxmaj if you will presently take horse with him 
▁ xxmaj and with all speed post with him toward the north 
▁ xxmaj to shun the danger that his soul divines . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj go , fellow , go , return unto thy lord ; 
▁ xxmaj bid him not fear the separated council : 
▁ xxmaj his honour and myself are at the one , 
▁ xxmaj and at the other is my good friend xxmaj catesby ; 
▁ xxmaj where nothing can proceed that toucheth us 
▁ xxmaj whereof i shall not have intelligence . 
▁ xxmaj tell him his fears are shallow , without instance ; 
▁ xxmaj and for his dreams , i wonder he 's so simple 
▁ xxmaj to trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers . 
▁ xxmaj to fly the boar before the boar pursues 
▁ xxmaj were to incense the boar to follow us 
▁ xxmaj and make pursuit where he did mean no chase . 
▁ xxmaj go , bid thy master rise and come to me ; 
▁ xxmaj and we will both together to the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj where , he shall see , the boar will use us kindly . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj i 'll go , my lord , and tell him what you say . 
▁ xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup catesby 

▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj many good morrows to my noble lord ! 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj catesby ; you are early stirring . 
▁ xxmaj what news , what news , in this our tott'ring state ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj it is a reeling world indeed , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj and i believe will never stand upright 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj richard wear the garland of the realm . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj how , wear the garland ! xxmaj dost thou mean the 
▁ crown ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj i 'll have this crown of mine cut from my 
▁ shoulders 
▁ xxmaj before xxmaj i 'll see the crown so foul misplac'd . 
▁ xxmaj but canst thou guess that he doth aim at it ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj ay , on my life ; and hopes to find you forward 
▁ xxmaj upon his party for the gain thereof ; 
▁ xxmaj and thereupon he sends you this good news , 
▁ xxmaj that this same very day your enemies , 
▁ xxmaj the kindred of the xxmaj queen , must die at xxmaj pomfret . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj indeed , i am no mourner for that news , 
▁ xxmaj because they have been still my adversaries ; 
▁ xxmaj but that xxmaj i 'll give my voice on xxmaj richard 's side 
▁ xxmaj to bar my master 's heirs in true descent , 
▁ xxmaj god knows i will not do it to the death . 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj god keep your lordship in that gracious mind ! 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj but i shall laugh at this a twelve month hence , 
▁ xxmaj that they which brought me in my master 's hate , 
▁ i live to look upon their tragedy . 
▁ xxmaj well , xxmaj catesby , ere a fortnight make me older , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send some packing that yet think not on't . 
▁ xxup catesby . ' tis a vile thing to die , my gracious lord , 
▁ xxmaj when men are unprepar'd and look not for it . 
▁ xxup hastings . o monstrous , monstrous ! xxmaj and so falls it out 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj rivers , xxmaj vaughan , xxmaj grey ; and so ' twill do 
▁ xxmaj with some men else that think themselves as safe 
▁ xxmaj as thou and xxup i , who , as thou knowest , are dear 
▁ xxmaj to princely xxmaj richard and to xxmaj buckingham . 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj the xxmaj princes both make high account of you- 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj for they account his head upon the bridge . 
▁ xxup hastings . i know they do , and i have well deserv'd it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup stanley 

▁ xxmaj come on , come on ; where is your boar - spear , man ? 
▁ xxmaj fear you the boar , and go so unprovided ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj my lord , good morrow ; good morrow , xxmaj catesby . 
▁ xxmaj you may jest on , but , by the holy rood , 
▁ i do not like these several councils , xxup i. 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj my lord , i hold my life as dear as yours , 
▁ xxmaj and never in my days , i do protest , 
▁ xxmaj was it so precious to me as ' tis now . 
▁ xxmaj think you , but that i know our state secure , 
▁ i would be so triumphant as i am ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj the lords at xxmaj pomfret , when they rode from 
▁ xxmaj london , 
▁ xxmaj were jocund and suppos'd their states were sure , 
▁ xxmaj and they indeed had no cause to mistrust ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet you see how soon the day o'ercast . 
▁ xxmaj this sudden stab of rancour i misdoubt ; 
▁ xxmaj pray xxmaj god , i say , i prove a needless coward . 
▁ xxmaj what , shall we toward the xxmaj tower ? xxmaj the day is spent . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj come , come , have with you . xxmaj wot you what , my 
▁ xxmaj lord ? 
▁ xxmaj to - day the lords you talk'd of are beheaded . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj they , for their truth , might better wear their 
▁ heads 
▁ xxmaj than some that have accus'd them wear their hats . 
▁ xxmaj but come , my lord , let 's away . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hastings , a pursuivant 

▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj go on before ; xxmaj i 'll talk with this good fellow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup stanley and xxup catesby 
▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj hastings ! xxmaj how goes the world with thee ? 
▁ xxup pursuivant . xxmaj the better that your lordship please to ask . 
▁ xxup hastings . i tell thee , man , ' tis better with me now 
▁ xxmaj than when thou met'st me last where now we meet : 
▁ xxmaj then was i going prisoner to the xxmaj tower 
▁ xxmaj by the suggestion of the xxmaj queen 's allies ; 
▁ xxmaj but now , i tell thee - keep it to thyself- 
▁ xxmaj this day those enernies are put to death , 
▁ xxmaj and i in better state than e'er i was . 
▁ xxup pursuivant . xxmaj god hold it , to your honour 's good content ! 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj gramercy , xxmaj hastings ; there , drink that for me . 
▁ [ throws him his purse ] 
▁ xxup pursuivant . i thank your honour . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup priest 

▁ xxup priest . xxmaj well met , my lord ; i am glad to see your honour . 
▁ xxup hastings . i thank thee , good xxmaj sir xxmaj john , with all my heart . 
▁ i am in your debt for your last exercise ; 
▁ xxmaj come the next xxmaj sabbath , and i will content you . 
▁ [ he whispers in his ear ] 
▁ xxup priest . xxmaj i 'll wait upon your lordship . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup buckingham 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj what , talking with a priest , xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj chamberlain ! 
▁ xxmaj your friends at xxmaj pomfret , they do need the priest : 
▁ xxmaj your honour hath no shriving work in hand . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj good faith , and when i met this holy man , 
▁ xxmaj the men you talk of came into my mind . 
▁ xxmaj what , go you toward the xxmaj tower ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . i do , my lord , but long i can not stay there ; 
▁ i shall return before your lordship thence . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj nay , like enough , for i stay dinner there . 
▁ xxup buckingham . [ aside ] xxmaj and supper too , although thou 
▁ knowest it not.- 
▁ xxmaj come , will you go ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj i 'll wait upon your lordship . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj pomfret xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup richard xxup ratcliff , with halberds , carrying the xxmaj nobles , 
 xxup rivers , xxup grey , and xxup vaughan , to death 

▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj sir xxmaj richard xxmaj ratcliff , let me tell thee this : 
▁ xxmaj to - day shalt thou behold a subject die 
▁ xxmaj for truth , for duty , and for loyalty . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj god bless the xxmaj prince from all the pack of you ! 
▁ a knot you are of damned blood - suckers . 
▁ xxup vaughan . xxmaj you live that shall cry woe for this hereafter . 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj dispatch ; the limit of your lives is out . 
▁ xxup rivers . o xxmaj pomfret , xxmaj pomfret ! o thou bloody prison , 
▁ xxmaj fatal and ominous to noble peers ! 
▁ xxmaj within the guilty closure of thy walls 
▁ xxup richard the xxmaj second here was hack'd to death ; 
▁ xxmaj and for more slander to thy dismal seat , 
▁ xxmaj we give to thee our guiltless blood to drink . 
▁ xxup grey . xxmaj now xxmaj margaret 's curse is fall'n upon our heads , 
▁ xxmaj when she exclaim'd on xxmaj hastings , you , and xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj for standing by when xxmaj richard stabb'd her son . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj then curs'd she xxmaj richard , then curs'd she 
▁ xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj then curs'd she xxmaj hastings . xxup o , remember , xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj to hear her prayer for them , as now for us ! 
▁ xxmaj and for my sister , and her princely sons , 
▁ xxmaj be satisfied , dear xxmaj god , with our true blood , 
▁ xxmaj which , as thou know'st , unjustly must be spilt . 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj make haste ; the hour of death is expiate . 
▁ xxup rivers . xxmaj come , xxmaj grey ; come , xxmaj vaughan ; let us here embrace . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , until we meet again in heaven . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj enter xxup buckingham , xxup derby , xxup hastings , the xxup bishop of xxup ely , xxup ratcliff , xxup lovel , 
 with others and seat themselves at a table 

▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj now , noble peers , the cause why we are met 
▁ xxmaj is to determine of the coronation . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj god 's name speak - when is the royal day ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj is all things ready for the royal time ? 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj it is , and wants but nomination . 
▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely . xxmaj to - morrow then i judge a happy day . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj who knows the xxmaj lord xxmaj protector 's mind 
▁ herein ? 
▁ xxmaj who is most inward with the noble xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely . xxmaj your xxmaj grace , we think , should soonest know 
▁ his mind . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj we know each other 's faces ; for our hearts , 
▁ xxmaj he knows no more of mine than i of yours ; 
▁ xxmaj or i of his , my lord , than you of mine . 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings , you and he are near in love . 
▁ xxup hastings . i thank his xxmaj grace , i know he loves me well ; 
▁ xxmaj but for his purpose in the coronation 
▁ i have not sounded him , nor he deliver'd 
▁ xxmaj his gracious pleasure any way therein . 
▁ xxmaj but you , my honourable lords , may name the time ; 
▁ xxmaj and in the xxmaj duke 's behalf xxmaj i 'll give my voice , 
▁ xxmaj which , i presume , he 'll take in gentle part . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester 

▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely . xxmaj in happy time , here comes the xxmaj duke himself . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my noble lords and cousins an , good morrow . 
▁ i have been long a sleeper , but i trust 
▁ xxmaj my absence doth neglect no great design 
▁ xxmaj which by my presence might have been concluded . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj had you not come upon your cue , my lord , 
▁ xxup william xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings had pronounc'd your part- 
▁ i mean , your voice for crowning of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj than my xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings no man might be 
▁ bolder ; 
▁ xxmaj his lordship knows me well and loves me well . 
▁ xxmaj my lord of xxmaj ely , when i was last in xxmaj holborn 
▁ i saw good strawberries in your garden there . 
▁ i do beseech you send for some of them . 
▁ xxup bishop of xxup ely . xxmaj marry and will , my lord , with all my heart . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj cousin of xxmaj buckingham , a word with you . 
▁ [ takes him aside ] 
▁ xxmaj catesby hath sounded xxmaj hastings in our business , 
▁ xxmaj and finds the testy gentleman so hot 
▁ xxmaj that he will lose his head ere give consent 
▁ xxmaj his master 's child , as worshipfully he terms it , 
▁ xxmaj shall lose the royalty of xxmaj england 's throne . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj withdraw yourself awhile ; xxmaj i 'll go with you . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gloucester and xxup buckingham 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj we have not yet set down this day of triumph . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow , in my judgment , is too sudden ; 
▁ xxmaj for i myself am not so well provided 
▁ xxmaj as else i would be , were the day prolong'd . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter the xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely 

▁ xxup bishop xxup of xxup ely . xxmaj where is my lord the xxmaj duke of xxmaj gloucester ? 
▁ i have sent for these strawberries . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj his xxmaj grace looks cheerfully and smooth this 
▁ morning ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's some conceit or other likes him well 
▁ xxmaj when that he bids good morrow with such spirit . 
▁ i think there 's never a man in xxmaj christendom 
▁ xxmaj can lesser hide his love or hate than he ; 
▁ xxmaj for by his face straight shall you know his heart . 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj what of his heart perceive you in his face 
▁ xxmaj by any livelihood he show'd to - day ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj marry , that with no man here he is offended ; 
▁ xxmaj for , were he , he had shown it in his looks . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gloucester and xxup buckingham 

▁ xxup gloucester . i pray you all , tell me what they deserve 
▁ xxmaj that do conspire my death with devilish plots 
▁ xxmaj of damned witchcraft , and that have prevail'd 
▁ xxmaj upon my body with their hellish charms ? 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj the tender love i bear your xxmaj grace , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj makes me most forward in this princely presence 
▁ xxmaj to doom th ' offenders , whosoe'er they be . 
▁ i say , my lord , they have deserved death . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj then be your eyes the witness of their evil . 
▁ xxmaj look how i am bewitch'd ; behold , mine arm 
▁ xxmaj is like a blasted sapling wither'd up . 
▁ xxmaj and this is xxmaj edward 's wife , that monstrous witch , 
▁ xxmaj consorted with that harlot strumpet xxmaj shore , 
▁ xxmaj that by their witchcraft thus have marked me . 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj if they have done this deed , my noble lord- 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj if?-thou protector of this damned strumpet , 
▁ xxmaj talk'st thou to me of ifs ? xxmaj thou art a traitor . 
▁ xxmaj off with his head ! xxmaj now by xxmaj saint xxmaj paul i swear 
▁ i will not dine until i see the same . 
▁ xxmaj lovel and xxmaj ratcliff , look that it be done . 
▁ xxmaj the rest that love me , rise and follow me . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup hastings , xxup lovel , and xxup ratcliff 
▁ xxup hastings . xxmaj woe , woe , for xxmaj england ! not a whit for me ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxup i , too fond , might have prevented this . 
▁ xxup stanley did dream the boar did raze our helms , 
▁ xxmaj and i did scorn it and disdain to fly . 
▁ xxmaj three times to - day my foot - cloth horse did stumble , 
▁ xxmaj and started when he look'd upon the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj as loath to bear me to the slaughter - house . 
▁ xxup o , now i need the priest that spake to me ! 
▁ i now repent i told the pursuivant , 
▁ xxmaj as too triumphing , how mine enemies 
▁ xxmaj to - day at xxmaj pomfret bloodily were butcher'd , 
▁ xxmaj and i myself secure in grace and favour . 
▁ o xxmaj margaret , xxmaj margaret , now thy heavy curse 
▁ xxmaj is lighted on poor xxmaj hastings ' wretched head ! 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj come , come , dispatch ; the xxmaj duke would be at 
▁ dinner . 
▁ xxmaj make a short shrift ; he longs to see your head . 
▁ xxup hastings . o momentary grace of mortal men , 
▁ xxmaj which we more hunt for than the grace of xxmaj god ! 
▁ xxmaj who builds his hope in air of your good looks 
▁ xxmaj lives like a drunken sailor on a mast , 
▁ xxmaj ready with every nod to tumble down 
▁ xxmaj into the fatal bowels of the deep . 
▁ xxup lovel . xxmaj come , come , dispatch ; ' tis bootless to exclaim . 
▁ xxup hastings . o bloody xxmaj richard ! xxmaj miserable xxmaj england ! 
▁ i prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee 
▁ xxmaj that ever wretched age hath look'd upon . 
▁ xxmaj come , lead me to the block ; bear him my head . 
▁ xxmaj they smile at me who shortly shall be dead . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the xxmaj tower - walls 

 xxmaj enter xxup gloucester and xxup buckingham in rotten armour , marvellous ill - favoured 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj come , cousin , canst thou quake and change 
▁ thy colour , 
▁ xxmaj murder thy breath in middle of a word , 
▁ xxmaj and then again begin , and stop again , 
▁ xxmaj as if thou were distraught and mad with terror ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj tut , i can counterfeit the deep tragedian ; 
▁ xxmaj speak and look back , and pry on every side , 
▁ xxmaj tremble and start at wagging of a straw , 
▁ xxmaj intending deep suspicion . xxmaj ghastly looks 
▁ xxmaj are at my service , like enforced smiles ; 
▁ xxmaj and both are ready in their offices 
▁ xxmaj at any time to grace my stratagems . 
▁ xxmaj but what , is xxmaj catesby gone ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj he is ; and , see , he brings the mayor along . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup mayor and xxup catesby 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor- 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj look to the drawbridge there ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj hark ! a drum . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj catesby , o'erlook the walls . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor , the reason we have sent- 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj look back , defend thee ; here are enemies . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj god and our innocence defend and guard us ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lovel and xxup ratcliff , with xxup hastings ' head 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj be patient ; they are friends - ratcliff and xxmaj lovel . 
▁ xxup lovel . xxmaj here is the head of that ignoble traitor , 
▁ xxmaj the dangerous and unsuspected xxmaj hastings . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj so dear i lov'd the man that i must weep . 
▁ i took him for the plainest harmless creature 
▁ xxmaj that breath'd upon the earth a xxmaj christian ; 
▁ xxmaj made him my book , wherein my soul recorded 
▁ xxmaj the history of all her secret thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj so smooth he daub'd his vice with show of virtue 
▁ xxmaj that , his apparent open guilt omitted , 
▁ i mean his conversation with xxmaj shore 's wife- 
▁ xxmaj he liv'd from all attainder of suspects . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj well , well , he was the covert'st shelt'red 
▁ traitor 
▁ xxmaj that ever liv'd . 
▁ xxmaj would you imagine , or almost believe- 
▁ xxmaj were't not that by great preservation 
▁ xxmaj we live to tell it - that the subtle traitor 
▁ xxmaj this day had plotted , in the council - house , 
▁ xxmaj to murder me and my good xxmaj lord of xxmaj gloucester . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj had he done so ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what ! think you we are xxmaj turks or xxmaj infidels ? 
▁ xxmaj or that we would , against the form of law , 
▁ xxmaj proceed thus rashly in the villain 's death 
▁ xxmaj but that the extreme peril of the case , 
▁ xxmaj the peace of xxmaj england and our persons ' safety , 
▁ xxmaj enforc'd us to this execution ? 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj now , fair befall you ! xxmaj he deserv'd his death ; 
▁ xxmaj and your good xxmaj graces both have well proceeded 
▁ xxmaj to warn false traitors from the like attempts . 
▁ i never look'd for better at his hands 
▁ xxmaj after he once fell in with xxmaj mistress xxmaj shore . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj yet had we not determin'd he should die 
▁ xxmaj until your lordship came to see his end- 
▁ xxmaj which now the loving haste of these our friends , 
▁ xxmaj something against our meanings , have prevented- 
▁ xxmaj because , my lord , i would have had you heard 
▁ xxmaj the traitor speak , and timorously confess 
▁ xxmaj the manner and the purpose of his treasons : 
▁ xxmaj that you might well have signified the same 
▁ xxmaj unto the citizens , who haply may 
▁ xxmaj misconster us in him and wail his death . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj but , my good lord , your xxmaj grace 's words shall serve 
▁ xxmaj as well as i had seen and heard him speak ; 
▁ xxmaj and do not doubt , right noble xxmaj princes both , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll acquaint our duteous citizens 
▁ xxmaj with all your just proceedings in this cause . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and to that end we wish'd your lordship here , 
▁ xxup t ' avoid xxwrep 3 the censures of the carping world . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj which since you come too late of our intent , 
▁ xxmaj yet witness what you hear we did intend . 
▁ xxmaj and so , my good xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor , we bid farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup lord xxup mayor 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj go , after , after , cousin xxmaj buckingham . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj mayor towards xxmaj guildhall hies him in an post . 
▁ xxmaj there , at your meet'st advantage of the time , 
▁ xxmaj infer the bastardy of xxmaj edward 's children . 
▁ xxmaj tell them how xxmaj edward put to death a citizen 
▁ xxmaj only for saying he would make his son 
▁ xxmaj heir to the crown - meaning indeed his house , 
▁ xxmaj which by the sign thereof was termed so . 
▁ xxmaj moreover , urge his hateful luxury 
▁ xxmaj and bestial appetite in change of lust , 
▁ xxmaj which stretch'd unto their servants , daughters , wives , 
▁ xxmaj even where his raging eye or savage heart 
▁ xxmaj without control lusted to make a prey . 
▁ xxmaj nay , for a need , thus far come near my person : 
▁ xxmaj tell them , when that my mother went with child 
▁ xxmaj of that insatiate xxmaj edward , noble xxmaj york 
▁ xxmaj my princely father then had wars in xxmaj france 
▁ xxmaj and , by true computation of the time , 
▁ xxmaj found that the issue was not his begot ; 
▁ xxmaj which well appeared in his lineaments , 
▁ xxmaj being nothing like the noble xxmaj duke my father . 
▁ xxmaj yet touch this sparingly , as ' twere far off ; 
▁ xxmaj because , my lord , you know my mother lives . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj doubt not , my lord , xxmaj i 'll play the orator 
▁ xxmaj as if the golden fee for which i plead 
▁ xxmaj were for myself ; and so , my lord , adieu . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj if you thrive well , bring them to xxmaj baynard 's 
▁ xxmaj castle ; 
▁ xxmaj where you shall find me well accompanied 
▁ xxmaj with reverend fathers and well learned bishops . 
▁ xxup buckingham . i go ; and towards three or four o'clock 
▁ xxmaj look for the news that the xxmaj guildhall affords . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj go , xxmaj lovel , with all speed to xxmaj doctor xxmaj shaw . 
▁ [ to xxup catesby ] xxmaj go thou to xxmaj friar xxmaj penker . xxmaj bid them both 
▁ xxmaj meet me within this hour at xxmaj baynard 's xxmaj castle . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup gloucester 
▁ xxmaj now will i go to take some privy order 
▁ xxmaj to draw the brats of xxmaj clarence out of sight , 
▁ xxmaj and to give order that no manner person 
▁ xxmaj have any time recourse unto the xxmaj princes . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 6 . 

 xxmaj london . a street 

 xxmaj enter a xxup scrivener 

▁ xxup scrivener . xxmaj here is the indictment of the good xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings ; 
▁ xxmaj which in a set hand fairly is engross'd 
▁ xxmaj that it may be to - day read o'er in xxmaj paul 's . 
▁ xxmaj and mark how well the sequel hangs together : 
▁ xxmaj eleven hours i have spent to write it over , 
▁ xxmaj for yesternight by xxmaj catesby was it sent me ; 
▁ xxmaj the precedent was full as long a - doing ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet within these five hours xxmaj hastings liv'd , 
▁ xxmaj untainted , unexamin'd , free , at liberty . 
▁ xxmaj here 's a good world the while ! xxmaj who is so gros 
▁ xxmaj that can not see this palpable device ? 
▁ xxmaj yet who 's so bold but says he sees it not ? 
▁ xxmaj bad is the world ; and all will come to nought , 
▁ xxmaj when such ill dealing must be seen in thought . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 7 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj baynard 's xxmaj castle 

 xxmaj enter xxup gloucester and xxup buckingham , at several doors 

▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj how now , how now ! xxmaj what say the citizens ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj now , by the holy xxmaj mother of our xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxmaj the citizens are mum , say not a word . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj touch'd you the bastardy of xxmaj edward 's 
▁ children ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . i did ; with his contract with xxmaj lady xxmaj lucy , 
▁ xxmaj and his contract by deputy in xxmaj france ; 
▁ xxmaj th ' insatiate greediness of his desire , 
▁ xxmaj and his enforcement of the city wives ; 
▁ xxmaj his tyranny for trifles ; his own bastardy , 
▁ xxmaj as being got , your father then in xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj and his resemblance , being not like the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxmaj withal i did infer your lineaments , 
▁ xxmaj being the right idea of your father , 
▁ xxmaj both in your form and nobleness of mind ; 
▁ xxmaj laid open all your victories in xxmaj scotland , 
▁ xxmaj your discipline in war , wisdom in peace , 
▁ xxmaj your bounty , virtue , fair humility ; 
▁ xxmaj indeed , left nothing fitting for your purpose 
▁ xxmaj untouch'd or slightly handled in discourse . 
▁ xxmaj and when mine oratory drew toward end 
▁ i bid them that did love their country 's good 
▁ xxmaj cry ' god save xxmaj richard , xxmaj england 's royal xxmaj king ! ' 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj and did they so ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj no , so xxmaj god help me , they spake not a word ; 
▁ xxmaj but , like dumb statues or breathing stones , 
▁ xxmaj star'd each on other , and look'd deadly pale . 
▁ xxmaj which when i saw , i reprehended them , 
▁ xxmaj and ask'd the xxmaj mayor what meant this wilfull silence . 
▁ xxmaj his answer was , the people were not used 
▁ xxmaj to be spoke to but by the xxmaj recorder . 
▁ xxmaj then he was urg'd to tell my tale again . 
▁ ' thus saith the xxmaj duke , thus hath the xxmaj duke inferr'd'- 
▁ xxmaj but nothing spoke in warrant from himself . 
▁ xxmaj when he had done , some followers of mine own 
▁ xxmaj at lower end of the hall hurl'd up their caps , 
▁ xxmaj and some ten voices cried ' god save xxmaj king xxmaj richard ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and thus i took the vantage of those few- 
▁ ' thanks , gentle citizens and friends , ' quoth i 
▁ ' this general applause and cheerful shout 
▁ xxmaj argues your wisdoms and your love to xxmaj richard . ' 
▁ xxmaj and even here brake off and came away . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj what , tongueless blocks were they ? xxmaj would 
▁ they not speak ? 
▁ xxmaj will not the xxmaj mayor then and his brethren come ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj the xxmaj mayor is here at hand . xxmaj intend some fear ; 
▁ xxmaj be not you spoke with but by mighty suit ; 
▁ xxmaj and look you get a prayer - book in your hand , 
▁ xxmaj and stand between two churchmen , good my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj for on that ground xxmaj i 'll make a holy descant ; 
▁ xxmaj and be not easily won to our requests . 
▁ xxmaj play the maid 's part : still answer nay , and take it . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i go ; and if you plead as well for them 
▁ xxmaj as i can say nay to thee for myself , 
▁ xxmaj no doubt we bring it to a happy issue . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj go , go , up to the leads ; the xxmaj lord xxmaj mayor 
▁ knocks . xxmaj exit xxup gloucester 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lord xxup mayor , xxup aldermen , and citizens 

▁ xxmaj welcome , my lord . i dance attendance here ; 
▁ i think the xxmaj duke will not be spoke withal . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup catesby 

▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj catesby , what says your lord to my request ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj he doth entreat your xxmaj grace , my noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj to visit him to - morrow or next day . 
▁ xxmaj he is within , with two right reverend fathers , 
▁ xxmaj divinely bent to meditation ; 
▁ xxmaj and in no worldly suits would he be mov'd , 
▁ xxmaj to draw him from his holy exercise . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj return , good xxmaj catesby , to the gracious xxmaj duke ; 
▁ xxmaj tell him , myself , the xxmaj mayor and xxmaj aldermen , 
▁ xxmaj in deep designs , in matter of great moment , 
▁ xxmaj no less importing than our general good , 
▁ xxmaj are come to have some conference with his xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj i 'll signify so much unto him straight . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj ah ha , my lord , this prince is not an xxmaj edward ! 
▁ xxmaj he is not lolling on a lewd love - bed , 
▁ xxmaj but on his knees at meditation ; 
▁ xxmaj not dallying with a brace of courtezans , 
▁ xxmaj but meditating with two deep divines ; 
▁ xxmaj not sleeping , to engross his idle body , 
▁ xxmaj but praying , to enrich his watchful soul . 
▁ xxmaj happy were xxmaj england would this virtuous prince 
▁ xxmaj take on his xxmaj grace the sovereignty thereof ; 
▁ xxmaj but , sure , i fear we shall not win him to it . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj marry , xxmaj god defend his xxmaj grace should say us nay ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . i fear he will . xxmaj here xxmaj catesby comes again . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup catesby 

▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj catesby , what says his xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj he wonders to what end you have assembled 
▁ xxmaj such troops of citizens to come to him . 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj grace not being warn'd thereof before , 
▁ xxmaj he fears , my lord , you mean no good to him . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj sorry i am my noble cousin should 
▁ xxmaj suspect me that i mean no good to him . 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , we come to him in perfect love ; 
▁ xxmaj and so once more return and tell his xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup catesby 
▁ xxmaj when holy and devout religious men 
▁ xxmaj are at their beads , ' tis much to draw them thence , 
▁ xxmaj so sweet is zealous contemplation . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gloucester aloft , between two xxup bishops . 
▁ xxup catesby returns 

▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj see where his xxmaj grace stands ' tween two clergymen ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj two props of virtue for a xxmaj christian prince , 
▁ xxmaj to stay him from the fall of vanity ; 
▁ xxmaj and , see , a book of prayer in his hand , 
▁ xxmaj true ornaments to know a holy man . 
▁ xxmaj famous xxmaj plantagenet , most gracious xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj lend favourable ear to our requests , 
▁ xxmaj and pardon us the interruption 
▁ xxmaj of thy devotion and right xxmaj christian zeal . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj my lord , there needs no such apology : 
▁ i do beseech your xxmaj grace to pardon me , 
▁ xxmaj who , earnest in the service of my xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj deferr'd the visitation of my friends . 
▁ xxmaj but , leaving this , what is your xxmaj grace 's pleasure ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj even that , i hope , which pleaseth xxmaj god above , 
▁ xxmaj and all good men of this ungovern'd isle . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i do suspect i have done some offence 
▁ xxmaj that seems disgracious in the city 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj and that you come to reprehend my ignorance . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj you have , my lord . xxmaj would it might please 
▁ your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj on our entreaties , to amend your fault ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj else wherefore breathe i in a xxmaj christian land ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj know then , it is your fault that you resign 
▁ xxmaj the supreme seat , the throne majestical , 
▁ xxmaj the scept'red office of your ancestors , 
▁ xxmaj your state of fortune and your due of birth , 
▁ xxmaj the lineal glory of your royal house , 
▁ xxmaj to the corruption of a blemish'd stock ; 
▁ xxmaj whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj which here we waken to our country 's good , 
▁ xxmaj the noble isle doth want her proper limbs ; 
▁ xxmaj her face defac'd with scars of infamy , 
▁ xxmaj her royal stock graft with ignoble plants , 
▁ xxmaj and almost should'red in the swallowing gulf