xxbos xxmaj of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion . 
▁ xxmaj which to recure , we heartily solicit 
▁ xxmaj your gracious self to take on you the charge 
▁ xxmaj and kingly government of this your land- 
▁ xxmaj not as protector , steward , substitute , 
▁ xxmaj or lowly factor for another 's gain ; 
▁ xxmaj but as successively , from blood to blood , 
▁ xxmaj your right of birth , your empery , your own . 
▁ xxmaj for this , consorted with the citizens , 
▁ xxmaj your very worshipful and loving friends , 
▁ xxmaj and by their vehement instigation , 
▁ xxmaj in this just cause come i to move your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup gloucester . i can not tell if to depart in silence 
▁ xxmaj or bitterly to speak in your reproof 
▁ xxmaj best fitteth my degree or your condition . 
▁ xxmaj if not to answer , you might haply think 
▁ xxmaj tongue - tied ambition , not replying , yielded 
▁ xxmaj to bear the golden yoke of sovereignty , 
▁ xxmaj which fondly you would here impose on me ; 
▁ xxmaj if to reprove you for this suit of yours , 
▁ xxmaj so season'd with your faithful love to me , 
▁ xxmaj then , on the other side , i check'd my friends . 
▁ xxmaj therefore - to speak , and to avoid the first , 
▁ xxmaj and then , in speaking , not to incur the last- 
▁ xxmaj definitively thus i answer you : 
▁ xxmaj your love deserves my thanks , but my desert 
▁ xxmaj unmeritable shuns your high request . 
▁ xxmaj first , if all obstacles were cut away , 
▁ xxmaj and that my path were even to the crown , 
▁ xxmaj as the ripe revenue and due of birth , 
▁ xxmaj yet so much is my poverty of spirit , 
▁ xxmaj so mighty and so many my defects , 
▁ xxmaj that i would rather hide me from my greatness- 
▁ xxmaj being a bark to brook no mighty sea- 
▁ xxmaj than in my greatness covet to be hid , 
▁ xxmaj and in the vapour of my glory smother'd . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj god be thank'd , there is no need of me- 
▁ xxmaj and much i need to help you , were there need . 
▁ xxmaj the royal tree hath left us royal fruit 
▁ xxmaj which , mellow'd by the stealing hours of time , 
▁ xxmaj will well become the seat of majesty 
▁ xxmaj and make , no doubt , us happy by his reign . 
▁ xxmaj on him i lay that you would lay on me- 
▁ xxmaj the right and fortune of his happy stars , 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj god defend that i should wring from him . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord , this argues conscience in your 
▁ xxmaj grace ; 
▁ xxmaj but the respects thereof are nice and trivial , 
▁ xxmaj all circumstances well considered . 
▁ xxmaj you say that xxmaj edward is your brother 's son . 
▁ xxmaj so say we too , but not by xxmaj edward 's wife ; 
▁ xxmaj for first was he contract to xxmaj lady xxmaj lucy- 
▁ xxmaj your mother lives a witness to his vow- 
▁ xxmaj and afterward by substitute betroth'd 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj bona , sister to the xxmaj king of xxmaj france . 
▁ xxmaj these both put off , a poor petitioner , 
▁ a care - craz'd mother to a many sons , 
▁ a beauty - waning and distressed widow , 
▁ xxmaj even in the afternoon of her best days , 
▁ xxmaj made prize and purchase of his wanton eye , 
▁ xxmaj seduc'd the pitch and height of his degree 
▁ xxmaj to base declension and loath'd bigamy . 
▁ xxmaj by her , in his unlawful bed , he got 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj edward , whom our manners call the xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxmaj more bitterly could i expostulate , 
▁ xxmaj save that , for reverence to some alive , 
▁ i give a sparing limit to my tongue . 
▁ xxmaj then , good my lord , take to your royal self 
▁ xxmaj this proffer'd benefit of dignity ; 
▁ xxmaj if not to bless us and the land withal , 
▁ xxmaj yet to draw forth your noble ancestry 
▁ xxmaj from the corruption of abusing times 
▁ xxmaj unto a lineal true - derived course . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj do , good my lord ; your citizens entreat you . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj refuse not , mighty lord , this proffer'd love . 
▁ xxup catesby . xxup o , make them joyful , grant their lawful suit ! 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj alas , why would you heap this care on me ? 
▁ i am unfit for state and majesty . 
▁ i do beseech you , take it not amiss : 
▁ i can not nor i will not yield to you . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj if you refuse it - as , in love and zeal , 
▁ xxmaj loath to depose the child , your brother 's son ; 
▁ xxmaj as well we know your tenderness of heart 
▁ xxmaj and gentle , kind , effeminate remorse , 
▁ xxmaj which we have noted in you to your kindred 
▁ xxmaj and egally indeed to all estates- 
▁ xxmaj yet know , whe'er you accept our suit or no , 
▁ xxmaj your brother 's son shall never reign our king ; 
▁ xxmaj but we will plant some other in the throne 
▁ xxmaj to the disgrace and downfall of your house ; 
▁ xxmaj and in this resolution here we leave you . 
▁ xxmaj come , citizens . xxmaj zounds , xxmaj i 'll entreat no more . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxup o , do not swear , my lord of xxmaj buckingham . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup buckingham , xxup mayor , and citizens 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj call him again , sweet xxmaj prince , accept their suit . 
▁ xxmaj if you deny them , all the land will rue it . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj will you enforce me to a world of cares ? 
▁ xxmaj call them again . i am not made of stones , 
▁ xxmaj but penetrable to your kind entreaties , 
▁ xxmaj albeit against my conscience and my soul . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup buckingham and the rest 

▁ xxmaj cousin of xxmaj buckingham , and sage grave men , 
▁ xxmaj since you will buckle fortune on my back , 
▁ xxmaj to bear her burden , whe'er i will or no , 
▁ i must have patience to endure the load ; 
▁ xxmaj but if black scandal or foul - fac'd reproach 
▁ xxmaj attend the sequel of your imposition , 
▁ xxmaj your mere enforcement shall acquittance me 
▁ xxmaj from all the impure blots and stains thereof ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj god doth know , and you may partly see , 
▁ xxmaj how far i am from the desire of this . 
▁ xxup mayor . xxmaj god bless your xxmaj grace ! xxmaj we see it , and will say it . 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj in saying so , you shall but say the truth . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj then i salute you with this royal title- 
▁ xxmaj long live xxmaj king xxmaj richard , xxmaj england 's worthy xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj to - morrow may it please you to be crown'd ? 
▁ xxup gloucester . xxmaj even when you please , for you will have it so . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj to - morrow , then , we will attend your xxmaj grace ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , most joyfully , we take our leave . 
▁ xxup gloucester . [ to the xxup bishops ] xxmaj come , let us to our holy 
▁ work again . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my cousin ; farewell , gentle friends . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj before the xxmaj tower 

 xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup elizabeth , xxup duchess of xxup york , and xxup marquis of xxup dorset , at one door ; 
 xxup anne , xxup duchess of xxup gloucester , leading xxup lady xxup margaret xxup plantagenet , 
 clarence 's young daughter , at another door 

▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj who meets us here ? xxmaj my niece xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj led in the hand of her kind aunt of xxmaj gloucester ? 
▁ xxmaj now , for my life , she 's wand'ring to the xxmaj tower , 
▁ xxmaj on pure heart 's love , to greet the tender xxmaj princes . 
▁ xxmaj daughter , well met . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj god give your xxmaj graces both 
▁ a happy and a joyful time of day ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj as much to you , good sister ! xxmaj whither 
▁ away ? 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj no farther than the xxmaj tower ; and , as i guess , 
▁ xxmaj upon the like devotion as yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj to gratulate the gentle xxmaj princes there . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj kind sister , thanks ; we 'll enter 
▁ all together . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup brakenbury 

▁ xxmaj and in good time , here the lieutenant comes . 
▁ xxmaj master xxmaj lieutenant , pray you , by your leave , 
▁ xxmaj how doth the xxmaj prince , and my young son of xxmaj york ? 
▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj right well , dear madam . xxmaj by your patience , 
▁ i may not suffer you to visit them . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king hath strictly charg'd the contrary . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj the xxmaj king ! xxmaj who 's that ? 
▁ xxup brakenbury . i mean the xxmaj lord xxmaj protector . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj the xxmaj lord protect him from that kingly 
▁ title ! 
▁ xxmaj hath he set bounds between their love and me ? 
▁ i am their mother ; who shall bar me from them ? 
▁ xxup duchess . i am their father 's mother ; i will see them . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj their aunt i am in law , in love their mother . 
▁ xxmaj then bring me to their sights ; xxmaj i 'll bear thy blame , 
▁ xxmaj and take thy office from thee on my peril . 
▁ xxup brakenbury . xxmaj no , madam , no . i may not leave it so ; 
▁ i am bound by oath , and therefore pardon me . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup stanley 

▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj let me but meet you , ladies , one hour hence , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll salute your xxmaj grace of xxmaj york as mother 
▁ xxmaj and reverend looker - on of two fair queens . 
▁ [ to xxup anne ] xxmaj come , madam , you must straight to 
▁ xxmaj westminster , 
▁ xxmaj there to be crowned xxmaj richard 's royal queen . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ah , cut my lace asunder 
▁ xxmaj that my pent heart may have some scope to beat , 
▁ xxmaj or else i swoon with this dead - killing news ! 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj despiteful tidings ! o unpleasing news ! 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj be of good cheer ; mother , how fares your xxmaj grace ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . o xxmaj dorset , speak not to me , get thee 
▁ gone ! 
▁ xxmaj death and destruction dogs thee at thy heels ; 
▁ xxmaj thy mother 's name is ominous to children . 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt outstrip death , go cross the seas , 
▁ xxmaj and live with xxmaj richmond , from the reach of hell . 
▁ xxmaj go , hie thee , hie thee from this slaughter - house , 
▁ xxmaj lest thou increase the number of the dead , 
▁ xxmaj and make me die the thrall of xxmaj margaret 's curse , 
▁ xxmaj nor mother , wife , nor xxmaj england 's counted queen . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj full of wise care is this your counsel , madam . 
▁ xxmaj take all the swift advantage of the hours ; 
▁ xxmaj you shall have letters from me to my son 
▁ xxmaj in your behalf , to meet you on the way . 
▁ xxmaj be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay . 
▁ xxup duchess . o ill - dispersing wind of misery ! 
▁ o my accursed womb , the bed of death ! 
▁ a cockatrice hast thou hatch'd to the world , 
▁ xxmaj whose unavoided eye is murderous . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj come , madam , come ; i in all haste was sent . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj and i with all unwillingness will go . 
▁ xxup o , would to xxmaj god that the inclusive verge 
▁ xxmaj of golden metal that must round my brow 
▁ xxmaj were red - hot steel , to sear me to the brains ! 
▁ xxmaj anointed let me be with deadly venom , 
▁ xxmaj and die ere men can say ' god save the xxmaj queen ! ' 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj go , go , poor soul ; i envy not thy glory . 
▁ xxmaj to feed my humour , wish thyself no harm . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj no , why ? xxmaj when he that is my husband now 
▁ xxmaj came to me , as i follow'd xxmaj henry 's corse ; 
▁ xxmaj when scarce the blood was well wash'd from his hands 
▁ xxmaj which issued from my other angel husband , 
▁ xxmaj and that dear saint which then i weeping follow'd- 
▁ xxup o , when , i say , i look'd on xxmaj richard 's face , 
▁ xxmaj this was my wish : ' be thou ' quoth i ' accurs'd 
▁ xxmaj for making me , so young , so old a widow ; 
▁ xxmaj and when thou wed'st , let sorrow haunt thy bed ; 
▁ xxmaj and be thy wife , if any be so mad , 
▁ xxmaj more miserable by the life of thee 
▁ xxmaj than thou hast made me by my dear lord 's death . ' 
▁ xxmaj lo , ere i can repeat this curse again , 
▁ xxmaj within so small a time , my woman 's heart 
▁ xxmaj grossly grew captive to his honey words 
▁ xxmaj and prov'd the subject of mine own soul 's curse , 
▁ xxmaj which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest ; 
▁ xxmaj for never yet one hour in his bed 
▁ xxmaj did i enjoy the golden dew of sleep , 
▁ xxmaj but with his timorous dreams was still awak'd . 
▁ xxmaj besides , he hates me for my father xxmaj warwick ; 
▁ xxmaj and will , no doubt , shortly be rid of me . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj poor heart , adieu ! i pity thy complaining . 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj no more than with my soul i mourn for yours . 
▁ xxup dorset . xxmaj farewell , thou woeful welcomer of glory ! 
▁ xxup anne . xxmaj adieu , poor soul , that tak'st thy leave of it ! 
▁ xxup duchess . [ to xxup dorset ] xxmaj go thou to xxmaj richmond , and good 
▁ fortune guide thee ! 
▁ [ to xxup anne ] xxmaj go thou to xxmaj richard , and good angels tend 
▁ thee ! [ to xxup queen xxup elizabeth ] xxmaj go thou to sanctuary , and good 
▁ thoughts possess thee ! 
▁ i to my grave , where peace and rest lie with me ! 
▁ xxmaj eighty odd years of sorrow have i seen , 
▁ xxmaj and each hour 's joy wreck'd with a week of teen . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj stay , yet look back with me unto the 
▁ xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxmaj pity , you ancient stones , those tender babes 
▁ xxmaj whom envy hath immur'd within your walls , 
▁ xxmaj rough cradle for such little pretty ones . 
▁ xxmaj rude ragged nurse , old sullen playfellow 
▁ xxmaj for tender princes , use my babies well . 
▁ xxmaj so foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj sound a sennet . xxmaj enter xxup richard , in pomp , as xxup king ; xxup buckingham , xxup catesby , 
 xxup ratcliff , xxup lovel , a xxup page , and others 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj stand all apart . xxmaj cousin of xxmaj buckingham ! 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my gracious sovereign ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj give me thy hand . 
▁ [ here he ascendeth the throne . xxmaj sound ] 
▁ xxmaj thus high , by thy advice 
▁ xxmaj and thy assistance , is xxmaj king xxmaj richard seated . 
▁ xxmaj but shall we wear these glories for a day ; 
▁ xxmaj or shall they last , and we rejoice in them ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj still live they , and for ever let them last ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ah , xxmaj buckingham , now do i play the touch , 
▁ xxmaj to try if thou be current gold indeed . 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj edward lives - think now what i would speak . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj say on , my loving lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , xxmaj buckingham , i say i would be xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj why , so you are , my thrice - renowned lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ha ! am i xxmaj king ? ' tis so ; but xxmaj edward lives . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj true , noble xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . o bitter consequence : 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj edward still should live - true noble xxmaj prince ! 
▁ xxmaj cousin , thou wast not wo nt to be so dull . 
▁ xxmaj shall i be plain ? i wish the bastards dead . 
▁ xxmaj and i would have it suddenly perform'd . 
▁ xxmaj what say'st thou now ? xxmaj speak suddenly , be brief . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj your xxmaj grace may do your pleasure . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj tut , tut , thou art all ice ; thy kindness freezes . 
▁ xxmaj say , have i thy consent that they shall die ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj give me some little breath , some pause , 
▁ dear xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxmaj before i positively speak in this . 
▁ i will resolve you herein presently . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup catesby . [ aside to another ] xxmaj the xxmaj king is angry ; see , he 
▁ gnaws his lip . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i will converse with iron - witted fools 
▁ [ descends from the throne ] 
▁ xxmaj and unrespective boys ; none are for me 
▁ xxmaj that look into me with considerate eyes . 
▁ xxmaj high - reaching xxmaj buckingham grows circumspect . 
▁ xxmaj boy ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj know'st thou not any whom corrupting 
▁ gold 
▁ xxmaj will tempt unto a close exploit of death ? 
▁ xxup page . i know a discontented gentleman 
▁ xxmaj whose humble means match not his haughty spirit . 
▁ xxmaj gold were as good as twenty orators , 
▁ xxmaj and will , no doubt , tempt him to anything . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what is his name ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj his name , my lord , is xxmaj tyrrel . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i partly know the man . xxmaj go , call him hither , 
▁ boy . xxmaj exit xxup page 
▁ xxmaj the deep - revolving witty xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxmaj no more shall be the neighbour to my counsels . 
▁ xxmaj hath he so long held out with me , untir'd , 
▁ xxmaj and stops he now for breath ? xxmaj well , be it so . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup stanley 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj lord xxmaj stanley ! xxmaj what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj know , my loving lord , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj marquis xxmaj dorset , as i hear , is fled 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj richmond , in the parts where he abides . [ stands apart ] 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj catesby . xxmaj rumour it abroad 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj anne , my wife , is very grievous sick ; 
▁ i will take order for her keeping close . 
▁ xxmaj inquire me out some mean poor gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj whom i will marry straight to xxmaj clarence ' daughter- 
▁ xxmaj the boy is foolish , and i fear not him . 
▁ xxmaj look how thou dream'st ! i say again , give out 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj anne , my queen , is sick and like to die . 
▁ xxmaj about it ; for it stands me much upon 
▁ xxmaj to stop all hopes whose growth may damage me . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup catesby 
▁ i must be married to my brother 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass . 
▁ xxmaj murder her brothers , and then marry her ! 
▁ xxmaj uncertain way of gain ! xxmaj but i am in 
▁ xxmaj so far in blood that sin will pluck on sin . 
▁ xxmaj tear - falling pity dwells not in this eye . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup page , with xxup tyrrel 

▁ xxmaj is thy name xxmaj tyrrel ? 
▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj james xxmaj tyrrel , and your most obedient subject . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj art thou , indeed ? 
▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj prove me , my gracious lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj dar'st'thou resolve to kill a friend of mine ? 
▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj please you ; 
▁ xxmaj but i had rather kill two enemies . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , then thou hast it . xxmaj two deep enemies , 
▁ xxmaj foes to my rest , and my sweet sleep 's disturbers , 
▁ xxmaj are they that i would have thee deal upon . 
▁ xxup tyrrel , i mean those bastards in the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj let me have open means to come to them , 
▁ xxmaj and soon xxmaj i 'll rid you from the fear of them . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thou sing'st sweet music . xxmaj hark , come 
▁ hither , xxmaj tyrrel . 
▁ xxmaj go , by this token . xxmaj rise , and lend thine ear . [ whispers ] 
▁ xxmaj there is no more but so : say it is done , 
▁ xxmaj and i will love thee and prefer thee for it . 
▁ xxup tyrrel . i will dispatch it straight . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup buckingham 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord , i have consider'd in my mind 
▁ xxmaj the late request that you did sound me in . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj well , let that rest . xxmaj dorset is fled to 
▁ xxmaj richmond . 
▁ xxup buckingham . i hear the news , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj stanley , he is your wife 's son : well , look 
▁ unto it . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord , i claim the gift , my due by promise , 
▁ xxmaj for which your honour and your faith is pawn'd : 
▁ xxmaj th ' earldom of xxmaj hereford and the movables 
▁ xxmaj which you have promised i shall possess . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj stanley , look to your wife ; if she convey 
▁ xxmaj letters to xxmaj richmond , you shall answer it . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj what says your xxmaj highness to my just request ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i do remember me : xxmaj henry the xxmaj sixth 
▁ xxmaj did prophesy that xxmaj richmond should be xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj richmond was a little peevish boy . 
▁ a king!-perhaps- 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj how chance the prophet could not at that 
▁ time 
▁ xxmaj have told me , i being by , that i should kill him ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord , your promise for the earldom- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj richmond ! xxmaj when last i was at xxmaj exeter , 
▁ xxmaj the mayor in courtesy show'd me the castle 
▁ xxmaj and call'd it xxmaj rugemount , at which name i started , 
▁ xxmaj because a bard of xxmaj ireland told me once 
▁ i should not live long after i saw xxmaj richmond . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , what 's o'clock ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . i am thus bold to put your xxmaj grace in mind 
▁ xxmaj of what you promis'd me . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj well , but o'clock ? 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj upon the stroke of ten . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj well , let it strike . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj why let it strike ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj because that like a xxmaj jack thou keep'st the 
▁ stroke 
▁ xxmaj betwixt thy begging and my meditation . 
▁ i am not in the giving vein to - day . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj may it please you to resolve me in my suit . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj thou troublest me ; i am not in the vein . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj and is it thus ? xxmaj repays he my deep service 
▁ xxmaj with such contempt ? xxmaj made i him xxmaj king for this ? 
▁ xxup o , let me think on xxmaj hastings , and be gone 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj brecknock while my fearful head is on ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup tyrrel 

▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj the tyrannous and bloody act is done , 
▁ xxmaj the most arch deed of piteous massacre 
▁ xxmaj that ever yet this land was guilty of . 
▁ xxmaj dighton and xxmaj forrest , who i did suborn 
▁ xxmaj to do this piece of ruthless butchery , 
▁ xxmaj albeit they were flesh'd villains , bloody dogs , 
▁ xxmaj melted with tenderness and mild compassion , 
▁ xxmaj wept like two children in their deaths ' sad story . 
▁ ' o , thus ' quoth xxmaj dighton ' lay the gentle babes'- 
▁ ' thus , thus , ' quoth xxmaj forrest ' girdling one another 
▁ xxmaj within their alabaster innocent arms . 
▁ xxmaj their lips were four red roses on a stalk , 
▁ xxmaj and in their summer beauty kiss'd each other . 
▁ a book of prayers on their pillow lay ; 
▁ xxmaj which once , ' quoth xxmaj forrest ' almost chang'd my mind ; 
▁ xxmaj but , xxup o , the devil'-there the villain stopp'd ; 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj dighton thus told on : ' we smothered 
▁ xxmaj the most replenished sweet work of nature 
▁ xxmaj that from the prime creation e'er she framed . ' 
▁ xxmaj hence both are gone with conscience and remorse 
▁ xxmaj they could not speak ; and so i left them both , 
▁ xxmaj to bear this tidings to the bloody xxmaj king . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup richard 

▁ xxmaj and here he comes . xxmaj all health , my sovereign lord ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj kind xxmaj tyrrel , am i happy in thy news ? 
▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj if to have done the thing you gave in charge 
▁ xxmaj beget your happiness , be happy then , 
▁ xxmaj for it is done . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj but didst thou see them dead ? 
▁ xxup tyrrel . i did , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and buried , gentle xxmaj tyrrel ? 
▁ xxup tyrrel . xxmaj the chaplain of the xxmaj tower hath buried them ; 
▁ xxmaj but where , to say the truth , i do not know . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj come to me , xxmaj tyrrel , soon at after supper , 
▁ xxmaj when thou shalt tell the process of their death . 
▁ xxmaj meantime , but think how i may do thee good 
▁ xxmaj and be inheritor of thy desire . 
▁ xxmaj farewell till then . 
▁ xxup tyrrel . i humbly take my leave . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj the son of xxmaj clarence have i pent up close ; 
▁ xxmaj his daughter meanly have i match'd in marriage ; 
▁ xxmaj the sons of xxmaj edward sleep in xxmaj abraham 's bosom , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj anne my wife hath bid this world good night . 
▁ xxmaj now , for i know the xxmaj britaine xxmaj richmond aims 
▁ xxmaj at young xxmaj elizabeth , my brother 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj and by that knot looks proudly on the crown , 
▁ xxmaj to her go xxup i , a jolly thriving wooer . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ratcliff 

▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj good or bad news , that thou com'st in so 
▁ bluntly ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj bad news , my lord : xxmaj morton is fled to xxmaj richmond ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj buckingham , back'd with the hardy xxmaj welshmen , 
▁ xxmaj is in the field , and still his power increaseth . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ely with xxmaj richmond troubles me more near 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj buckingham and his rash - levied strength . 
▁ xxmaj come , i have learn'd that fearful commenting 
▁ xxmaj is leaden servitor to dull delay ; 
▁ xxmaj delay leads impotent and snail - pac'd beggary . 
▁ xxmaj then fiery expedition be my wing , 
▁ xxmaj jove 's xxmaj mercury , and herald for a king ! 
▁ xxmaj go , muster men . xxmaj my counsel is my shield . 
▁ xxmaj we must be brief when traitors brave the field . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj london . xxmaj before the palace 

 xxmaj enter old xxup queen xxup margaret 

▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj so now prosperity begins to mellow 
▁ xxmaj and drop into the rotten mouth of death . 
▁ xxmaj here in these confines slily have i lurk'd 
▁ xxmaj to watch the waning of mine enemies . 
▁ a dire induction am i witness to , 
▁ xxmaj and will to xxmaj france , hoping the consequence 
▁ xxmaj will prove as bitter , black , and tragical . 
▁ xxmaj withdraw thee , wretched xxmaj margaret . xxmaj who comes here ? 
▁ [ retires ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup queen xxup elizabeth and the xxup duchess xxup of xxup york 

▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ah , my poor princes ! ah , my tender 
▁ babes ! 
▁ xxmaj my unblown flowers , new - appearing sweets ! 
▁ xxmaj if yet your gentle souls fly in the air 
▁ xxmaj and be not fix'd in doom perpetual , 
▁ xxmaj hover about me with your airy wings 
▁ xxmaj and hear your mother 's lamentation . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj hover about her ; say that right for right 
▁ xxmaj hath dimm'd your infant morn to aged night . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj so many miseries have craz'd my voice 
▁ xxmaj that my woe - wearied tongue is still and mute . 
▁ xxmaj edward xxmaj plantagenet , why art thou dead ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj plantagenet doth quit xxmaj plantagenet , 
▁ xxmaj edward for xxmaj edward pays a dying debt . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj wilt thou , o xxmaj god , fly from such gentle 
▁ lambs 
▁ xxmaj and throw them in the entrails of the wolf ? 
▁ xxmaj when didst thou sleep when such a deed was done ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj when holy xxmaj harry died , and my sweet 
▁ son . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj dead life , blind sight , poor mortal living ghost , 
▁ xxmaj woe 's scene , world 's shame , grave 's due by life usurp'd , 
▁ xxmaj brief abstract and record of tedious days , 
▁ xxmaj rest thy unrest on xxmaj england 's lawful earth , [ sitting down ] 
▁ xxmaj unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj ah , that thou wouldst as soon afford a 
▁ grave 
▁ xxmaj as thou canst yield a melancholy seat ! 
▁ xxmaj then would i hide my bones , not rest them here . 
▁ xxmaj ah , who hath any cause to mourn but we ? 
▁ [ sitting down by her ] 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . [ coming forward ] xxmaj if ancient sorrow be 
▁ most reverend , 
▁ xxmaj give mine the benefit of seniory , 
▁ xxmaj and let my griefs frown on the upper hand . 
▁ xxmaj if sorrow can admit society , [ sitting down with them ] 
▁ xxmaj tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine . 
▁ i had an xxmaj edward , till a xxmaj richard kill'd him ; 
▁ i had a husband , till a xxmaj richard kill'd him : 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst an xxmaj edward , till a xxmaj richard kill'd him ; 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst a xxmaj richard , till a xxmaj richard kill'd him . 
▁ xxup duchess . i had a xxmaj richard too , and thou didst kill him ; 
▁ i had a xxmaj rutland too , thou holp'st to kill him . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj thou hadst a xxmaj clarence too , and xxmaj richard 
▁ kill'd him . 
▁ xxmaj from forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept 
▁ a hell - hound that doth hunt us all to death . 
▁ xxmaj that dog , that had his teeth before his eyes 
▁ xxmaj to worry lambs and lap their gentle blood , 
▁ xxmaj that foul defacer of xxmaj god 's handiwork , 
▁ xxmaj that excellent grand tyrant of the earth 
▁ xxmaj that reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls , 
▁ xxmaj thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves . 
▁ o upright , just , and true - disposing xxmaj god , 
▁ xxmaj how do i thank thee that this carnal cur 
▁ xxmaj preys on the issue of his mother 's body 
▁ xxmaj and makes her pew - fellow with others ' moan ! 
▁ xxup duchess . o xxmaj harry 's wife , triumph not in my woes ! 
▁ xxmaj god witness with me , i have wept for thine . 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj bear with me ; i am hungry for revenge , 
▁ xxmaj and now i cloy me with beholding it . 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj edward he is dead , that kill'd my xxmaj edward ; 
▁ xxmaj the other xxmaj edward dead , to quit my xxmaj edward ; 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj york he is but boot , because both they 
▁ xxmaj match'd not the high perfection of my loss . 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj clarence he is dead that stabb'd my xxmaj edward ; 
▁ xxmaj and the beholders of this frantic play , 
▁ xxmaj th ' adulterate xxmaj hastings , xxmaj rivers , xxmaj vaughan , xxmaj grey , 
▁ xxmaj untimely smother'd in their dusky graves . 
▁ xxmaj richard yet lives , hell 's black intelligencer ; 
▁ xxmaj only reserv'd their factor to buy souls 
▁ xxmaj and send them thither . xxmaj but at hand , at hand , 
▁ xxmaj ensues his piteous and unpitied end . 
▁ xxmaj earth gapes , hell burns , fiends roar , saints pray , 
▁ xxmaj to have him suddenly convey'd from hence . 
▁ xxmaj cancel his bond of life , dear xxmaj god , i pray , 
▁ xxmaj that i may live and say ' the dog is dead . ' 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxup o , thou didst prophesy the time would 
▁ come 
▁ xxmaj that i should wish for thee to help me curse 
▁ xxmaj that bottled spider , that foul bunch - back'd toad ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . i xxmaj call'd thee then vain flourish of my 
▁ fortune ; 
▁ i call'd thee then poor shadow , painted queen , 
▁ xxmaj the presentation of but what i was , 
▁ xxmaj the flattering index of a direful pageant , 
▁ xxmaj one heav'd a - high to be hurl'd down below , 
▁ a mother only mock'd with two fair babes , 
▁ a dream of what thou wast , a garish flag 
▁ xxmaj to be the aim of every dangerous shot , 
▁ a sign of dignity , a breath , a bubble , 
▁ a queen in jest , only to fill the scene . 
▁ xxmaj where is thy husband now ? xxmaj where be thy brothers ? 
▁ xxmaj where be thy two sons ? xxmaj wherein dost thou joy ? 
▁ xxmaj who sues , and kneels , and says ' god save the xxmaj queen ' ? 
▁ xxmaj where be the bending peers that flattered thee ? 
▁ xxmaj where be the thronging troops that followed thee ? 
▁ xxmaj decline an this , and see what now thou art : 
▁ xxmaj for happy wife , a most distressed widow ; 
▁ xxmaj for joyful mother , one that wails the name ; 
▁ xxmaj for one being su'd to , one that humbly sues ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj queen , a very caitiff crown'd with care ; 
▁ xxmaj for she that scorn'd at me , now scorn'd of me ; 
▁ xxmaj for she being fear'd of all , now fearing one ; 
▁ xxmaj for she commanding all , obey'd of none . 
▁ xxmaj thus hath the course of justice whirl'd about 
▁ xxmaj and left thee but a very prey to time , 
▁ xxmaj having no more but thought of what thou wast 
▁ xxmaj to torture thee the more , being what thou art . 
▁ xxmaj thou didst usurp my place , and dost thou not 
▁ xxmaj usurp the just proportion of my sorrow ? 
▁ xxmaj now thy proud neck bears half my burden'd yoke , 
▁ xxmaj from which even here i slip my weary head 
▁ xxmaj and leave the burden of it all on thee . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , xxmaj york 's wife , and queen of sad mischance ; 
▁ xxmaj these xxmaj english woes shall make me smile in xxmaj france . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . o thou well skill'd in curses , stay awhile 
▁ xxmaj and teach me how to curse mine enemies ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj forbear to sleep the nights , and fast the 
▁ days ; 
▁ xxmaj compare dead happiness with living woe ; 
▁ xxmaj think that thy babes were sweeter than they were , 
▁ xxmaj and he that slew them fouler than he is . 
▁ xxmaj bett'ring thy loss makes the bad - causer worse ; 
▁ xxmaj revolving this will teach thee how to curse . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj my words are dull ; xxup o , quicken them 
▁ with thine ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup margaret . xxmaj thy woes will make them sharp and 
▁ pierce like mine . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj why should calamity be fun of words ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj windy attorneys to their client woes , 
▁ xxmaj airy succeeders of intestate joys , 
▁ xxmaj poor breathing orators of miseries , 
▁ xxmaj let them have scope ; though what they will impart 
▁ xxmaj help nothing else , yet do they case the heart . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj if so , then be not tongue - tied . xxmaj go with me , 
▁ xxmaj and in the breath of bitter words let 's smother 
▁ xxmaj my damned son that thy two sweet sons smother'd . 
▁ xxmaj the trumpet sounds ; be copious in exclaims . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup king xxup richard and his train , marching with 
▁ drums and trumpets 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj who intercepts me in my expedition ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxup o , she that might have intercepted thee , 
▁ xxmaj by strangling thee in her accursed womb , 
▁ xxmaj from all the slaughters , wretch , that thou hast done ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj hidest thou that forehead with a golden 
▁ crown 
▁ xxmaj where't should be branded , if that right were right , 
▁ xxmaj the slaughter of the xxmaj prince that ow'd that crown , 
▁ xxmaj and the dire death of my poor sons and brothers ? 
▁ xxmaj tell me , thou villain slave , where are my children ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj thou toad , thou toad , where is thy brother 
▁ xxmaj clarence ? 
▁ xxmaj and little xxmaj ned xxmaj plantagenet , his son ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj where is the gentle xxmaj rivers , xxmaj vaughan , 
▁ xxmaj grey ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj where is kind xxmaj hastings ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . a flourish , trumpets ! xxmaj strike alarum , drums ! 
▁ xxmaj let not the heavens hear these tell - tale women 
▁ xxmaj rail on the xxmaj lord 's anointed . xxmaj strike , i say ! 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj alarums ] 
▁ xxmaj either be patient and entreat me fair , 
▁ xxmaj or with the clamorous report of war 
▁ xxmaj thus will i drown your exclamations . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj art thou my son ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , i thank xxmaj god , my father , and yourself . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj then patiently hear my impatience . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj madam , i have a touch of your condition 
▁ xxmaj that can not brook the accent of reproof . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxup o , let me speak ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj do , then ; but xxmaj i 'll not hear . 
▁ xxup duchess . i will be mild and gentle in my words . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and brief , good mother ; for i am in haste . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj art thou so hasty ? i have stay'd for thee , 
▁ xxmaj god knows , in torment and in agony . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and came i not at last to comfort you ? 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj no , by the holy rood , thou know'st it well 
▁ xxmaj thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell . 
▁ a grievous burden was thy birth to me ; 
▁ xxmaj tetchy and wayward was thy infancy ; 
▁ xxmaj thy school - days frightful , desp'rate , wild , and furious ; 
▁ xxmaj thy prime of manhood daring , bold , and venturous ; 
▁ xxmaj thy age confirm'd , proud , subtle , sly , and bloody , 
▁ xxmaj more mild , but yet more harmful - kind in hatred . 
▁ xxmaj what comfortable hour canst thou name 
▁ xxmaj that ever grac'd me with thy company ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj faith , none but xxmaj humphrey xxmaj hour , that call'd 
▁ your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj to breakfast once forth of my company . 
▁ xxmaj if i be so disgracious in your eye , 
▁ xxmaj let me march on and not offend you , madam . 
▁ xxmaj strike up the drum . 
▁ xxup duchess . i prithee hear me speak . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj you speak too bitterly . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj hear me a word ; 
▁ xxmaj for i shall never speak to thee again . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj so . 
▁ xxup duchess . xxmaj either thou wilt die by xxmaj god 's just ordinance 
▁ xxmaj ere from this war thou turn a conqueror ; 
▁ xxmaj or i with grief and extreme age shall perish 
▁ xxmaj and never more behold thy face again . 
▁ xxmaj therefore take with thee my most grievous curse , 
▁ xxmaj which in the day of battle tire thee more 
▁ xxmaj than all the complete armour that thou wear'st ! 
▁ xxmaj my prayers on the adverse party fight ; 
▁ xxmaj and there the little souls of xxmaj edward 's children 
▁ xxmaj whisper the spirits of thine enemies 
▁ xxmaj and promise them success and victory . 
▁ xxmaj bloody thou art ; bloody will be thy end . 
▁ xxmaj shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj though far more cause , yet much less 
▁ spirit to curse 
▁ xxmaj abides in me ; i say amen to her . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj stay , madam , i must talk a word with you . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . i have no moe sons of the royal blood 
▁ xxmaj for thee to slaughter . xxmaj for my daughters , xxmaj richard , 
▁ xxmaj they shall be praying nuns , not weeping queens ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore level not to hit their lives . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj you have a daughter call'd xxmaj elizabeth . 
▁ xxmaj virtuous and fair , royal and gracious . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj and must she die for this ? xxup o , let her 
▁ live , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll corrupt her manners , stain her beauty , 
▁ xxmaj slander myself as false to xxmaj edward 's bed , 
▁ xxmaj throw over her the veil of infamy ; 
▁ xxmaj so she may live unscarr'd of bleeding slaughter , 
▁ i will confess she was not xxmaj edward 's daughter . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj wrong not her birth ; she is a royal 
▁ xxmaj princess . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj to save her life xxmaj i 'll say she is not so . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj her life is safest only in her birth . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj and only in that safety died her 
▁ brothers . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj lo , at their birth good stars were opposite . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj no , to their lives ill friends were 
▁ contrary . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj all unavoided is the doom of destiny . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj true , when avoided grace makes destiny . 
▁ xxmaj my babes were destin'd to a fairer death , 
▁ xxmaj if grace had bless'd thee with a fairer life . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj you speak as if that i had slain my cousins . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj cousins , indeed ; and by their uncle 
▁ cozen'd 
▁ xxmaj of comfort , kingdom , kindred , freedom , life . 
▁ xxmaj whose hand soever lanc'd their tender hearts , 
▁ xxmaj thy head , an indirectly , gave direction . 
▁ xxmaj no doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt 
▁ xxmaj till it was whetted on thy stone - hard heart 
▁ xxmaj to revel in the entrails of my lambs . 
▁ xxmaj but that stiff use of grief makes wild grief tame , 
▁ xxmaj my tongue should to thy ears not name my boys 
▁ xxmaj till that my nails were anchor'd in thine eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , in such a desp'rate bay of death , 
▁ xxmaj like a poor bark , of sails and tackling reft , 
▁ xxmaj rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj madam , so thrive i in my enterprise 
▁ xxmaj and dangerous success of bloody wars , 
▁ xxmaj as i intend more good to you and yours 
▁ xxmaj than ever you or yours by me were harm'd ! 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj what good is cover'd with the face of 
▁ heaven , 
▁ xxmaj to be discover'd , that can do me good ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . advancement of your children , gentle 
▁ lady . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj up to some scaffold , there to lose their 
▁ heads ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj unto the dignity and height of xxmaj fortune , 
▁ xxmaj the high imperial type of this earth 's glory . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj flatter my sorrow with report of it ; 
▁ xxmaj tell me what state , what dignity , what honour , 
▁ xxmaj canst thou demise to any child of mine ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj even all i have - ay , and myself and all 
▁ xxmaj will i withal endow a child of thine ; 
▁ xxmaj so in the xxmaj lethe of thy angry soul 
▁ xxmaj thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs 
▁ xxmaj which thou supposest i have done to thee . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj be brief , lest that the process of thy 
▁ kindness 
▁ xxmaj last longer telling than thy kindness ' date . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then know , that from my soul i love thy 
▁ daughter . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj my daughter 's mother thinks it with her 
▁ soul . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what do you think ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj that thou dost love my daughter from 
▁ thy soul . 
▁ xxmaj so from thy soul 's love didst thou love her brothers , 
▁ xxmaj and from my heart 's love i do thank thee for it . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj be not so hasty to confound my meaning . 
▁ i mean that with my soul i love thy daughter 
▁ xxmaj and do intend to make her xxmaj queen of xxmaj england . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj well , then , who dost thou mean shall be 
▁ her king ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj even he that makes her xxmaj queen . xxmaj who else 
▁ should be ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj what , thou ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj even so . xxmaj how think you of it ? 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj how canst thou woo her ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj that would i learn of you , 
▁ xxmaj as one being best acquainted with her humour . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj and wilt thou learn of me ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj madam , with all my heart . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj send to her , by the man that slew her 
▁ brothers , 
▁ a pair of bleeding hearts ; thereon engrave 
▁ ' edward ' and ' york . ' xxmaj then haply will she weep ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore present to her - as sometimes xxmaj margaret 
▁ xxmaj did to thy father , steep'd in xxmaj rutland 's blood- 
▁ a handkerchief ; which , say to her , did drain 
▁ xxmaj the purple sap from her sweet brother 's body , 
▁ xxmaj and bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal . 
▁ xxmaj if this inducement move her not to love , 
▁ xxmaj send her a letter of thy noble deeds ; 
▁ xxmaj tell her thou mad'st away her uncle xxmaj clarence , 
▁ xxmaj her uncle xxmaj rivers ; ay , and for her sake 
▁ xxmaj mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt xxmaj anne . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj you mock me , madam ; this is not the way 
▁ xxmaj to win your daughter . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj there is no other way ; 
▁ xxmaj unless thou couldst put on some other shape 
▁ xxmaj and not be xxmaj richard that hath done all this . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj say that i did all this for love of her . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj nay , then indeed she can not choose but 
▁ hate thee , 
▁ xxmaj having bought love with such a bloody spoil . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj look what is done can not be now amended . 
▁ xxmaj men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes , 
▁ xxmaj which after - hours gives leisure to repent . 
▁ xxmaj if i did take the kingdom from your sons , 
▁ xxmaj to make amends xxmaj i 'll give it to your daughter . 
▁ xxmaj if i have kill'd the issue of your womb , 
▁ xxmaj to quicken your increase i will beget 
▁ xxmaj mine issue of your blood upon your daughter . 
▁ a grandam 's name is little less in love 
▁ xxmaj than is the doating title of a mother ; 
▁ xxmaj they are as children but one step below , 
▁ xxmaj even of your metal , of your very blood ; 
▁ xxmaj of all one pain , save for a night of groans 
▁ xxmaj endur'd of her , for whom you bid like sorrow . 
▁ xxmaj your children were vexation to your youth ; 
▁ xxmaj but mine shall be a comfort to your age . 
▁ xxmaj the loss you have is but a son being xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and by that loss your daughter is made xxmaj queen . 
▁ i can not make you what amends i would , 
▁ xxmaj therefore accept such kindness as i can . 
▁ xxmaj dorset your son , that with a fearful soul 
▁ xxmaj leads discontented steps in foreign soil , 
▁ xxmaj this fair alliance quickly shall can home 
▁ xxmaj to high promotions and great dignity . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king , that calls your beauteous daughter wife , 
▁ xxmaj familiarly shall call thy xxmaj dorset brother ; 
▁ xxmaj again shall you be mother to a king , 
▁ xxmaj and all the ruins of distressful times 
▁ xxmaj repair'd with double riches of content . 
▁ xxmaj what ! we have many goodly days to see . 
▁ xxmaj the liquid drops of tears that you have shed 
▁ xxmaj shall come again , transform'd to orient pearl , 
▁ xxmaj advantaging their loan with interest 
▁ xxmaj of ten times double gain of happiness . 
▁ xxmaj go , then , my mother , to thy daughter go ; 
▁ xxmaj make bold her bashful years with your experience ; 
▁ xxmaj prepare her ears to hear a wooer 's tale ; 
▁ xxmaj put in her tender heart th ' aspiring flame 
▁ xxmaj of golden sovereignty ; acquaint the xxmaj princes 
▁ xxmaj with the sweet silent hours of marriage joys . 
▁ xxmaj and when this arm of mine hath chastised 
▁ xxmaj the petty rebel , dull - brain'd xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj bound with triumphant garlands will i come , 
▁ xxmaj and lead thy daughter to a conqueror 's bed ; 
▁ xxmaj to whom i will retail my conquest won , 
▁ xxmaj and she shall be sole victoress , xxmaj caesar 's xxmaj caesar . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj what were i best to say ? xxmaj her father 's 
▁ brother 
▁ xxmaj would be her lord ? xxmaj or shall i say her uncle ? 
▁ xxmaj or he that slew her brothers and her uncles ? 
▁ xxmaj under what title shall i woo for thee 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj god , the law , my honour , and her love 
▁ xxmaj can make seem pleasing to her tender years ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj infer fair xxmaj england 's peace by this alliance . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj which she shall purchase with 
▁ still - lasting war . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj tell her the xxmaj king , that may command , 
▁ entreats . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj that at her hands which the xxmaj king 's 
▁ xxmaj king forbids . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj say she shall be a high and mighty queen . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj to wail the title , as her mother doth . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj say i will love her everlastingly . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj but how long shall that title ' ever ' last ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj sweetly in force unto her fair life 's end . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj but how long fairly shall her sweet life 
▁ last ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj as long as heaven and nature lengthens it . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj as long as hell and xxmaj richard likes of it . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj say xxup i , her sovereign , am her subject low . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj but she , your subject , loathes such 
▁ sovereignty . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj be eloquent in my behalf to her . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj an honest tale speeds best being plainly 
▁ told . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then plainly to her tell my loving tale . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj plain and not honest is too harsh a style . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj your reasons are too shallow and too quick . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxup o , no , my reasons are too deep and 
▁ dead- 
▁ xxmaj too deep and dead , poor infants , in their graves . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj harp not on that string , madam ; that is past . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj harp on it still shall i till heartstrings 
▁ break . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj now , by my xxmaj george , my garter , and my 
▁ crown- 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj profan'd , dishonour'd , and the third 
▁ usurp'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i swear- 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj by nothing ; for this is no oath : 
▁ xxmaj thy xxmaj george , profan'd , hath lost his lordly honour ; 
▁ xxmaj thy garter , blemish'd , pawn'd his knightly virtue ; 
▁ xxmaj thy crown , usurp'd , disgrac'd his kingly glory . 
▁ xxmaj if something thou wouldst swear to be believ'd , 
▁ xxmaj swear then by something that thou hast not wrong'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then , by my self- 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj thy self is self - misus'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj now , by the world- 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . ' tis full of thy foul wrongs . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj my father 's death- 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj thy life hath it dishonour'd . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , then , by xxmaj god- 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj god 's wrong is most of all . 
▁ xxmaj if thou didst fear to break an oath with xxmaj him , 
▁ xxmaj the unity the xxmaj king my husband made 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst not broken , nor my brothers died . 
▁ xxmaj if thou hadst fear'd to break an oath by xxmaj him , 
▁ xxmaj th ' imperial metal , circling now thy head , 
▁ xxmaj had grac'd the tender temples of my child ; 
▁ xxmaj and both the xxmaj princes had been breathing here , 
▁ xxmaj which now , two tender bedfellows for dust , 
▁ xxmaj thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms . 
▁ xxmaj what canst thou swear by now ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj the time to come . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj that thou hast wronged in the time 
▁ o'erpast ; 
▁ xxmaj for i myself have many tears to wash 
▁ xxmaj hereafter time , for time past wrong'd by thee . 
▁ xxmaj the children live whose fathers thou hast slaughter'd , 
▁ xxmaj ungovern'd youth , to wail it in their age ; 
▁ xxmaj the parents live whose children thou hast butcheed , 
▁ xxmaj old barren plants , to wail it with their age . 
▁ xxmaj swear not by time to come ; for that thou hast 
▁ xxmaj misus'd ere us'd , by times ill - us'd o'erpast . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj as i intend to prosper and repent , 
▁ xxmaj so thrive i in my dangerous affairs 
▁ xxmaj of hostile arms ! xxmaj myself myself confound ! 
▁ xxmaj heaven and fortune bar me happy hours ! 
▁ xxmaj day , yield me not thy light ; nor , night , thy rest ! 
▁ xxmaj be opposite all planets of good luck 
▁ xxmaj to my proceeding!-if , with dear heart 's love , 
▁ xxmaj immaculate devotion , holy thoughts , 
▁ i tender not thy beauteous princely daughter . 
▁ xxmaj in her consists my happiness and thine ; 
▁ xxmaj without her , follows to myself and thee , 
▁ xxmaj herself , the land , and many a xxmaj christian soul , 
▁ xxmaj death , desolation , ruin , and decay . 
▁ xxmaj it can not be avoided but by this ; 
▁ xxmaj it will not be avoided but by this . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , dear mother - i must call you so- 
▁ xxmaj be the attorney of my love to her ; 
▁ xxmaj plead what i will be , not what i have been ; 
▁ xxmaj not my deserts , but what i will deserve . 
▁ xxmaj urge the necessity and state of times , 
▁ xxmaj and be not peevish - fond in great designs . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj shall i be tempted of the devil thus ?