xxbos xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , if the devil tempt you to do good . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj shall i forget myself to be myself ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , if your self 's remembrance wrong 
▁ yourself . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj yet thou didst kill my children . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj but in your daughter 's womb i bury them ; 
▁ xxmaj where , in that nest of spicery , they will breed 
▁ xxmaj selves of themselves , to your recomforture . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . xxmaj shall i go win my daughter to thy will ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj and be a happy mother by the deed . 
▁ xxup queen xxup elizabeth . i go . xxmaj write to me very shortly , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall understand from me her mind . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj bear her my true love 's kiss ; and so , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj kissing her . xxmaj exit xxup queen xxup elizabeth 
▁ xxmaj relenting fool , and shallow , changing woman ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ratcliff ; xxup catesby following 

▁ xxmaj how now ! what news ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj most mighty sovereign , on the western coast 
▁ xxmaj rideth a puissant navy ; to our shores 
▁ xxmaj throng many doubtful hollow - hearted friends , 
▁ xxmaj unarm'd , and unresolv'd to beat them back . 
▁ ' tis thought that xxmaj richmond is their admiral ; 
▁ xxmaj and there they hull , expecting but the aid 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj buckingham to welcome them ashore . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj some light - foot friend post to the xxmaj duke of 
▁ xxmaj norfolk . 
▁ xxmaj ratcliff , thyself - or xxmaj catesby ; where is he ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj here , my good lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj catesby , fly to the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup catesby . i will my lord , with all convenient haste . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ratcliff , come hither . xxmaj post to xxmaj salisbury ; 
▁ xxmaj when thou com'st thither- [ to xxup catesby ] xxmaj dull , 
▁ unmindfull villain , 
▁ xxmaj why stay'st thou here , and go'st not to the xxmaj duke ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj first , mighty liege , tell me your xxmaj highness ' pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj what from your xxmaj grace i shall deliver to him . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxup o , true , good xxmaj catesby . xxmaj bid him levy straight 
▁ xxmaj the greatest strength and power that he can make 
▁ xxmaj and meet me suddenly at xxmaj salisbury . 
▁ xxup catesby . i go . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj what , may it please you , shall i do at xxmaj salisbury ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , what wouldst thou do there before i 
▁ go ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj your xxmaj highness told me i should post before . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj my mind is chang'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lord xxup stanley 

▁ xxup stanley , what news with you ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj none good , my liege , to please you with 
▁ the hearing ; 
▁ xxmaj nor none so bad but well may be reported . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj hoyday , a riddle ! neither good nor bad ! 
▁ xxmaj what need'st thou run so many miles about , 
▁ xxmaj when thou mayest tell thy tale the nearest way ? 
▁ xxmaj once more , what news ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj richmond is on the seas . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj there let him sink , and be the seas on him ! 
▁ xxmaj white - liver'd runagate , what doth he there ? 
▁ xxup stanley . i know not , mighty sovereign , but by guess . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj well , as you guess ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj stirr'd up by xxmaj dorset , xxmaj buckingham , and xxmaj morton , 
▁ xxmaj he makes for xxmaj england here to claim the crown . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj is the chair empty ? xxmaj is the sword unsway'd ? 
▁ xxmaj is the xxmaj king dead , the empire unpossess'd ? 
▁ xxmaj what heir of xxmaj york is there alive but we ? 
▁ xxmaj and who is xxmaj england 's xxmaj king but great xxmaj york 's heir ? 
▁ xxmaj then tell me what makes he upon the seas . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj unless for that , my liege , i can not guess . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj unless for that he comes to be your liege , 
▁ xxmaj you can not guess wherefore the xxmaj welshman comes . 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt revolt and fly to him , i fear . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj no , my good lord ; therefore mistrust me not . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj where is thy power then , to beat him back ? 
▁ xxmaj where be thy tenants and thy followers ? 
▁ xxmaj are they not now upon the western shore , 
▁ xxmaj safe - conducting the rebels from their ships ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj no , my good lord , my friends are in the north . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj cold friends to me . xxmaj what do they in the 
▁ north , 
▁ xxmaj when they should serve their sovereign in the west ? 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj they have not been commanded , mighty xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj pleaseth your xxmaj majesty to give me leave , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll muster up my friends and meet your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj where and what time your xxmaj majesty shall please . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj ay , ay , thou wouldst be gone to join with 
▁ xxmaj richmond ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll not trust thee . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj most mighty sovereign , 
▁ xxmaj you have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful . 
▁ i never was nor never will be false . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj go , then , and muster men . xxmaj but leave behind 
▁ xxmaj your son , xxmaj george xxmaj stanley . xxmaj look your heart be firm , 
▁ xxmaj or else his head 's assurance is but frail . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj so deal with him as i prove true to you . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my gracious sovereign , now in xxmaj devonshire , 
▁ xxmaj as i by friends am well advertised , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj edward xxmaj courtney and the haughty prelate , 
▁ xxmaj bishop of xxmaj exeter , his elder brother , 
▁ xxmaj with many moe confederates , are in arms . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup messenger 

▁ xxup second xxup messenger . xxmaj in xxmaj kent , my liege , the xxmaj guilfords are in 
▁ arms ; 
▁ xxmaj and every hour more competitors 
▁ xxmaj flock to the rebels , and their power grows strong . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup messenger 

▁ xxup third xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord , the army of great xxmaj buckingham- 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj out on you , owls ! xxmaj nothing but songs of 
▁ death ? [ he strikes him ] 
▁ xxmaj there , take thou that till thou bring better news . 
▁ xxup third xxup messenger . xxmaj the news i have to tell your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj is that by sudden floods and fall of waters 
▁ xxmaj buckingham 's army is dispers'd and scatter'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and he himself wand'red away alone , 
▁ xxmaj no man knows whither . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i cry thee mercy . 
▁ xxmaj there is my purse to cure that blow of thine . 
▁ xxmaj hath any well - advised friend proclaim'd 
▁ xxmaj reward to him that brings the traitor in ? 
▁ xxup third xxup messenger . xxmaj such proclamation hath been made , 
▁ my xxmaj lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup messenger 

▁ xxup fourth xxup messenger . xxmaj sir xxmaj thomas xxmaj lovel and xxmaj lord xxmaj marquis 
▁ xxmaj dorset , 
▁ ' tis said , my liege , in xxmaj yorkshire are in arms . 
▁ xxmaj but this good comfort bring i to your xxmaj highness- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj britaine navy is dispers'd by tempest . 
▁ xxmaj richmond in xxmaj dorsetshire sent out a boat 
▁ xxmaj unto the shore , to ask those on the banks 
▁ xxmaj if they were his assistants , yea or no ; 
▁ xxmaj who answer'd him they came from xxmaj buckingham 
▁ xxmaj upon his party . xxmaj he , mistrusting them , 
▁ xxmaj hois'd sail , and made his course again for xxmaj britaine . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj march on , march on , since we are up in 
▁ arms ; 
▁ xxmaj if not to fight with foreign enemies , 
▁ xxmaj yet to beat down these rebels here at home . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup catesby 

▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj my liege , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj buckingham is taken- 
▁ xxmaj that is the best news . xxmaj that the xxmaj earl of xxmaj richmond 
▁ xxmaj is with a mighty power landed at xxmaj milford 
▁ xxmaj is colder tidings , yet they must be told . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj away towards xxmaj salisbury ! xxmaj while we reason 
▁ here 
▁ a royal battle might be won and lost . 
▁ xxmaj some one take order xxmaj buckingham be brought 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj salisbury ; the rest march on with me . 
▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxup lord xxup derby 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup stanley and xxup sir xxup christopher xxup urswick 

▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj sir xxmaj christopher , tell xxmaj richmond this from me : 
▁ xxmaj that in the sty of the most deadly boar 
▁ xxmaj my son xxmaj george xxmaj stanley is frank'd up in hold ; 
▁ xxmaj if i revolt , off goes young xxmaj george 's head ; 
▁ xxmaj the fear of that holds off my present aid . 
▁ xxmaj so , get thee gone ; commend me to thy lord . 
▁ xxmaj withal say that the xxmaj queen hath heartily consented 
▁ xxmaj he should espouse xxmaj elizabeth her daughter . 
▁ xxmaj but tell me , where is princely xxmaj richmond now ? 
▁ xxup christopher . xxmaj at xxmaj pembroke , or at xxmaj ha'rford west in xxmaj wales . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj what men of name resort to him ? 
▁ xxup christopher . xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj herbert , a renowned soldier ; 
▁ xxup sir xxmaj gilbert xxmaj talbot , xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj stanley , 
▁ xxup oxford , redoubted xxmaj pembroke , xxmaj sir xxmaj james xxmaj blunt , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj rice ap xxmaj thomas , with a valiant crew ; 
▁ xxmaj and many other of great name and worth ; 
▁ xxmaj and towards xxmaj london do they bend their power , 
▁ xxmaj if by the way they be not fought withal . 
▁ xxup stanley . xxmaj well , hie thee to thy lord ; i kiss his hand ; 
▁ xxmaj my letter will resolve him of my mind . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 

 xxmaj salisbury . xxmaj an open place 

 xxmaj enter the xxup sheriff and guard , with xxup buckingham , led to execution 

▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj will not xxmaj king xxmaj richard let me speak with 
▁ him ? 
▁ xxup sheriff . xxmaj no , my good lord ; therefore be patient . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj hastings , and xxmaj edward 's children , xxmaj grey , and 
▁ xxmaj rivers , 
▁ xxmaj holy xxmaj king xxmaj henry , and thy fair son xxmaj edward , 
▁ xxmaj vaughan , and all that have miscarried 
▁ xxmaj by underhand corrupted foul injustice , 
▁ xxmaj if that your moody discontented souls 
▁ xxmaj do through the clouds behold this present hour , 
▁ xxmaj even for revenge mock my destruction ! 
▁ xxmaj this is all - souls ' day , fellow , is it not ? 
▁ xxup sheriff . xxmaj it is , my lord . 
▁ xxup buckingham . xxmaj why , then all - souls ' day is my body 's 
▁ doomsday . 
▁ xxmaj this is the day which in xxmaj king xxmaj edward 's time 
▁ i wish'd might fall on me when i was found 
▁ xxmaj false to his children and his wife 's allies ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the day wherein i wish'd to fall 
▁ xxmaj by the false faith of him whom most i trusted ; 
▁ xxmaj this , this all - souls ' day to my fearful soul 
▁ xxmaj is the determin'd respite of my wrongs ; 
▁ xxmaj that high all - seer which i dallied with 
▁ xxmaj hath turn'd my feigned prayer on my head 
▁ xxmaj and given in earnest what i begg'd in jest . 
▁ xxmaj thus doth xxmaj he force the swords of wicked men 
▁ xxmaj to turn their own points in their masters ' bosoms . 
▁ xxmaj thus xxmaj margaret 's curse falls heavy on my neck . 
▁ ' when he ' quoth she ' shall split thy heart with sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj remember xxmaj margaret was a prophetess . ' 
▁ xxmaj come lead me , officers , to the block of shame ; 
▁ xxmaj wrong hath but wrong , and blame the due of blame . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 . 

 xxmaj camp near xxmaj tamworth 

 xxmaj enter xxup richmond , xxup oxford , xxup sir xxup james xxup blunt , xxup sir xxup walter xxup herbert , and others , 
 with drum and colours 

▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj fellows in arms , and my most loving friends , 
▁ xxmaj bruis'd underneath the yoke of tyranny , 
▁ xxmaj thus far into the bowels of the land 
▁ xxmaj have we march'd on without impediment ; 
▁ xxmaj and here receive we from our father xxmaj stanley 
▁ xxmaj lines of fair comfort and encouragement . 
▁ xxmaj the wretched , bloody , and usurping boar , 
▁ xxmaj that spoil'd your summer fields and fruitful vines , 
▁ xxmaj swills your warm blood like wash , and makes his trough 
▁ xxmaj in your embowell'd bosoms - this foul swine 
▁ xxmaj is now even in the centre of this isle , 
▁ xxmaj near to the town of xxmaj leicester , as we learn . 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj tamworth thither is but one day 's march . 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj god 's name cheerly on , courageous friends , 
▁ xxmaj to reap the harvest of perpetual peace 
▁ xxmaj by this one bloody trial of sharp war . 
▁ xxup oxford . xxmaj every man 's conscience is a thousand men , 
▁ xxmaj to fight against this guilty homicide . 
▁ xxup herbert . i doubt not but his friends will turn to us . 
▁ xxup blunt . xxmaj he hath no friends but what are friends for fear , 
▁ xxmaj which in his dearest need will fly from him . 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj all for our vantage . xxmaj then in xxmaj god 's name march . 
▁ xxmaj true hope is swift and flies with swallow 's wings ; 
▁ xxmaj kings it makes gods , and meaner creatures kings . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 . 

 xxmaj bosworth xxmaj field 

 xxmaj enter xxup king xxup richard in arms , with xxup norfolk , xxup ratcliff , 
 the xxup earl of xxup surreys and others 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj here pitch our tent , even here in xxmaj bosworth 
▁ field . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj surrey , why look you so sad ? 
▁ xxup surrey . xxmaj my heart is ten times lighter than my looks . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj norfolk ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj here , most gracious liege . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj norfolk , we must have knocks ; ha ! must we 
▁ not ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj we must both give and take , my loving lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj up xxmaj with my tent ! xxmaj here will i lie to - night ; 
▁ [ soldiers begin to set up the xxup king 's tent ] 
▁ xxmaj but where to - morrow ? xxmaj well , all 's one for that . 
▁ xxmaj who hath descried the number of the traitors ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj six or seven thousand is their utmost power . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj why , our battalia trebles that account ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , the xxmaj king 's name is a tower of strength , 
▁ xxmaj which they upon the adverse faction want . 
▁ xxmaj up with the tent ! xxmaj come , noble gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj let us survey the vantage of the ground . 
▁ xxmaj call for some men of sound direction . 
▁ xxmaj let 's lack no discipline , make no delay ; 
▁ xxmaj for , lords , to - morrow is a busy day . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj enter , on the other side of the field , 
▁ xxup richmond , xxup sir xxup william xxup brandon , xxup oxford , xxup dorset , 
▁ and others . xxmaj some pitch xxup richmond 's tent 

▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj the weary sun hath made a golden set , 
▁ xxmaj and by the bright tract of his fiery car 
▁ xxmaj gives token of a goodly day to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj brandon , you shall bear my standard . 
▁ xxmaj give me some ink and paper in my tent . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll draw the form and model of our battle , 
▁ xxmaj limit each leader to his several charge , 
▁ xxmaj and part in just proportion our small power . 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj lord of xxmaj oxford - you , xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj brandon- 
▁ xxmaj and you , xxmaj sir xxmaj walter xxmaj herbert - stay with me . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj earl of xxmaj pembroke keeps his regiment ; 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj captain xxmaj blunt , bear my good night to him , 
▁ xxmaj and by the second hour in the morning 
▁ xxmaj desire the xxmaj earl to see me in my tent . 
▁ xxmaj yet one thing more , good xxmaj captain , do for me- 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj lord xxmaj stanley quarter'd , do you know ? 
▁ xxup blunt . xxmaj unless i have mista'en his colours much- 
▁ xxmaj which well i am assur'd i have not done- 
▁ xxmaj his regiment lies half a mile at least 
▁ xxmaj south from the mighty power of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj if without peril it be possible , 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj blunt , make some good means to speak with him 
▁ xxmaj and give him from me this most needful note . 
▁ xxup blunt . xxmaj upon my life , my lord , xxmaj i 'll undertake it ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , xxmaj god give you quiet rest to - night ! 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj good night , good xxmaj captain xxmaj blunt . xxmaj come , 
▁ gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj let us consult upon to - morrow 's business . 
▁ xxmaj in to my tent ; the dew is raw and cold . 
▁ [ they withdraw into the tent ] 

▁ xxmaj enter , to his - tent , xxup king xxup richard , xxup norfolk , 
▁ xxup ratcliff , and xxup catesby 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what is't o'clock ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj it 's supper - time , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj it 's nine o'clock . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . i will not sup to - night . 
▁ xxmaj give me some ink and paper . 
▁ xxmaj what , is my beaver easier than it was ? 
▁ xxmaj and all my armour laid into my tent ? 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj it is , my liege ; and all things are in readiness . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj good xxmaj norfolk , hie thee to thy charge ; 
▁ xxmaj use careful watch , choose trusty sentinels . 
▁ xxup norfolk . i go , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj stir with the lark to - morrow , gentle xxmaj norfolk . 
▁ xxup norfolk . i warrant you , my lord . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj catesby ! 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj send out a pursuivant - at - arms 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj stanley 's regiment ; bid him bring his power 
▁ xxmaj before sunrising , lest his son xxmaj george fall 
▁ xxmaj into the blind cave of eternal night . xxmaj exit xxup catesby 
▁ xxmaj fill me a bowl of wine . xxmaj give me a watch . 
▁ xxmaj saddle white xxmaj surrey for the field to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj look that my staves be sound , and not too heavy . 
▁ xxmaj ratcliff ! 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj saw'st thou the melancholy xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj northumberland ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj thomas the xxmaj earl of xxmaj surrey and himself , 
▁ xxmaj much about cock - shut time , from troop to troop 
▁ xxmaj went through the army , cheering up the soldiers . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj so , i am satisfied . xxmaj give me a bowl of wine . 
▁ i have not that alacrity of spirit 
▁ xxmaj nor cheer of mind that i was wo nt to have . 
▁ xxmaj set it down . xxmaj is ink and paper ready ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj it is , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj bid my guard watch ; leave me . 
▁ xxup ratcliff , about the mid of night come to my tent 
▁ xxmaj and help to arm me . xxmaj leave me , i say . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup ratcliff . xxup richard sleeps 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup derby to xxup richmond in his tent ; 
▁ xxup lords attending 

▁ xxup derby . xxmaj fortune and victory sit on thy helm ! 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj all comfort that the dark night can afford 
▁ xxmaj be to thy person , noble father - in - law ! 
▁ xxmaj tell me , how fares our loving mother ? 
▁ xxup derby . xxup i , by attorney , bless thee from thy mother , 
▁ xxmaj who prays continually for xxmaj richmond 's good . 
▁ xxmaj so much for that . xxmaj the silent hours steal on , 
▁ xxmaj and flaky darkness breaks within the east . 
▁ xxmaj in brief , for so the season bids us be , 
▁ xxmaj prepare thy battle early in the morning , 
▁ xxmaj and put thy fortune to the arbitrement 
▁ xxmaj of bloody strokes and mortal - staring war . 
▁ xxup i , as i may - that which i would i cannot- 
▁ xxmaj with best advantage will deceive the time 
▁ xxmaj and aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms ; 
▁ xxmaj but on thy side i may not be too forward , 
▁ xxmaj lest , being seen , thy brother , tender xxmaj george , 
▁ xxmaj be executed in his father 's sight . 
▁ xxmaj farewell ; the leisure and the fearful time 
▁ xxmaj cuts off the ceremonious vows of love 
▁ xxmaj and ample interchange of sweet discourse 
▁ xxmaj which so - long - sund'red friends should dwell upon . 
▁ xxmaj god give us leisure for these rites of love ! 
▁ xxmaj once more , adieu ; be valiant , and speed well ! 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj good lords , conduct him to his regiment . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap , 
▁ xxmaj lest leaden slumber peise me down to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj when i should mount with wings of victory . 
▁ xxmaj once more , good night , kind lords and gentlemen . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup richmond 
▁ o xxmaj thou , whose captain i account myself , 
▁ xxmaj look on my forces with a gracious eye ; 
▁ xxmaj put in their hands xxmaj thy bruising irons of wrath , 
▁ xxmaj that they may crush down with a heavy fall 
▁ xxmaj the usurping helmets of our adversaries ! 
▁ xxmaj make us xxmaj thy ministers of chastisement , 
▁ xxmaj that we may praise xxmaj thee in the victory ! 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj thee i do commend my watchful soul 
▁ xxmaj ere i let fall the windows of mine eyes . 
▁ xxmaj sleeping and waking , xxup o , defend me still ! [ sleeps ] 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghost xxmaj of xxup young xxup prince xxup edward , 
▁ son to xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 

▁ xxup ghost . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj let me sit heavy on thy soul 
▁ to - morrow ! 
▁ xxmaj think how thou stabb'dst me in my prime of youth 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj tewksbury ; despair , therefore , and die ! 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj be cheerful , xxmaj richmond ; for the wronged 
▁ souls 
▁ xxmaj of butcher'd princes fight in thy behalf . 
▁ xxmaj king xxmaj henry 's issue , xxmaj richmond , comforts thee . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghost of xxup henry xxup the xxup sixth 

▁ xxup ghost . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj when i was mortal , my anointed 
▁ body 
▁ xxmaj by thee was punched full of deadly holes . 
▁ xxmaj think on the xxmaj tower and me . xxmaj despair , and die . 
▁ xxmaj harry the xxmaj sixth bids thee despair and die . 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj virtuous and holy , be thou conqueror ! 
▁ xxmaj harry , that prophesied thou shouldst be xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj doth comfort thee in thy sleep . xxmaj live and flourish ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghost of xxup clarence 

▁ xxup ghost . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj let me sit heavy in thy soul 
▁ to - morrow ! i that was wash'd to death with fulsome wine , 
▁ xxmaj poor xxmaj clarence , by thy guile betray'd to death ! 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow in the battle think on me , 
▁ xxmaj and fall thy edgeless sword . xxmaj despair and die ! 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj thou offspring of the house of xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj the wronged heirs of xxmaj york do pray for thee . 
▁ xxmaj good angels guard thy battle ! xxmaj live and flourish ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghosts of xxup rivers , xxup grey , and xxup vaughan 

▁ xxup ghost xxup of xxup rivers . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj let me sit heavy in thy 
▁ soul to - morrow , 
▁ xxmaj rivers that died at xxmaj pomfret ! xxmaj despair and die ! 
▁ xxup ghost xxup of xxup grey . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj think upon xxmaj grey , and let 
▁ thy soul despair ! 
▁ xxup ghost xxup of xxup vaughan . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj think upon xxmaj vaughan , 
▁ and with guilty fear 
▁ xxmaj let fall thy lance . xxmaj despair and die ! 
▁ xxup all . [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj awake , and think our wrongs in 
▁ xxmaj richard 's bosom 
▁ xxmaj will conquer him . xxmaj awake and win the day . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghost of xxup hastings 

▁ xxup ghost . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj bloody and guilty , guiltily awake , 
▁ xxmaj and in a bloody battle end thy days ! 
▁ xxmaj think on xxmaj lord xxmaj hastings . xxmaj despair and die . 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj quiet untroubled soul , awake , awake ! 
▁ xxmaj arm , fight , and conquer , for fair xxmaj england 's sake ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghosts of the two young xxup princes 

▁ xxup ghosts . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj dream on thy cousins smothered in 
▁ the xxmaj tower . 
▁ xxmaj let us be lead within thy bosom , xxmaj richard , 
▁ xxmaj and weigh thee down to ruin , shame , and death ! 
▁ xxmaj thy nephews ' souls bid thee despair and die . 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj sleep , xxmaj richmond , sleep in peace , and 
▁ wake in joy ; 
▁ xxmaj good angels guard thee from the boar 's annoy ! 
▁ xxmaj live , and beget a happy race of kings ! 
▁ xxmaj edward 's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghost of xxup lady xxup anne , his wife 

▁ xxup ghost . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj richard , thy wife , that wretched 
▁ xxmaj anne thy wife 
▁ xxmaj that never slept a quiet hour with thee 
▁ xxmaj now fills thy sleep with perturbations . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow in the battle think on me , 
▁ xxmaj and fall thy edgeless sword . xxmaj despair and die . 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] xxmaj thou quiet soul , sleep thou a quiet sleep ; 
▁ xxmaj dream of success and happy victory . 
▁ xxmaj thy adversary 's wife doth pray for thee . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup ghost of xxup buckingham 

▁ xxup ghost . [ to xxup richard ] xxmaj the first was i that help'd thee 
▁ to the crown ; 
▁ xxmaj the last was i that felt thy tyranny . 
▁ xxup o , in the battle think on xxmaj buckingham , 
▁ xxmaj and die in terror of thy guiltiness ! 
▁ xxmaj dream on , dream on of bloody deeds and death ; 
▁ xxmaj fainting , despair ; despairing , yield thy breath ! 
▁ [ to xxup richmond ] i died for hope ere i could lend thee aid ; 
▁ xxmaj but cheer thy heart and be thou not dismay'd : 
▁ xxmaj god and good angels fight on xxmaj richmond 's side ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj richard falls in height of all his pride . 
▁ [ the xxup ghosts vanish . xxup richard starts out of his dream ] 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj give me another horse . xxmaj bind up my wounds . 
▁ xxmaj have mercy , xxmaj jesu ! xxmaj soft ! i did but dream . 
▁ o coward conscience , how dost thou afflict me ! 
▁ xxmaj the lights burn blue . xxmaj it is now dead midnight . 
▁ xxmaj cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh . 
▁ xxmaj what do i fear ? xxmaj myself ? xxmaj there 's none else by . 
▁ xxmaj richard loves xxmaj richard ; that is , i am xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj is there a murderer here ? xxmaj no - yes , i am . 
▁ xxmaj then fly . xxmaj what , from myself ? xxmaj great reason why- 
▁ xxmaj lest i revenge . xxmaj what , myself upon myself ! 
▁ xxmaj alack , i love myself . xxmaj wherefore ? xxmaj for any good 
▁ xxmaj that i myself have done unto myself ? 
▁ xxup o , no ! xxmaj alas , i rather hate myself 
▁ xxmaj for hateful deeds committed by myself ! 
▁ i am a villain ; yet i lie , i am not . 
▁ xxmaj fool , of thyself speak well . xxmaj fool , do not flatter . 
▁ xxmaj my conscience hath a thousand several tongues , 
▁ xxmaj and every tongue brings in a several tale , 
▁ xxmaj and every tale condemns me for a villain . 
▁ xxmaj perjury , perjury , in the high'st degree ; 
▁ xxmaj murder , stern murder , in the dir'st degree ; 
▁ xxmaj all several sins , all us'd in each degree , 
▁ xxmaj throng to the bar , crying all ' guilty ! guilty ! ' 
▁ i shall despair . xxmaj there is no creature loves me ; 
▁ xxmaj and if i die no soul will pity me : 
▁ xxmaj and wherefore should they , since that i myself 
▁ xxmaj find in myself no pity to myself ? 
▁ xxmaj methought the souls of all that i had murder'd 
▁ xxmaj came to my tent , and every one did threat 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow 's vengeance on the head of xxmaj richard . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ratcliff 

▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj zounds , who is there ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj ratcliff , my lord ; ' tis xxup i. xxmaj the early village - cock 
▁ xxmaj hath twice done salutation to the morn ; 
▁ xxmaj your friends are up and buckle on their armour . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . o xxmaj ratcliff , i have dream'd a fearful dream ! 
▁ xxmaj what think'st thou - will our friends prove all true ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj no doubt , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . o xxmaj ratcliff , i fear , i fear . 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj nay , good my lord , be not afraid of shadows . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard xxmaj by the apostle xxmaj paul , shadows to - night 
▁ xxmaj have stuck more terror to the soul of xxmaj richard 
▁ xxmaj than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers 
▁ xxmaj armed in proof and led by shallow xxmaj richmond . 
▁ ' tis not yet near day . xxmaj come , go with me ; 
▁ xxmaj under our tents xxmaj i 'll play the eaves - dropper , 
▁ xxmaj to see if any mean to shrink from me . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup lords to xxup richmond sitting in his tent 

▁ xxup lords . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj richmond ! 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj cry mercy , lords and watchful gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj that you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here . 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj how have you slept , my lord ? 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj the sweetest sleep and fairest - boding dreams 
▁ xxmaj that ever ent'red in a drowsy head 
▁ xxmaj have i since your departure had , my lords . 
▁ xxmaj methought their souls whose bodies xxmaj richard murder'd 
▁ xxmaj came to my tent and cried on victory . 
▁ i promise you my soul is very jocund 
▁ xxmaj in the remembrance of so fair a dream . 
▁ xxmaj how far into the morning is it , lords ? 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj upon the stroke of four . 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj why , then ' tis time to arm and give direction . 

▁ xxmaj his xxup oration to his xxup soldiers 

▁ xxmaj more than i have said , loving countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj the leisure and enforcement of the time 
▁ xxmaj forbids to dwell upon ; yet remember this : 
▁ xxmaj god and our good cause fight upon our side ; 
▁ xxmaj the prayers of holy saints and wronged souls , 
▁ xxmaj like high - rear'd bulwarks , stand before our faces ; 
▁ xxmaj richard except , those whom we fight against 
▁ xxmaj had rather have us win than him they follow . 
▁ xxmaj for what is he they follow ? xxmaj truly , gentlemen , 
▁ a bloody tyrant and a homicide ; 
▁ xxmaj one rais'd in blood , and one in blood establish'd ; 
▁ xxmaj one that made means to come by what he hath , 
▁ xxmaj and slaughtered those that were the means to help him ; 
▁ a base foul stone , made precious by the foil 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj england 's chair , where he is falsely set ; 
▁ xxmaj one that hath ever been xxmaj god 's enemy . 
▁ xxmaj then if you fight against xxmaj god 's enemy , 
▁ xxmaj god will in justice ward you as his soldiers ; 
▁ xxmaj if you do sweat to put a tyrant down , 
▁ xxmaj you sleep in peace , the tyrant being slain ; 
▁ xxmaj if you do fight against your country 's foes , 
▁ xxmaj your country 's foes shall pay your pains the hire ; 
▁ xxmaj if you do fight in safeguard of your wives , 
▁ xxmaj your wives shall welcome home the conquerors ; 
▁ xxmaj if you do free your children from the sword , 
▁ xxmaj your children 's children quits it in your age . 
▁ xxmaj then , in the name of xxmaj god and all these rights , 
▁ xxmaj advance your standards , draw your willing swords . 
▁ xxmaj for me , the ransom of my bold attempt 
▁ xxmaj shall be this cold corpse on the earth 's cold face ; 
▁ xxmaj but if i thrive , the gain of my attempt 
▁ xxmaj the least of you shall share his part thereof . 
▁ xxmaj sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully ; 
▁ xxmaj god and xxmaj saint xxmaj george ! xxmaj richmond and victory ! xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup king xxup richard , xxup ratcliff , attendants , 
▁ and forces 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj what said xxmaj northumberland as touching 
▁ xxmaj richmond ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj that he was never trained up in arms . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj he said the truth ; and what said xxmaj surrey 
▁ then ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj he smil'd , and said ' the better for our purpose . ' 
▁ xxup king xxmaj he was in the right ; and so indeed it is . 
▁ [ clock strikes ] 
▁ xxmaj tell the clock there . xxmaj give me a calendar . 
▁ xxmaj who saw the sun to - day ? 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj not xxup i , my lord . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj then he disdains to shine ; for by the book 
▁ xxmaj he should have brav'd the east an hour ago . 
▁ a black day will it be to somebody . 
▁ xxmaj ratcliff ! 
▁ xxup ratcliff . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj the sun will not be seen to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj the sky doth frown and lour upon our army . 
▁ i would these dewy tears were from the ground . 
▁ xxmaj not shine to - day ! xxmaj why , what is that to me 
▁ xxmaj more than to xxmaj richmond ? xxmaj for the selfsame heaven 
▁ xxmaj that frowns on me looks sadly upon him . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup norfolk 

▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj arm , arm , my lord ; the foe vaunts in the field . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj come , bustle , bustle ; caparison my horse ; 
▁ xxmaj call up xxmaj lord xxmaj stanley , bid him bring his power . 
▁ i will lead forth my soldiers to the plain , 
▁ xxmaj and thus my battle shall be ordered : 
▁ xxmaj my foreward shall be drawn out all in length , 
▁ xxmaj consisting equally of horse and foot ; 
▁ xxmaj our archers shall be placed in the midst . 
▁ xxmaj john xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , xxmaj thomas xxmaj earl of xxmaj surrey , 
▁ xxmaj shall have the leading of this foot and horse . 
▁ xxmaj they thus directed , we will follow 
▁ xxmaj in the main battle , whose puissance on either side 
▁ xxmaj shall be well winged with our chiefest horse . 
▁ xxmaj this , and xxmaj saint xxmaj george to boot ! xxmaj what think'st thou , 
▁ xxmaj norfolk ? 
▁ xxup norfolk . a good direction , warlike sovereign . 
▁ xxmaj this found i on my tent this morning . 
▁ [ he sheweth him a paper ] 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . [ reads ] 
▁ ' jockey of xxmaj norfolk , be not so bold , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj dickon thy master is bought and sold . ' 
▁ a thing devised by the enemy . 
▁ xxmaj go , gentlemen , every man unto his charge . 
▁ xxmaj let not our babbling dreams affright our souls ; 
▁ xxmaj conscience is but a word that cowards use , 
▁ xxmaj devis'd at first to keep the strong in awe . 
▁ xxmaj our strong arms be our conscience , swords our law . 
▁ xxmaj march on , join bravely , let us to it pell - mell ; 
▁ xxmaj if not to heaven , then hand in hand to hell . 

▁ xxmaj his xxup oration to his xxup army 

▁ xxmaj what shall i say more than i have inferr'd ? 
▁ xxmaj remember whom you are to cope withal- 
▁ a sort of vagabonds , rascals , and runaways , 
▁ a scum of xxmaj britaines , and base lackey peasants , 
▁ xxmaj whom their o'er - cloyed country vomits forth 
▁ xxmaj to desperate adventures and assur'd destruction . 
▁ xxmaj you sleeping safe , they bring to you unrest ; 
▁ xxmaj you having lands , and bless'd with beauteous wives , 
▁ xxmaj they would restrain the one , distain the other . 
▁ xxmaj and who doth lead them but a paltry fellow , 
▁ xxmaj long kept in xxmaj britaine at our mother 's cost ? 
▁ a milk - sop , one that never in his life 
▁ xxmaj felt so much cold as over shoes in snow ? 
▁ xxmaj let 's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again ; 
▁ xxmaj lash hence these over - weening rags of xxmaj france , 
▁ xxmaj these famish'd beggars , weary of their lives ; 
▁ xxmaj who , but for dreaming on this fond exploit , 
▁ xxmaj for want of means , poor rats , had hang'd themselves . 
▁ xxmaj if we be conquered , let men conquer us , 
▁ xxmaj and not these bastard xxmaj britaines , whom our fathers 
▁ xxmaj have in their own land beaten , bobb'd , and thump'd , 
▁ xxmaj and , in record , left them the heirs of shame . 
▁ xxmaj shall these enjoy our lands ? lie with our wives , 
▁ xxmaj ravish our daughters ? [ drum afar off ] xxmaj hark ! i hear their 
▁ drum . 
▁ xxmaj fight , gentlemen of xxmaj england ! xxmaj fight , bold yeomen ! 
▁ xxmaj draw , archers , draw your arrows to the head ! 
▁ xxmaj spur your proud horses hard , and ride in blood ; 
▁ xxmaj amaze the welkin with your broken staves ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 
▁
▁ xxmaj what says xxmaj lord xxmaj stanley ? xxmaj will he bring his power ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj my lord , he doth deny to come . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj off with his son xxmaj george 's head ! 
▁ xxup norfolk . xxmaj my lord , the enemy is pass'd the marsh . 
▁ xxmaj after the battle let xxmaj george xxmaj stanley die . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . a thousand hearts are great within my 
▁ bosom . 
▁ xxmaj advance our standards , set upon our foes ; 
▁ xxmaj our ancient word of courage , fair xxmaj saint xxmaj george , 
▁ xxmaj inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons ! 
▁ xxmaj upon them ! xxmaj victory sits on our helms . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 4 . 

 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj alarum ; excursions . xxmaj enter xxup norfolk and forces ; to him xxup catesby 

▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj rescue , my xxmaj lord of xxmaj norfolk , rescue , rescue ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king enacts more wonders than a man , 
▁ xxmaj daring an opposite to every danger . 
▁ xxmaj his horse is slain , and all on foot he fights , 
▁ xxmaj seeking for xxmaj richmond in the throat of death . 
▁ xxmaj rescue , fair lord , or else the day is lost . 

▁ xxmaj alarums . xxmaj enter xxup king xxup richard 

▁ xxup king xxup richard . a horse ! a horse ! my kingdom for a horse ! 
▁ xxup catesby . xxmaj withdraw , my lord ! xxmaj i 'll help you to a horse . 
▁ xxup king xxup richard . xxmaj slave , i have set my life upon a cast 
▁ xxmaj and i xxmaj will stand the hazard of the die . 
▁ i think there be six xxmaj richmonds in the field ; 
▁ xxmaj five have i slain to - day instead of him . 
▁ a horse ! a horse ! my kingdom for a horse ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 5 . 

 xxmaj another part of the field 

 xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup richard and xxup richmond ; they fight ; xxup richard is slain . 
 xxmaj retreat and flourish . xxmaj enter xxup richmond , xxup derby bearing the crown , 
 with other xxup lords 

▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj god and your arms be prais'd , victorious friends ; 
▁ xxmaj the day is ours , the bloody dog is dead . 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj courageous xxmaj richmond , well hast thou acquit thee ! 
▁ xxmaj lo , here , this long - usurped royalty 
▁ xxmaj from the dead temples of this bloody wretch 
▁ xxmaj have i pluck'd off , to grace thy brows withal . 
▁ xxmaj wear it , enjoy it , and make much of it . 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj great xxmaj god of heaven , say xxmaj amen to all ! 
▁ xxmaj but , tell me is young xxmaj george xxmaj stanley living . 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj he is , my lord , and safe in xxmaj leicester town , 
▁ xxmaj whither , if it please you , we may now withdraw us . 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj what men of name are slain on either side ? 
▁ xxup derby . xxmaj john xxmaj duke of xxmaj norfolk , xxmaj walter xxmaj lord xxmaj ferrers , 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj robert xxmaj brakenbury , and xxmaj sir xxmaj william xxmaj brandon . 
▁ xxup richmond . xxmaj inter their bodies as becomes their births . 
▁ xxmaj proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled 
▁ xxmaj that in submission will return to us . 
▁ xxmaj and then , as we have ta'en the sacrament , 
▁ xxmaj we will unite the white rose and the red . 
▁ xxmaj smile heaven upon this fair conjunction , 
▁ xxmaj that long have frown'd upon their emnity ! 
▁ xxmaj what traitor hears me , and says not xxmaj amen ? 
▁ xxmaj england hath long been mad , and scarr'd herself ; 
▁ xxmaj the brother blindly shed the brother 's blood , 
▁ xxmaj the father rashly slaughter'd his own son , 
▁ xxmaj the son , compell'd , been butcher to the sire ; 
▁ xxmaj all this divided xxmaj york and xxmaj lancaster , 
▁ xxmaj divided in their dire division , 
▁ xxup o , now let xxmaj richmond and xxmaj elizabeth , 
▁ xxmaj the true succeeders of each royal house , 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj god 's fair ordinance conjoin together ! 
▁ xxmaj and let their heirs , xxmaj god , if thy will be so , 
▁ xxmaj enrich the time to come with smooth - fac'd peace , 
▁ xxmaj with smiling plenty , and fair prosperous days ! 
▁ xxmaj abate the edge of traitors , gracious xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxmaj that would reduce these bloody days again 
▁ xxmaj and make poor xxmaj england weep in streams of blood ! 
▁ xxmaj let them not live to taste this land 's increase 
▁ xxmaj that would with treason wound this fair land 's peace ! 
▁ xxmaj now civil wounds are stopp'd , peace lives again- 
▁ xxmaj that she may long live here , xxmaj god say xxmaj amen ! xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1595 


 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup romeo xxup and xxup juliet 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxmaj chorus . 

▁ xxmaj escalus , xxmaj prince of xxmaj verona . 
▁ xxmaj paris , a young xxmaj count , kinsman to the xxmaj prince . 
▁ xxmaj montague , heads of two houses at variance with each other . 
▁ xxmaj capulet , heads of two houses at variance with each other . 
▁ xxmaj an old xxmaj man , of the xxmaj capulet family . 
▁ xxmaj romeo , son to xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj tybalt , nephew to xxmaj lady xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj mercutio , kinsman to the xxmaj prince and friend to xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj benvolio , nephew to xxmaj montague , and friend to xxmaj romeo 
▁ xxmaj tybalt , nephew to xxmaj lady xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence , xxmaj franciscan . 
▁ xxmaj friar xxmaj john , xxmaj franciscan . 
▁ xxmaj balthasar , servant to xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj abram , servant to xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj sampson , servant to xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj gregory , servant to xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj peter , servant to xxmaj juliet 's nurse . 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj apothecary . 
▁ xxmaj three xxmaj musicians . 
▁ xxmaj an xxmaj officer . 

▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj montague , wife to xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj lady xxmaj capulet , wife to xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj juliet , daughter to xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj nurse to xxmaj juliet . 

▁ xxmaj citizens of xxmaj verona ; xxmaj gentlemen and xxmaj gentlewomen of both houses ; 
▁ xxmaj maskers , xxmaj torchbearers , xxmaj pages , xxmaj guards , xxmaj watchmen , xxmaj servants , and 
▁ xxmaj attendants . 

▁ scene.--verona ; xxmaj mantua . 



▁ xxup the xxup prologue 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj chorus . 

▁ xxmaj chor . xxmaj two households , both alike in dignity , 
▁ xxmaj in fair xxmaj verona , where we lay our scene , 
▁ xxmaj from ancient grudge break to new mutiny , 
▁ xxmaj where civil blood makes civil hands unclean . 
▁ xxmaj from forth the fatal loins of these two foes 
▁ a pair of star - cross'd lovers take their life ; 
▁ xxmaj whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows 
▁ xxmaj doth with their death bury their parents ' strife . 
▁ xxmaj the fearful passage of their death - mark'd love , 
▁ xxmaj and the continuance of their parents ' rage , 
▁ xxmaj which , but their children 's end , naught could remove , 
▁ xxmaj is now the two hours ' traffic of our stage ; 
▁ xxmaj the which if you with patient ears attend , 
▁ xxmaj what here shall miss , our toil shall strive to mend . 
▁ [ exit . ] 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj verona . a public place . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj sampson and xxmaj gregory ( with swords and bucklers ) of the house of xxmaj capulet . 

▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj gregory , on my word , we 'll not carry coals . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj no , for then we should be colliers . 
▁ xxmaj samp . i mean , an we be in choler , we 'll draw . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj ay , while you live , draw your neck out of collar . 
▁ xxmaj samp . i strike quickly , being moved . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj but thou art not quickly moved to strike . 
▁ xxmaj samp . a dog of the house of xxmaj montague moves me . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj to move is to stir , and to be valiant is to stand . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , if thou art moved , thou runn'st away . 
▁ xxmaj samp . a dog of that house shall move me to stand . i will take the 
▁ wall of any man or maid of xxmaj montague 's . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj that shows thee a weak slave ; for the weakest goes to the 
▁ wall . 
▁ xxmaj samp . ' tis true ; and therefore women , being the weaker vessels , are 
▁ ever thrust to the wall . xxmaj therefore i will push xxmaj montague 's men 
▁ from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj the quarrel is between our masters and us their men . 
▁ xxmaj samp . ' tis all one . i will show myself a tyrant . xxmaj when i have fought 
▁ with the men , i will be cruel with the maids- i will cut off 
▁ their heads . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj the heads of the maids ? 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj ay , the heads of the maids , or their maidenheads . 
▁ xxmaj take it in what sense thou wilt . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj they must take it in sense that feel it . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj me they shall feel while i am able to stand ; and ' tis known i 
▁ am a pretty piece of flesh . 
▁ xxmaj greg . ' tis well thou art not fish ; if thou hadst , thou hadst been 
▁ poor - john . xxmaj draw thy tool ! xxmaj here comes two of the house of 
▁ xxmaj montagues . 

▁ xxmaj enter two other xxmaj servingmen [ abram and xxmaj balthasar ] . 

▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj my naked weapon is out . xxmaj quarrel ! i will back thee . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj how ? turn thy back and run ? 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj fear me not . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj no , marry . i fear thee ! 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj let us take the law of our sides ; let them begin . 
▁ xxmaj greg . i will frown as i pass by , and let them take it as they list . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj nay , as they dare . i will bite my thumb at them ; which is 
▁ disgrace to them , if they bear it . 
▁ xxmaj abr . xxmaj do you bite your thumb at us , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj samp . i do bite my thumb , sir . 
▁ xxmaj abr . xxmaj do you bite your thumb at us , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj samp . [ aside to xxmaj gregory ] xxmaj is the law of our side if i say ay ? 
▁ xxmaj greg . [ aside to xxmaj sampson ] xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj no , sir , i do not bite my thumb at you , sir ; but i bite my 
▁ thumb , sir . 
▁ xxmaj greg . xxmaj do you quarrel , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj abr . xxmaj quarrel , sir ? xxmaj no , sir . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj but if you do , sir , am for you . i serve as good a man as you . 
▁ xxmaj abr . xxmaj no better . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj well , sir . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj benvolio . 

▁ xxmaj greg . [ aside to xxmaj sampson ] xxmaj say ' better . ' xxmaj here comes one of my 
▁ master 's kinsmen . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj yes , better , sir . 
▁ xxmaj abr . xxmaj you lie . 
▁ xxmaj samp . xxmaj draw , if you be men . xxmaj gregory , remember thy swashing blow . 
▁ xxmaj they fight . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj part , fools ! [ beats down their swords . ] 
▁ xxmaj put up your swords . xxmaj you know not what you do . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj tybalt . 

▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj what , art thou drawn among these heartless hinds ? 
▁ xxmaj turn thee xxmaj benvolio ! look upon thy death . 
▁ xxmaj ben . i do but keep the peace . xxmaj put up thy sword , 
▁ xxmaj or manage it to part these men with me . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj what , drawn , and talk of peace ? i hate the word 
▁ xxmaj as i hate hell , all xxmaj montagues , and thee . 
▁ xxmaj have at thee , coward ! xxmaj they fight . 

▁ xxmaj enter an officer , and three or four xxmaj citizens with clubs or 
▁ partisans . 
▁
▁ xxmaj officer . xxmaj clubs , bills , and partisans ! xxmaj strike ! beat them down ! 
▁ xxmaj citizens . xxmaj down with the xxmaj capulets ! xxmaj down with the xxmaj montagues !