xxbos xxmaj enter xxmaj old xxmaj capulet in his gown , and his xxmaj wife . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj what noise is this ? xxmaj give me my long sword , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj wife . a crutch , a crutch ! xxmaj why call you for a sword ? 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj my sword , i say ! xxmaj old xxmaj montague is come 
▁ xxmaj and flourishes his blade in spite of me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj old xxmaj montague and his xxmaj wife . 

▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj thou villain xxmaj capulet!- xxmaj hold me not , let me go . 
▁ xxup m. xxmaj wife . xxmaj thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj prince xxmaj escalus , with his xxmaj train . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj rebellious subjects , enemies to peace , 
▁ xxmaj profaners of this neighbour - stained steel- 
▁ xxmaj will they not hear ? xxmaj what , ho ! you men , you beasts , 
▁ xxmaj that quench the fire of your pernicious rage 
▁ xxmaj with purple fountains issuing from your veins ! 
▁ xxmaj on pain of torture , from those bloody hands 
▁ xxmaj throw your mistempered weapons to the ground 
▁ xxmaj and hear the sentence of your moved prince . 
▁ xxmaj three civil brawls , bred of an airy word 
▁ xxmaj by thee , old xxmaj capulet , and xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets 
▁ xxmaj and made xxmaj verona 's ancient citizens 
▁ xxmaj cast by their grave beseeming ornaments 
▁ xxmaj to wield old partisans , in hands as old , 
▁ xxmaj cank'red with peace , to part your cank'red hate . 
▁ xxmaj if ever you disturb our streets again , 
▁ xxmaj your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace . 
▁ xxmaj for this time all the rest depart away . 
▁ xxmaj you , xxmaj capulet , shall go along with me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj montague , come you this afternoon , 
▁ xxmaj to know our farther pleasure in this case , 
▁ xxmaj to old xxmaj freetown , our common judgment place . 
▁ xxmaj once more , on pain of death , all men depart . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but xxmaj montague , his xxmaj wife , and xxmaj benvolio ] . 
▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj who set this ancient quarrel new abroach ? 
▁ xxmaj speak , nephew , were you by when it began ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj here were the servants of your adversary 
▁ xxmaj and yours , close fighting ere i did approach . 
▁ i drew to part them . xxmaj in the instant came 
▁ xxmaj the fiery xxmaj tybalt , with his sword prepar'd ; 
▁ xxmaj which , as he breath'd defiance to my ears , 
▁ xxmaj he swung about his head and cut the winds , 
▁ xxmaj who , nothing hurt withal , hiss'd him in scorn . 
▁ xxmaj while we were interchanging thrusts and blows , 
▁ xxmaj came more and more , and fought on part and part , 
▁ xxmaj till the xxmaj prince came , who parted either part . 
▁ xxup m. xxmaj wife . xxup o , where is xxmaj romeo ? xxmaj saw you him to - day ? 
▁ xxmaj right glad i am he was not at this fray . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj madam , an hour before the worshipp'd sun 
▁ xxmaj peer'd forth the golden window of the xxmaj east , 
▁ a troubled mind drave me to walk abroad ; 
▁ xxmaj where , underneath the grove of sycamore 
▁ xxmaj that westward rooteth from the city 's side , 
▁ xxmaj so early walking did i see your son . 
▁ xxmaj towards him i made ; but he was ware of me 
▁ xxmaj and stole into the covert of the wood . 
▁ xxup i- measuring his affections by my own , 
▁ xxmaj which then most sought where most might not be found , 
▁ xxmaj being one too many by my weary self- 
▁ xxmaj pursu'd my humour , not xxmaj pursuing his , 
▁ xxmaj and gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me . 
▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj many a morning hath he there been seen , 
▁ xxmaj with tears augmenting the fresh morning 's dew , 
▁ xxmaj adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs ; 
▁ xxmaj but all so soon as the all - cheering sun 
▁ xxmaj should in the farthest xxmaj east bean to draw 
▁ xxmaj the shady curtains from xxmaj aurora 's bed , 
▁ xxmaj away from light steals home my heavy son 
▁ xxmaj and private in his chamber pens himself , 
▁ xxmaj shuts up his windows , locks fair daylight 
▁ xxmaj and makes himself an artificial night . 
▁ xxmaj black and portentous must this humour prove 
▁ xxmaj unless good counsel may the cause remove . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj my noble uncle , do you know the cause ? 
▁ xxmaj mon . i neither know it nor can learn of him 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj have you importun'd him by any means ? 
▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj both by myself and many other friend ; 
▁ xxmaj but he , his own affections ' counsellor , 
▁ xxmaj is to himself- i will not say how true- 
▁ xxmaj but to himself so secret and so close , 
▁ xxmaj so far from sounding and discovery , 
▁ xxmaj as is the bud bit with an envious worm 
▁ xxmaj ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air 
▁ xxmaj or dedicate his beauty to the sun . 
▁ xxmaj could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow , 
▁ xxmaj we would as willingly give cure as know . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj see , where he comes . xxmaj so please you step aside , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll know his grievance , or be much denied . 
▁ xxmaj mon . i would thou wert so happy by thy stay 
▁ xxmaj to hear true shrift . xxmaj come , madam , let 's away , 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ montague and xxmaj wife ] . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj good morrow , cousin . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj is the day so young ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj but new struck nine . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ay me ! sad hours seem long . 
▁ xxmaj was that my father that went hence so fast ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj it was . xxmaj what sadness lengthens xxmaj romeo 's hours ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj not having that which having makes them short . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj in love ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj out- 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj of love ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj out of her favour where i am in love . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj alas that love , so gentle in his view , 
▁ xxmaj should be so tyrannous and rough in proof ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj alas that love , whose view is muffled still , 
▁ xxmaj should without eyes see pathways to his will ! 
▁ xxmaj where shall we dine ? o me ! xxmaj what fray was here ? 
▁ xxmaj yet tell me not , for i have heard it all . 
▁ xxmaj here 's much to do with hate , but more with love . 
▁ xxmaj why then , o brawling love ! o loving hate ! 
▁ o anything , of nothing first create ! 
▁ o heavy lightness ! serious vanity ! 
▁ xxmaj misshapen chaos of well - seeming forms ! 
▁ xxmaj feather of lead , bright smoke , cold fire , sick health ! 
▁ xxmaj still - waking sleep , that is not what it is 
▁ xxmaj this love feel xxup i , that feel no love in this . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou not laugh ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj no , coz , i rather weep . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj good heart , at what ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj at thy good heart 's oppression . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj why , such is love 's transgression . 
▁ xxmaj griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast , 
▁ xxmaj which thou wilt propagate , to have it prest 
▁ xxmaj with more of thine . xxmaj this love that thou hast shown 
▁ xxmaj doth add more grief to too much of mine own . 
▁ xxmaj love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs ; 
▁ xxmaj being purg'd , a fire sparkling in lovers ' eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj being vex'd , a sea nourish'd with lovers ' tears . 
▁ xxmaj what is it else ? a madness most discreet , 
▁ a choking gall , and a preserving sweet . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my coz . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj soft ! i will go along . 
▁ xxmaj an if you leave me so , you do me wrong . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj tut ! i have lost myself ; i am not here : 
▁ xxmaj this is not xxmaj romeo , he 's some other where . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj tell me in sadness , who is that you love ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what , shall i groan and tell thee ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj groan ? xxmaj why , no ; 
▁ xxmaj but sadly tell me who . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj bid a sick man in sadness make his will . 
▁ xxmaj ah , word ill urg'd to one that is so ill ! 
▁ xxmaj in sadness , cousin , i do love a woman . 
▁ xxmaj ben . i aim'd so near when i suppos'd you lov'd . 
▁ xxmaj rom . a right good markman ! xxmaj and she 's fair i love . 
▁ xxmaj ben . a right fair mark , fair coz , is soonest hit . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj well , in that hit you miss . xxmaj she 'll not be hit 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj cupid 's arrow . xxmaj she hath xxmaj dian 's wit , 
▁ xxmaj and , in strong proof of chastity well arm'd , 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj love 's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd . 
▁ xxmaj she will not stay the siege of loving terms , 
▁ xxmaj nor bide th ' encounter of assailing eyes , 
▁ xxmaj nor ope her lap to saint - seducing gold . 
▁ xxup o , she 's rich in beauty ; only poor 
▁ xxmaj that , when she dies , with beauty dies her store . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj she hath , and in that sparing makes huge waste ; 
▁ xxmaj for beauty , starv'd with her severity , 
▁ xxmaj cuts beauty off from all posterity . 
▁ xxmaj she is too fair , too wise , wisely too fair , 
▁ xxmaj to merit bliss by making me despair . 
▁ xxmaj she hath forsworn to love , and in that vow 
▁ xxmaj do i live dead that live to tell it now . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj be rul'd by me : forget to think of her . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , teach me how i should forget to think ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj by giving liberty unto thine eyes . 
▁ xxmaj examine other beauties . 
▁ xxmaj rom . ' tis the way 
▁ xxmaj to call hers ( exquisite ) in question more . 
▁ xxmaj these happy masks that kiss fair ladies ' brows , 
▁ xxmaj being black puts us in mind they hide the fair . 
▁ xxmaj he that is strucken blind can not forget 
▁ xxmaj the precious treasure of his eyesight lost . 
▁ xxmaj show me a mistress that is passing fair , 
▁ xxmaj what doth her beauty serve but as a note 
▁ xxmaj where i may read who pass'd that passing fair ? 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj thou canst not teach me to forget . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj i 'll pay that doctrine , or else die in debt . xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 a xxmaj street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj capulet , xxmaj county xxmaj paris , and [ servant ] -the xxmaj clown . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj but xxmaj montague is bound as well as xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj in penalty alike ; and ' tis not hard , i think , 
▁ xxmaj for men so old as we to keep the peace . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj of honourable reckoning are you both , 
▁ xxmaj and pity ' tis you liv'd at odds so long . 
▁ xxmaj but now , my lord , what say you to my suit ? 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj but saying o'er what i have said before : 
▁ xxmaj my child is yet a stranger in the world , 
▁ xxmaj she hath not seen the change of fourteen years ; 
▁ xxmaj let two more summers wither in their pride 
▁ xxmaj ere we may think her ripe to be a bride . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj younger than she are happy mothers made . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj and too soon marr'd are those so early made . 
▁ xxmaj the earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she ; 
▁ xxmaj she is the hopeful lady of my earth . 
▁ xxmaj but woo her , gentle xxmaj paris , get her heart ; 
▁ xxmaj my will to her consent is but a part . 
▁ xxmaj an she agree , within her scope of choice 
▁ xxmaj lies my consent and fair according voice . 
▁ xxmaj this night i hold an old accustom'd feast , 
▁ xxmaj whereto i have invited many a guest , 
▁ xxmaj such as i love ; and you among the store , 
▁ xxmaj one more , most welcome , makes my number more . 
▁ xxmaj at my poor house look to behold this night 
▁ xxmaj earth - treading stars that make dark heaven light . 
▁ xxmaj such comfort as do lusty young men feel 
▁ xxmaj when well apparell'd xxmaj april on the heel 
▁ xxmaj of limping xxmaj winter treads , even such delight 
▁ xxmaj among fresh female buds shall you this night 
▁ xxmaj inherit at my house . xxmaj hear all , all see , 
▁ xxmaj and like her most whose merit most shall be ; 
▁ xxmaj which , on more view of many , mine , being one , 
▁ xxmaj may stand in number , though in reck'ning none . 
▁ xxmaj come , go with me . [ to xxmaj servant , giving him a paper ] xxmaj go , sirrah , 
▁ trudge about 
▁ xxmaj through fair xxmaj verona ; find those persons out 
▁ xxmaj whose names are written there , and to them say , 
▁ xxmaj my house and welcome on their pleasure stay- 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ capulet and xxmaj paris ] . 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj find them out whose names are written here ? xxmaj it is written 
▁ that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor 
▁ with his last , the fisher with his pencil and the painter with 
▁ his nets ; but i am sent to find those persons whose names are 
▁ here writ , and can never find what names the writing person hath 
▁ here writ . i must to the learned . xxmaj in good time ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj benvolio and xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj tut , man , one fire burns out another 's burning ; 
▁ xxmaj one pain is lessoned by another 's anguish ; 
▁ xxmaj turn giddy , and be holp by backward turning ; 
▁ xxmaj one desperate grief cures with another 's languish . 
▁ xxmaj take thou some new infection to thy eye , 
▁ xxmaj and the rank poison of the old will die . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj your plantain leaf is excellent for that . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj for what , i pray thee ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj for your broken shin . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj why , xxmaj romeo , art thou mad ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj not mad , but bound more than a madman is ; 
▁ xxmaj shut up in xxmaj prison , kept without my food , 
▁ xxmaj whipp'd and tormented and- xxmaj god - den , good fellow . 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj god gi ' go - den . i pray , sir , can you read ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ay , mine own fortune in my misery . 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj perhaps you have learned it without book . xxmaj but i pray , can you 
▁ read anything you see ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ay , xxmaj if i know the letters and the language . 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj ye say honestly . xxmaj rest you merry ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj stay , fellow ; i can read . xxmaj he reads . 

▁ ' signior xxmaj martino and his wife and daughters ; 
▁ xxmaj county xxmaj anselmo and his beauteous sisters ; 
▁ xxmaj the lady widow of xxmaj vitruvio ; 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj placentio and xxmaj his lovely nieces ; 
▁ xxmaj mercutio and his brother xxmaj valentine ; 
▁ xxmaj mine uncle xxmaj capulet , his wife , and daughters ; 
▁ xxmaj my fair niece xxmaj rosaline and xxmaj livia ; 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj valentio and xxmaj his cousin xxmaj tybalt ; 
▁ xxmaj lucio and the lively xxmaj helena . ' 

▁ [ gives back the paper . ] a fair assembly . xxmaj whither should they come ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj up . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj whither ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj to supper , to our house . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj whose house ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj my master 's . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj indeed i should have ask'd you that before . 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj now xxmaj i 'll tell you without asking . xxmaj my master is the great rich 
▁ xxmaj capulet ; and if you be not of the house of xxmaj montagues , i pray come 
▁ and crush a cup of wine . xxmaj rest you merry ! xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj at this same ancient feast of xxmaj capulet 's 
▁ xxmaj sups the fair xxmaj rosaline whom thou so lov'st ; 
▁ xxmaj with all the admired beauties of xxmaj verona . 
▁ xxmaj go thither , and with unattainted eye 
▁ xxmaj compare her face with some that i shall show , 
▁ xxmaj and i will make thee think thy swan a crow . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj when the devout religion of mine eye 
▁ xxmaj maintains such falsehood , then turn tears to fires ; 
▁ xxmaj and these , who , often drown'd , could never die , 
▁ xxmaj transparent heretics , be burnt for liars ! 
▁ xxmaj one fairer than my love ? xxmaj the all - seeing sun 
▁ xxmaj ne'er saw her match since first the world begun . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj tut ! you saw her fair , none else being by , 
▁ xxmaj herself pois'd with herself in either eye ; 
▁ xxmaj but in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd 
▁ xxmaj your lady 's love against some other maid 
▁ xxmaj that i will show you shining at this feast , 
▁ xxmaj and she shall scant show well that now seems best . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj i 'll go along , no such sight to be shown , 
▁ xxmaj but to rejoice in splendour of my own . [ exeunt . ] 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj capulet 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj capulet 's xxmaj wife , and xxmaj nurse . 

▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj nurse , where 's my daughter ? xxmaj call her forth to me . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj now , by my maidenhead at twelve year old , 
▁ i bade her come . xxmaj what , lamb ! what ladybird ! 
▁ xxmaj god forbid ! xxmaj where 's this girl ? xxmaj what , xxmaj juliet ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj how now ? xxmaj who calls ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj your mother . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj madam , i am here . 
▁ xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj this is the matter- xxmaj nurse , give leave awhile , 
▁ xxmaj we must talk in secret . xxmaj nurse , come back again ; 
▁ i have rememb'red me , thou 's hear our counsel . 
▁ xxmaj thou knowest my daughter 's of a pretty age . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj faith , i can tell her age unto an hour . 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj she 's not fourteen . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj i 'll lay fourteen of my teeth- 
▁ xxmaj and yet , to my teen be it spoken , i have but four- 
▁ xxmaj she is not fourteen . xxmaj how long is it now 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj lammastide ? 
▁ xxmaj wife . a fortnight and odd days . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj even or odd , of all days in the year , 
▁ xxmaj come xxmaj lammas xxmaj eve at night shall she be fourteen . 
▁ xxmaj susan and she ( god rest all xxmaj christian souls ! ) 
▁ xxmaj were of an age . xxmaj well , xxmaj susan is with xxmaj god ; 
▁ xxmaj she was too good for me . xxmaj but , as i said , 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj lammas xxmaj eve at night shall she be fourteen ; 
▁ xxmaj that shall she , marry ; i remember it well . 
▁ ' tis since the earthquake now eleven years ; 
▁ xxmaj and she was wean'd ( i never shall forget it ) , 
▁ xxmaj of all the days of the year , upon that day ; 
▁ xxmaj for i had then laid wormwood to my dug , 
▁ xxmaj sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall . 
▁ xxmaj my lord and you were then at xxmaj mantua . 
▁ xxmaj nay , i do bear a brain . xxmaj but , as i said , 
▁ xxmaj when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple 
▁ xxmaj of my dug and felt it bitter , pretty fool , 
▁ xxmaj to see it tetchy and fall out with the dug ! 
▁ xxmaj shake , quoth the dovehouse ! ' twas no need , i trow , 
▁ xxmaj to bid me trudge . 
▁ xxmaj and since that time it is eleven years , 
▁ xxmaj for then she could stand high - lone ; nay , by th ' rood , 
▁ xxmaj she could have run and waddled all about ; 
▁ xxmaj for even the day before , she broke her brow ; 
▁ xxmaj and then my husband ( god be with his soul ! 
▁ ' a was a merry man ) took up the child . 
▁ ' yea , ' quoth he , ' dost thou fall upon thy face ? 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit ; 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou not , xxmaj jule ? ' and , by my holidam , 
▁ xxmaj the pretty wretch left crying , and said ' ay . ' 
▁ xxmaj to see now how a jest shall come about ! 
▁ i warrant , an i should live a thousand yeas , 
▁ i never should forget it . ' wilt thou not , xxmaj jule ? ' quoth he , 
▁ xxmaj and , pretty fool , it stinted , and said ' ay . ' 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj enough of this . i pray thee hold thy peace . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj yes , madam . xxmaj yet i can not choose but laugh 
▁ xxmaj to think it should leave crying and say ' ay . ' 
▁ xxmaj and yet , i warrant , it bad upon it brow 
▁ a bump as big as a young cock'rel 's stone ; 
▁ a perilous knock ; and it cried bitterly . 
▁ ' yea , ' quoth my husband , ' fall'st upon thy face ? 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age ; 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou not , xxmaj jule ? ' xxmaj it stinted , and said ' ay . ' 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj and stint thou too , i pray thee , nurse , say xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj peace , i have done . xxmaj god mark thee to his grace ! 
▁ xxmaj thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er i nurs'd . 
▁ xxmaj an i might live to see thee married once , i have my wish . 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj marry , that ' marry ' is the very theme 
▁ i came to talk of . xxmaj tell me , daughter xxmaj juliet , 
▁ xxmaj how stands your disposition to be married ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj it is an honour that i dream not of . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj an honour ? xxmaj were not i thine only nurse , 
▁ i would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat . 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj well , think of marriage now . xxmaj younger than you , 
▁ xxmaj here in xxmaj verona , ladies of esteem , 
▁ xxmaj are made already mothers . xxmaj by my count , 
▁ i was your mother much upon these years 
▁ xxmaj that you are now a maid . xxmaj thus then in brief : 
▁ xxmaj the valiant xxmaj paris seeks you for his love . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . a man , young lady ! lady , such a man 
▁ xxmaj as all the world- why he 's a man of wax . 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj verona 's summer hath not such a flower . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj nay , he 's a flower , in faith- a very flower . 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj what say you ? xxmaj can you love the gentleman ? 
▁ xxmaj this night you shall behold him at our feast . 
▁ xxmaj read o'er the volume of young xxmaj paris ' face , 
▁ xxmaj and find delight writ there with beauty 's pen ; 
▁ xxmaj examine every married lineament , 
▁ xxmaj and see how one another lends content ; 
▁ xxmaj and what obscur'd in this fair volume lies 
▁ xxmaj find written in the margent of his eyes , 
▁ xxmaj this precious book of love , this unbound lover , 
▁ xxmaj to beautify him only lacks a cover . 
▁ xxmaj the fish lives in the sea , and ' tis much pride 
▁ xxmaj for fair without the fair within to hide . 
▁ xxmaj that book in many 's eyes doth share the glory , 
▁ xxmaj that in gold clasps locks in the golden story ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall you share all that he doth possess , 
▁ xxmaj by having him making yourself no less . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj no less ? xxmaj nay , bigger ! xxmaj women grow by men 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj speak briefly , can you like of xxmaj paris ' love ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj i 'll look to like , if looking liking move ; 
▁ xxmaj but no more deep will i endart mine eye 
▁ xxmaj than your consent gives strength to make it fly . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj servingman . 

▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj madam , the guests are come , supper serv'd up , you call'd , my 
▁ young lady ask'd for , the nurse curs'd in the pantry , and 
▁ everything in extremity . i must hence to wait . i beseech you 
▁ follow straight . 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj we follow thee . xxmaj exit [ servingman ] . 
▁ xxmaj juliet , the xxmaj county stays . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj go , girl , seek happy nights to happy days . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo , xxmaj mercutio , xxmaj benvolio , with five or six other xxmaj maskers ; xxmaj torchbearers . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what , shall this speech be spoke for our excuse ? 
▁ xxmaj or shall we on without apology ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj the date is out of such prolixity . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll have no xxmaj cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf , 
▁ xxmaj bearing a xxmaj tartar 's painted bow of lath , 
▁ xxmaj scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper ; 
▁ xxmaj nor no without - book prologue , faintly spoke 
▁ xxmaj after the prompter , for our entrance ; 
▁ xxmaj but , let them measure us by what they will , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll measure them a measure , and be gone . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj give me a torch . i am not for this ambling . 
▁ xxmaj being but heavy , i will bear the light . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj nay , gentle xxmaj romeo , we must have you dance . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj not xxup i , believe me . xxmaj you have dancing shoes 
▁ xxmaj with nimble soles ; i have a soul of lead 
▁ xxmaj so stakes me to the ground i can not move . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj you are a lover . xxmaj borrow xxmaj cupid 's wings 
▁ xxmaj and soar with them above a common bound . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i am too sore enpierced with his shaft 
▁ xxmaj to soar with his light feathers ; and so bound 
▁ i can not bound a pitch above dull woe . 
▁ xxmaj under love 's heavy burthen do i sink . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj and , to sink in it , should you burthen love- 
▁ xxmaj too great oppression for a tender thing . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj is love a tender thing ? xxmaj it is too rough , 
▁ xxmaj too rude , too boist'rous , and it pricks like thorn . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj if love be rough with you , be rough with love . 
▁ xxmaj prick love for pricking , and you beat love down . 
▁ xxmaj give me a case to put my visage in . 
▁ a visor for a visor ! xxmaj what care i 
▁ xxmaj what curious eye doth quote deformities ? 
▁ xxmaj here are the beetle brows shall blush for me . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj come , knock and enter ; and no sooner in 
▁ xxmaj but every man betake him to his legs . 
▁ xxmaj rom . a torch for me ! xxmaj let wantons light of heart 
▁ xxmaj tickle the senseless rushes with their heels ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be a candle - holder and look on ; 
▁ xxmaj the game was ne'er so fair , and i am done . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj tut ! dun 's the mouse , the constable 's own word ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou art xxmaj dun , we 'll draw thee from the mire 
▁ xxmaj of this sir - reverence love , wherein thou stick'st 
▁ xxmaj up to the ears . xxmaj come , we burn daylight , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj nay , that 's not so . 
▁ xxmaj mer . i mean , sir , in delay 
▁ xxmaj we waste our lights in vain , like lamps by day . 
▁ xxmaj take our good meaning , for our judgment sits 
▁ xxmaj five times in that ere once in our five wits . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj and we mean well , in going to this masque ; 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis no wit to go . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj why , may one ask ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . i dreamt a dream to - night . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj and so did xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj well , what was yours ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj that dreamers often lie . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj in bed asleep , while they do dream things true . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxup o , then i see xxmaj queen xxmaj mab hath been with you . 
▁ xxmaj she is the fairies ' midwife , and she comes 
▁ xxmaj in shape no bigger than an agate stone 
▁ xxmaj on the forefinger of an alderman , 
▁ xxmaj drawn with a team of little atomies 
▁ xxmaj athwart men 's noses as they lie asleep ; 
▁ xxmaj her wagon spokes made of long spinners ' legs , 
▁ xxmaj the cover , of the wings of grasshoppers ; 
▁ xxmaj her traces , of the smallest spider 's web ; 
▁ xxmaj her collars , of the moonshine 's wat'ry beams ; 
▁ xxmaj her whip , of cricket 's bone ; the lash , of film ; 
▁ xxmaj her wagoner , a small grey - coated gnat , 
▁ xxmaj not half so big as a round little worm 
▁ xxmaj prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid ; 
▁ xxmaj her chariot is an empty hazelnut , 
▁ xxmaj made by the joiner squirrel or old grub , 
▁ xxmaj time out o ' mind the fairies ' coachmakers . 
▁ xxmaj and in this state she ' gallops night by night 
▁ xxmaj through lovers ' brains , and then they dream of love ; 
▁ xxmaj o'er courtiers ' knees , that dream on cursies straight ; 
▁ xxmaj o'er lawyers ' fingers , who straight dream on fees ; 
▁ xxmaj o'er ladies ' lips , who straight on kisses dream , 
▁ xxmaj which oft the angry xxmaj mab with blisters plagues , 
▁ xxmaj because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are . 
▁ xxmaj sometime she gallops o'er a courtier 's nose , 
▁ xxmaj and then dreams he of smelling out a suit ; 
▁ xxmaj and sometime comes she with a tithe - pig 's tail 
▁ xxmaj tickling a parson 's nose as ' a lies asleep , 
▁ xxmaj then dreams he of another benefice . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier 's neck , 
▁ xxmaj and then dreams he of cutting foreign throats , 
▁ xxmaj of breaches , ambuscadoes , xxmaj spanish blades , 
▁ xxmaj of healths five fadom deep ; and then anon 
▁ xxmaj drums in his ear , at which he starts and wakes , 
▁ xxmaj and being thus frighted , swears a prayer or two 
▁ xxmaj and sleeps again . xxmaj this is that very xxmaj mab 
▁ xxmaj that plats the manes of horses in the night 
▁ xxmaj and bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish , hairs , 
▁ xxmaj which once untangled much misfortune bodes 
▁ xxmaj this is the hag , when maids lie on their backs , 
▁ xxmaj that presses them and learns them first to bear , 
▁ xxmaj making them women of good carriage . 
▁ xxmaj this is she- 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj peace , peace , xxmaj mercutio , peace ! 
▁ xxmaj thou talk'st of nothing . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj true , i talk of dreams ; 
▁ xxmaj which are the children of an idle brain , 
▁ xxmaj begot of nothing but vain fantasy ; 
▁ xxmaj which is as thin of substance as the air , 
▁ xxmaj and more inconstant than the wind , who wooes 
▁ xxmaj even now the frozen bosom of the xxmaj north 
▁ xxmaj and , being anger'd , puffs away from thence , 
▁ xxmaj turning his face to the dew - dropping xxmaj south . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj this wind you talk of blows us from ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj supper is done , and we shall come too late . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i fear , too early ; for my mind misgives 
▁ xxmaj some consequence , yet hanging in the stars , 
▁ xxmaj shall bitterly begin his fearful date 
▁ xxmaj with this night 's revels and expire the term 
▁ xxmaj of a despised life , clos'd in my breast , 
▁ xxmaj by some vile forfeit of untimely death . 
▁ xxmaj but he that hath the steerage of my course 
▁ xxmaj direct my sail ! xxmaj on , lusty gentlemen ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj strike , drum . 
▁ xxmaj they march about the stage . [ exeunt . ] 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj capulet 's house . 

 xxmaj servingmen come forth with napkins . 

▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj where 's xxmaj potpan , that he helps not to take away ? 
▁ xxmaj he shift a trencher ! he scrape a trencher ! 
▁ 2 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj when good manners shall lie all in one or two men 's hands , 
▁ and they unwash'd too , ' tis a foul thing . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj away with the join - stools , remove the court - cubbert , look 
▁ to the plate . xxmaj good thou , save me a piece of marchpane and , as 
▁ thou loves me , let the porter let in xxmaj susan xxmaj grindstone and xxmaj nell . 
▁ xxmaj anthony , and xxmaj potpan ! 
▁ 2 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj ay , boy , ready . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj you are look'd for and call'd for , ask'd for and sought 
▁ for , in the great chamber . 
▁ 3 . xxmaj serv . xxmaj we can not be here and there too . xxmaj cheerly , boys ! 
▁ xxmaj be brisk awhile , and the longer liver take all . xxmaj exeunt . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj maskers , xxmaj enter , [ with xxmaj servants , ] xxmaj capulet , his xxmaj wife , 
▁ xxmaj juliet , xxmaj tybalt , and all the xxmaj guests 
▁ and xxmaj gentlewomen to the xxmaj maskers . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj welcome , gentlemen ! xxmaj ladies that have their toes 
▁ xxmaj unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you . 
▁ xxmaj ah ha , my mistresses ! which of you all 
▁ xxmaj will now deny to dance ? xxmaj she that makes dainty , 
▁ xxmaj she xxmaj i 'll swear hath corns . xxmaj am i come near ye now ? 
▁ xxmaj welcome , gentlemen ! i have seen the day 
▁ xxmaj that i have worn a visor and could tell 
▁ a whispering tale in a fair lady 's ear , 
▁ xxmaj such as would please . ' tis gone , ' tis gone , ' tis gone ! 
▁ xxmaj you are welcome , gentlemen ! xxmaj come , musicians , play . 
▁ a hall , a hall ! give room ! and foot it , girls . 
▁ xxmaj music plays , and they dance . 
▁ xxmaj more light , you knaves ! and turn the tables up , 
▁ xxmaj and quench the fire , the room is grown too hot . 
▁ xxmaj ah , sirrah , this unlook'd - for sport comes well . 
▁ xxmaj nay , sit , nay , sit , good cousin xxmaj capulet , 
▁ xxmaj for you and i are past our dancing days . 
▁ xxmaj how long is't now since last yourself and i 
▁ xxmaj were in a mask ? 
▁ 2 . xxmaj cap . xxmaj by'r xxmaj lady , thirty years . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj what , man ? ' tis not so much , ' tis not so much ! 
▁ ' tis since the nuptial of xxmaj lucentio , 
▁ xxmaj come xxmaj pentecost as quickly as it will , 
▁ xxmaj some five - and - twenty years , and then we mask'd . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj cap . ' tis more , ' tis more ! xxmaj his son is elder , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj his son is thirty . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj will you tell me that ? 
▁ xxmaj his son was but a ward two years ago . 
▁ xxmaj rom . [ to a xxmaj servingman ] xxmaj what lady 's that , which doth enrich the hand 
▁ xxmaj of yonder knight ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . i know not , sir . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , she doth teach the torches to burn bright ! 
▁ xxmaj it seems she hangs upon the cheek of night 
▁ xxmaj like a rich jewel in an xxmaj ethiop 's ear- 
▁ xxmaj beauty too rich for use , for earth too dear ! 
▁ xxmaj so shows a snowy dove trooping with crows 
▁ xxmaj as yonder lady o'er her fellows shows . 
▁ xxmaj the measure done , xxmaj i 'll watch her place of stand 
▁ xxmaj and , touching hers , make blessed my rude hand . 
▁ xxmaj did my heart love till now ? xxmaj forswear it , sight ! 
▁ xxmaj for i ne'er saw true beauty till this night . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj this , by his voice , should be a xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj fetch me my rapier , boy . xxmaj what , dares the slave 
▁ xxmaj come hither , cover'd with an antic face , 
▁ xxmaj to fleer and scorn at our solemnity ? 
▁ xxmaj now , by the stock and honour of my kin , 
▁ xxmaj to strike him dead i hold it not a sin . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj why , how now , kinsman ? xxmaj wherefore storm you so ? 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj uncle , this is a xxmaj montague , our foe ; 
▁ a villain , that is hither come in spite 
▁ xxmaj to scorn at our solemnity this night . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj young xxmaj romeo is it ? 
▁ xxmaj tyb . ' tis he , that villain xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj content thee , gentle coz , let him alone . 
▁ ' a bears him like a portly gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj and , to say truth , xxmaj verona brags of him 
▁ xxmaj to be a virtuous and well - govern'd youth . 
▁ i would not for the wealth of all this town 
▁ xxmaj here in my house do him disparagement . 
▁ xxmaj therefore be patient , take no note of him . 
▁ xxmaj it is my will ; the which if thou respect , 
▁ xxmaj show a fair presence and put off these frowns , 
▁ xxmaj an ill - beseeming semblance for a feast . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj it fits when such a villain is a guest . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not endure him . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj he shall be endur'd . 
▁ xxmaj what , goodman boy ? i say he shall . xxmaj go to ! 
▁ xxmaj am i the master here , or you ? xxmaj go to ! 
▁ xxmaj you 'll not endure him ? xxmaj god shall mend my soul ! 
▁ xxmaj you 'll make a mutiny among my guests ! 
▁ xxmaj you will set cock - a - hoop ! you 'll be the man ! 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj why , uncle , ' tis a shame . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj go to , go to ! 
▁ xxmaj you are a saucy boy . xxmaj is't so , indeed ? 
▁ xxmaj this trick may chance to scathe you . i know what . 
▁ xxmaj you must contrary me ! xxmaj marry , ' tis time.- 
▁ xxmaj well said , my hearts!- xxmaj you are a princox- go ! 
▁ xxmaj be quiet , or- xxmaj more light , more light!- xxmaj for shame ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make you quiet ; what!- xxmaj cheerly , my hearts ! 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj patience perforce with wilful choler meeting 
▁ xxmaj makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting . 
▁ i will withdraw ; but this intrusion shall , 
▁ xxmaj now seeming sweet , convert to bitt'rest gall . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj if i profane with my unworthiest hand 
▁ xxmaj this holy shrine , the gentle fine is this : 
▁ xxmaj my lips , two blushing pilgrims , ready stand 
▁ xxmaj to smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj good pilgrim , you do wrong your hand too much , 
▁ xxmaj which mannerly devotion shows in this ; 
▁ xxmaj for saints have hands that pilgrims ' hands do touch , 
▁ xxmaj and palm to palm is holy palmers ' kiss . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj have not saints lips , and holy palmers too ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj ay , pilgrim , lips that they must use in pray'r . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , then , dear saint , let lips do what hands do ! 
▁ xxmaj they pray ; grant thou , lest faith turn to despair . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj saints do not move , though grant for prayers ' sake . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj then move not while my prayer 's effect i take . 
▁ xxmaj thus from my lips , by thine my sin is purg'd . [ kisses her . ] 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj then have my lips the sin that they have took . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj sin from my lips ? o trespass sweetly urg'd ! 
▁ xxmaj give me my sin again . [ kisses her . ] 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj you kiss by th ' book . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj madam , your mother craves a word with you . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what is her mother ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj marry , bachelor , 
▁ xxmaj her mother is the lady of the house . 
▁ xxmaj and a good lady , and a wise and virtuous . 
▁ i nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal . 
▁ i tell you , he that can lay hold of her 
▁ xxmaj shall have the chinks . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj is she a xxmaj capulet ? 
▁ o dear account ! my life is my foe 's debt . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj away , be gone ; the sport is at the best . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ay , so i fear ; the more is my unrest . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj nay , gentlemen , prepare not to be gone ; 
▁ xxmaj we have a trifling foolish banquet towards . 
▁ xxmaj is it e'en so ? xxmaj why then , i thank you all . 
▁ i thank you , honest gentlemen . xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj more torches here ! [ exeunt xxmaj maskers . ] xxmaj come on then , let 's to bed . 
▁ xxmaj ah , sirrah , by my fay , it waxes late ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to my rest . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ all but xxmaj juliet and xxmaj nurse ] . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj come hither , nurse . xxmaj what is yond gentleman ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj the son and heir of old xxmaj tiberio . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what 's he that now is going out of door ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj marry , that , i think , be young xxmaj petruchio . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what 's he that follows there , that would not dance ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . i know not . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj go ask his name.- xxmaj if he be married , 
▁ xxmaj my grave is like to be my wedding bed . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj his name is xxmaj romeo , and a xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj the only son of your great enemy . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj my only love , sprung from my only hate ! 
▁ xxmaj too early seen unknown , and known too late ! 
▁ xxmaj prodigious birth of love it is to me 
▁ xxmaj that i must love a loathed enemy . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj what 's this ? what 's this ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . a rhyme i learnt even now 
▁ xxmaj of one i danc'd withal . 
▁ xxmaj one calls within , ' juliet . ' 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj anon , anon ! 
▁ xxmaj come , let 's away ; the strangers all are gone . xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup prologue 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj chorus . 

▁ xxmaj chor . xxmaj now old desire doth in his deathbed lie , 
▁ xxmaj and young affection gapes to be his heir ; 
▁ xxmaj that fair for which love groan'd for and would die , 
▁ xxmaj with tender xxmaj juliet match'd , is now not fair . 
▁ xxmaj now xxmaj romeo is belov'd , and loves again , 
▁ xxmaj alike bewitched by the charm of looks ; 
▁ xxmaj but to his foe suppos'd he must complain , 
▁ xxmaj and she steal love 's sweet bait from fearful hooks . 
▁ xxmaj being held a foe , he may not have access 
▁ xxmaj to breathe such vows as lovers use to swear , 
▁ xxmaj and she as much in love , her means much less 
▁ xxmaj to meet her new beloved anywhere ; 
▁ xxmaj but passion lends them power , time means , to meet , 
▁ xxmaj temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet . 
 xxmaj exit . 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 a lane by the wall of xxmaj capulet 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo alone . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj can i go forward when my heart is here ? 
▁ xxmaj turn back , dull earth , and find thy centre out . 
▁ [ climbs the wall and leaps down within it . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj benvolio with xxmaj mercutio . 

▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj romeo ! my cousin xxmaj romeo ! xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj he is wise , 
▁ xxmaj and , on my life , hath stol'n him home to bed . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj he ran this way , and leapt this orchard wall . 
▁ xxmaj call , good xxmaj mercutio . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll conjure too . 
▁ xxmaj romeo ! humours ! madman ! passion ! lover ! 
▁ xxmaj appear thou in the likeness of a sigh ; 
▁ xxmaj speak but one rhyme , and i am satisfied ! 
▁ xxmaj cry but ' ay me ! ' pronounce but ' love ' and ' dove ' ; 
▁ xxmaj speak to my gossip xxmaj venus one fair word , 
▁ xxmaj one nickname for her purblind son and heir , 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj adam xxmaj cupid , he that shot so trim 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj king xxmaj cophetua lov'd the beggar maid ! 
▁ xxmaj he heareth not , he stirreth not , be moveth not ; 
▁ xxmaj the ape is dead , and i must conjure him . 
▁ i conjure thee by xxmaj rosaline 's bright eyes . 
▁ xxmaj by her high forehead and her scarlet lip , 
▁ xxmaj by her fine foot , straight leg , and quivering thigh , 
▁ xxmaj and the demesnes that there adjacent lie , 
▁ xxmaj that in thy likeness thou appear to us ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj an if he hear thee , thou wilt anger him . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj this can not anger him . ' twould anger him 
▁ xxmaj to raise a spirit in his mistress ' circle 
▁ xxmaj of some strange nature , letting it there stand 
▁ xxmaj till she had laid it and conjur'd it down . 
▁ xxmaj that were some spite ; my invocation 
▁ xxmaj is fair and honest : in his mistress ' name , 
▁ i conjure only but to raise up him . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj come , he hath hid himself among these trees 
▁ xxmaj to be consorted with the humorous night . 
▁ xxmaj blind is his love and best befits the dark . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj if love be blind , love can not hit the mark . 
▁ xxmaj now will he sit under a medlar tree 
▁ xxmaj and wish his mistress were that kind of fruit 
▁ xxmaj as maids call medlars when they laugh alone . 
▁ xxup o , xxmaj romeo , that she were , o that she were 
▁ xxmaj an open et cetera , thou a pop'rin pear ! 
▁ xxmaj romeo , good night . xxmaj i 'll to my truckle - bed ; 
▁ xxmaj this field - bed is too cold for me to sleep . 
▁ xxmaj come , shall we go ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj go then , for ' tis in vain 
▁ ' to seek him here that means not to be found . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj capulet 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj he jests at scars that never felt a wound . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet above at a window . 

▁ xxmaj but soft ! xxmaj what light through yonder window breaks ? 
▁ xxmaj it is the xxmaj east , and xxmaj juliet is the sun ! 
▁ xxmaj arise , fair sun , and kill the envious moon , 
▁ xxmaj who is already sick and pale with grief 
▁ xxmaj that thou her maid art far more fair than she . 
▁ xxmaj be not her maid , since she is envious . 
▁ xxmaj her vestal livery is but sick and green , 
▁ xxmaj and none but fools do wear it . xxmaj cast it off . 
▁ xxmaj it is my lady ; xxup o , it is my love ! 
▁ o that she knew she were ! 
▁ xxmaj she speaks , yet she says nothing . xxmaj what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj her eye discourses ; i will answer it . 
▁ i am too bold ; ' tis not to me she speaks . 
▁ xxmaj two of the fairest stars in all the heaven , 
▁ xxmaj having some business , do entreat her eyes 
▁ xxmaj to twinkle in their spheres till they return . 
▁ xxmaj what if her eyes were there , they in her head ? 
▁ xxmaj the brightness of her cheek would shame those stars 
▁ xxmaj as daylight doth a l & her eyes in heaven 
▁ xxmaj would through the airy region stream so bright 
▁ xxmaj that birds would sing and think it were not night . 
▁ xxmaj see how she leans her cheek upon her hand ! 
▁ o that i were a glove upon that hand , 
▁ xxmaj that i might touch that cheek ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj ay me ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj she speaks . 
▁ xxup o , speak again , bright angel ! for thou art 
▁ xxmaj as glorious to this night , being o'er my head , 
▁ xxmaj as is a winged messenger of heaven 
▁ xxmaj unto the white - upturned wond'ring eyes 
▁ xxmaj of mortals that fall back to gaze on him 
▁ xxmaj when he bestrides the lazy - pacing clouds 
▁ xxmaj and sails upon the bosom of the air . 
▁ xxmaj jul . o xxmaj romeo , xxmaj romeo ! wherefore art thou xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj deny thy father and refuse thy name ! 
▁ xxmaj or , if thou wilt not , be but sworn my love , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll no longer be a xxmaj capulet . 
▁ xxmaj rom . [ aside ] xxmaj shall i hear more , or shall i speak at this ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . ' tis but thy name that is my enemy . 
▁ xxmaj thou art thyself , though not a xxmaj montague . 
▁ xxmaj what 's xxmaj montague ? it is nor hand , nor foot , 
▁ xxmaj nor arm , nor face , nor any other part 
▁ xxmaj belonging to a man . xxup o , be some other name ! 
▁ xxmaj what 's in a name ? xxmaj that which we call a rose 
▁ xxmaj by any other name would smell as sweet . 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj romeo would , were he not xxmaj romeo call'd , 
▁ xxmaj retain that dear perfection which he owes 
▁ xxmaj without that title . xxmaj romeo , doff thy name ; 
▁ xxmaj and for that name , which is no part of thee , 
▁ xxmaj take all myself . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i take thee at thy word . 
▁ xxmaj call me but love , and xxmaj i 'll be new baptiz'd ; 
▁ xxmaj henceforth i never will be xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what man art thou that , thus bescreen'd in night , 
▁ xxmaj so stumblest on my counsel ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj by a name 
▁ i know not how to tell thee who i am . 
▁ xxmaj my name , dear saint , is hateful to myself , 
▁ xxmaj because it is an enemy to thee . 
▁ xxmaj had i it written , i would tear the word . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj my ears have yet not drunk a hundred words 
▁ xxmaj of that tongue 's utterance , yet i know the sound . 
▁ xxmaj art thou not xxmaj romeo , and a xxmaj montague ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj neither , fair saint , if either thee dislike . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj how cam'st thou hither , tell me , and wherefore ? 
▁ xxmaj the orchard walls are high and hard to climb , 
▁ xxmaj and the place death , considering who thou art , 
▁ xxmaj if any of my kinsmen find thee here . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj with love 's light wings did i o'erperch these walls ; 
▁ xxmaj for stony limits can not hold love out , 
▁ xxmaj and what love can do , that dares love attempt . 
▁ xxmaj therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj if they do see thee , they will murther thee . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj alack , there lies more peril in thine eye 
▁ xxmaj than twenty of their swords ! xxmaj look thou but sweet , 
▁ xxmaj and i am proof against their enmity . 
▁ xxmaj jul . i would not for the world they saw thee here . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i have night 's cloak to hide me from their sight ; 
▁ xxmaj and but thou love me , let them find me here . 
▁ xxmaj my life were better ended by their hate 
▁ xxmaj than death prorogued , wanting of thy love . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj by whose direction found'st thou out this place ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj by love , that first did prompt me to enquire . 
▁ xxmaj he lent me counsel , and i lent him eyes . 
▁ i am no pilot ; yet , wert thou as far 
▁ xxmaj as that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea , 
▁ i would adventure for such merchandise . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj thou knowest the mask of night is on my face ; 
▁ xxmaj else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek 
▁ xxmaj for that which thou hast heard me speak to - night . 
▁ xxmaj fain would i dwell on form- fain , fain deny 
▁ xxmaj what i have spoke ; but farewell compliment ! 
▁ xxmaj dost thou love me , i know thou wilt say ' ay ' ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will take thy word . xxmaj yet , if thou swear'st , 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst prove false . xxmaj at lovers ' perjuries , 
▁ xxmaj they say xxmaj jove laughs . o gentle xxmaj romeo , 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost love , pronounce it faithfully . 
▁ xxmaj or if thou thinkest i am too quickly won , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll frown , and be perverse , and say thee nay , 
▁ xxmaj so thou wilt woo ; but else , not for the world . 
▁ xxmaj in truth , fair xxmaj montague , i am too fond , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore thou mayst think my haviour light ; 
▁ xxmaj but trust me , gentleman , xxmaj i 'll prove more true 
▁ xxmaj than those that have more cunning to be strange . 
▁ i should have been more strange , i must confess , 
▁ xxmaj but that thou overheard'st , ere i was ware , 
▁ xxmaj my true - love passion . xxmaj therefore pardon me , 
▁ xxmaj and not impute this yielding to light love , 
▁ xxmaj which the dark night hath so discovered . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj lady , by yonder blessed moon i swear , 
▁ xxmaj that tips with silver all these fruit - tree tops- 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup o , swear not by the moon , th ' inconstant moon , 
▁ xxmaj that monthly changes in her circled orb , 
▁ xxmaj lest that thy love prove likewise variable . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what shall i swear by ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj do not swear at all ; 
▁ xxmaj or if thou wilt , swear by thy gracious self , 
▁ xxmaj which is the god of my idolatry , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll believe thee . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj if my heart 's dear love- 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj well , do not swear . xxmaj although i joy in thee , 
▁ i have no joy of this contract to - night . 
▁ xxmaj it is too rash , too unadvis'd , too sudden ; 
▁ xxmaj too like the lightning , which doth cease to be 
▁ xxmaj ere one can say ' it lightens . ' xxmaj sweet , good night ! 
▁ xxmaj this bud of love , by summer 's ripening breath , 
▁ xxmaj may prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet . 
▁ xxmaj good night , good night ! xxmaj as sweet repose and rest 
▁ xxmaj come to thy heart as that within my breast ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what satisfaction canst thou have to - night ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj th ' exchange of thy love 's faithful vow for mine . 
▁ xxmaj jul . i gave thee mine before thou didst request it ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i would it were to give again . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj would'st thou withdraw it ? xxmaj for what purpose , love ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj but to be frank and give it thee again . 
▁ xxmaj and yet i wish but for the thing i have . 
▁ xxmaj my bounty is as boundless as the sea , 
▁ xxmaj my love as deep ; the more i give to thee , 
▁ xxmaj the more i have , for both are infinite . 
▁ i hear some noise within . xxmaj dear love , adieu ! 
▁ [ nurse ] calls within . 
▁ xxmaj anon , good nurse ! xxmaj sweet xxmaj montague , be true . 
▁ xxmaj stay but a little , i will come again . [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . o blessed , blessed night ! i am afeard , 
▁ xxmaj being in night , all this is but a dream , 
▁ xxmaj too flattering - sweet to be substantial . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet above . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj three words , dear xxmaj romeo , and good night indeed . 
▁ xxmaj if that thy bent of love be honourable , 
▁ xxmaj thy purpose marriage , send me word to - morrow , 
▁ xxmaj by one that xxmaj i 'll procure to come to thee , 
▁ xxmaj where and what time thou wilt perform the rite ; 
▁ xxmaj and all my fortunes at thy foot xxmaj i 'll lay 
▁ xxmaj and follow thee my lord throughout the world . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . ( within ) xxmaj madam ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . i come , anon.- xxmaj but if thou meanest not well , 
▁ i do beseech thee- 
▁ xxmaj nurse . ( within ) xxmaj madam ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj by - and - by i come.- 
▁ xxmaj to cease thy suit and leave me to my grief . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow will i send . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj so thrive my soul- 
▁ xxmaj jul . a thousand times good night ! xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj rom . a thousand times the worse , to want thy light !