xxbos xxmaj love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books ; 
▁ xxmaj but love from love , towards school with heavy looks . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet again , [ above ] . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj hist ! xxmaj romeo , hist ! o for a falconer 's voice 
▁ xxmaj to lure this tassel - gentle back again ! 
▁ xxmaj bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud ; 
▁ xxmaj else would i tear the cave where xxmaj echo lies , 
▁ xxmaj and make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine 
▁ xxmaj with repetition of my xxmaj romeo 's name . 
▁ xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj it is my soul that calls upon my name . 
▁ xxmaj how silver - sweet sound lovers ' tongues by night , 
▁ xxmaj like softest music to attending ears ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj my dear ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj at what o'clock to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj shall i send to thee ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj by the hour of nine . 
▁ xxmaj jul . i will not fail . ' tis twenty years till then . 
▁ i have forgot why i did call thee back . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj let me stand here till thou remember it . 
▁ xxmaj jul . i shall forget , to have thee still stand there , 
▁ xxmaj rememb'ring how i love thy company . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll still stay , to have thee still forget , 
▁ xxmaj forgetting any other home but this . 
▁ xxmaj jul . ' tis almost morning . i would have thee gone- 
▁ xxmaj and yet no farther than a wanton 's bird , 
▁ xxmaj that lets it hop a little from her hand , 
▁ xxmaj like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves , 
▁ xxmaj and with a silk thread plucks it back again , 
▁ xxmaj so loving - jealous of his liberty . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i would i were thy bird . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj sweet , so would xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj yet i should kill thee with much cherishing . 
▁ xxmaj good night , good night ! xxmaj parting is such sweet sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj that i shall say good night till it be morrow . 
▁ [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj sleep dwell upon thine eyes , peace in thy breast ! 
▁ xxmaj would i were sleep and peace , so sweet to rest ! 
▁ xxmaj hence will i to my ghostly father 's cell , 
▁ xxmaj his help to crave and my dear hap to tell . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence 's cell . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj friar , [ laurence ] alone , with a basket . 

▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj the grey - ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night , 
▁ xxmaj check'ring the xxmaj eastern clouds with streaks of light ; 
▁ xxmaj and flecked darkness like a drunkard reels 
▁ xxmaj from forth day 's path and xxmaj titan 's fiery wheels . 
▁ xxmaj non , ere the sun advance his burning eye 
▁ xxmaj the day to cheer and night 's dank dew to dry , 
▁ i must up - fill this osier cage of ours 
▁ xxmaj with baleful weeds and precious - juiced flowers . 
▁ xxmaj the earth that 's nature 's mother is her tomb . 
▁ xxmaj what is her burying gave , that is her womb ; 
▁ xxmaj and from her womb children of divers kind 
▁ xxmaj we sucking on her natural bosom find ; 
▁ xxmaj many for many virtues excellent , 
▁ xxmaj none but for some , and yet all different . 
▁ xxup o , mickle is the powerful grace that lies 
▁ xxmaj in plants , herbs , stones , and their true qualities ; 
▁ xxmaj for naught so vile that on the earth doth live 
▁ xxmaj but to the earth some special good doth give ; 
▁ xxmaj nor aught so good but , strain'd from that fair use , 
▁ xxmaj revolts from true birth , stumbling on abuse . 
▁ xxmaj virtue itself turns vice , being misapplied , 
▁ xxmaj and vice sometime 's by action dignified . 
▁ xxmaj within the infant rind of this small flower 
▁ xxmaj poison hath residence , and medicine power ; 
▁ xxmaj for this , being smelt , with that part cheers each part ; 
▁ xxmaj being tasted , slays all senses with the heart . 
▁ xxmaj two such opposed kings encamp them still 
▁ xxmaj in man as well as herbs- grace and rude will ; 
▁ xxmaj and where the worser is predominant , 
▁ xxmaj full soon the canker death eats up that plant . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj good morrow , father . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj benedicite ! 
▁ xxmaj what early tongue so sweet saluteth me ? 
▁ xxmaj young son , it argues a distempered head 
▁ xxmaj so soon to bid good morrow to thy bed . 
▁ xxmaj care keeps his watch in every old man 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj and where care lodges sleep will never lie ; 
▁ xxmaj but where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain 
▁ xxmaj doth couch his limbs , there golden sleep doth reign . 
▁ xxmaj therefore thy earliness doth me assure 
▁ xxmaj thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature ; 
▁ xxmaj or if not so , then here i hit it right- 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj romeo hath not been in bed to - night . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj that last is true - the sweeter rest was mine . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj god pardon sin ! xxmaj wast thou with xxmaj rosaline ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj with xxmaj rosaline , my ghostly father ? xxmaj no . 
▁ i have forgot that name , and that name 's woe . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj that 's my good son ! xxmaj but where hast thou been then ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj i 'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again . 
▁ i have been feasting with mine enemy , 
▁ xxmaj where on a sudden one hath wounded me 
▁ xxmaj that 's by me wounded . xxmaj both our remedies 
▁ xxmaj within thy help and holy physic lies . 
▁ i bear no hatred , blessed man , for , lo , 
▁ xxmaj my intercession likewise steads my foe . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj be plain , good son , and homely in thy drift 
▁ xxmaj riddling confession finds but riddling shrift . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj then plainly know my heart 's dear love is set 
▁ xxmaj on the fair daughter of rich xxmaj capulet ; 
▁ xxmaj as mine on hers , so hers is set on mine , 
▁ xxmaj and all combin'd , save what thou must combine 
▁ xxmaj by holy marriage . xxmaj when , and where , and how 
▁ xxmaj we met , we woo'd , and made exchange of vow , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell thee as we pass ; but this i pray , 
▁ xxmaj that thou consent to marry us to - day . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj holy xxmaj saint xxmaj francis ! xxmaj what a change is here ! 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj rosaline , that thou didst love so dear , 
▁ xxmaj so soon forsaken ? xxmaj young men 's love then lies 
▁ xxmaj not truly in their hearts , but in their eyes . 
▁ xxmaj jesu xxmaj maria ! xxmaj what a deal of brine 
▁ xxmaj hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for xxmaj rosaline ! 
▁ xxmaj how much salt water thrown away in waste , 
▁ xxmaj to season love , that of it doth not taste ! 
▁ xxmaj the sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears , 
▁ xxmaj thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears . 
▁ xxmaj lo , here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit 
▁ xxmaj of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet . 
▁ xxmaj if e'er thou wast thyself , and these woes thine , 
▁ xxmaj thou and these woes were all for xxmaj rosaline . 
▁ xxmaj and art thou chang'd ? xxmaj pronounce this sentence then : 
▁ xxmaj women may fall when there 's no strength in men . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj thou chid'st me oft for loving xxmaj rosaline . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj for doting , not for loving , pupil mine . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj and bad'st me bury love . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj not in a grave 
▁ xxmaj to lay one in , another out to have . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i pray thee chide not . xxmaj she whom i love now 
▁ xxmaj doth grace for grace and love for love allow . 
▁ xxmaj the other did not so . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxup o , she knew well 
▁ xxmaj thy love did read by rote , that could not spell . 
▁ xxmaj but come , young waverer , come go with me . 
▁ xxmaj in one respect xxmaj i 'll thy assistant be ; 
▁ xxmaj for this alliance may so happy prove 
▁ xxmaj to turn your households ' rancour to pure love . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , let us hence ! i stand on sudden haste . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj wisely , and slow . xxmaj they stumble that run fast . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj benvolio and xxmaj mercutio . 

▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj where the devil should this xxmaj romeo be ? 
▁ xxmaj came he not home to - night ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj not to his father 's . i spoke with his man . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj why , that same pale hard - hearted wench , that xxmaj rosaline , 
▁ xxmaj torments him so that he will sure run mad . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj tybalt , the kinsman to old xxmaj capulet , 
▁ xxmaj hath sent a letter to his father 's house . 
▁ xxmaj mer . a challenge , on my life . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj romeo will answer it . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj any man that can write may answer a letter . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj nay , he will answer the letter 's master , how he dares , being 
▁ dared . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj romeo , he is already dead ! stabb'd with a white 
▁ wench 's black eye ; shot through the ear with a love song ; the 
▁ very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow - boy 's butt - shaft ; 
▁ and is he a man to encounter xxmaj tybalt ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj why , what is xxmaj tybalt ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj more than xxmaj prince of xxmaj cats , i can tell you . xxup o , he 's the 
▁ courageous captain of compliments . xxmaj he fights as you sing 
▁ pricksong - keeps time , distance , and proportion ; rests me his 
▁ minim rest , one , two , and the third in your bosom ! the very 
▁ butcher of a silk button , a duellist , a duellist ! a gentleman of 
▁ the very first house , of the first and second cause . xxmaj ah , the 
▁ immortal passado ! the punto reverse ! the hay . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj the what ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj the pox of such antic , lisping , affecting fantasticoes- these 
▁ new tuners of accent ! ' by xxmaj jesu , a very good blade ! a very tall 
▁ man ! a very good whore ! ' xxmaj why , is not this a lamentable thing , 
▁ grandsir , that we should be thus afflicted with these strange 
▁ flies , these fashion - mongers , these pardona - mi 's , who stand so 
▁ much on the new form that they can not sit at ease on the old 
▁ bench ? xxup o , their bones , their bones ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj here comes xxmaj romeo ! here comes xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj without his roe , like a dried herring . o flesh , flesh , how art 
▁ thou fishified ! xxmaj now is he for the numbers that xxmaj petrarch flowed 
▁ in . xxmaj laura , to his lady , was but a kitchen wench ( marry , she had a 
▁ better love to berhyme her ) , xxmaj dido a dowdy , xxmaj cleopatra a gypsy , 
▁ xxmaj helen and xxmaj hero hildings and harlots , xxmaj this be a gray eye or so , 
▁ but not to the purpose . xxmaj signior xxmaj romeo , bon jour ! xxmaj there 's a xxmaj french 
▁ salutation to your xxmaj french slop . xxmaj you gave us the counterfeit 
▁ fairly last night . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj good morrow to you both . xxmaj what counterfeit did i give you ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj the slip , sir , the slip . xxmaj can you not conceive ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj pardon , good xxmaj mercutio . xxmaj my business was great , and in such a 
▁ case as mine a man may strain courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj that 's as much as to say , such a case as yours constrains a 
▁ man to bow in the hams . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj meaning , to cursy . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj thou hast most kindly hit it . 
▁ xxmaj rom . a most courteous exposition . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj nay , i am the very pink of courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj pink for flower . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj right . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj why , then is my pump well - flower'd . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj well said ! xxmaj follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy 
▁ pump , that , when the single sole of it is worn , the jest may 
▁ remain , after the wearing , solely singular . 
▁ xxmaj rom . o single - sold jest , solely singular for the singleness ! 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj come between us , good xxmaj benvolio ! xxmaj my wits faint . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj swits and spurs , swits and spurs ! or xxmaj i 'll cry a match . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj nay , if our wits run the wild - goose chase , i am done ; for thou 
▁ hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than , i am sure , i 
▁ have in my whole five . xxmaj was i with you there for the goose ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there 
▁ for the goose . 
▁ xxmaj mer . i will bite thee by the ear for that jest . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj nay , good goose , bite not ! 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj thy wit is a very bitter sweeting ; it is a most sharp sauce . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj and is it not , then , well serv'd in to a sweet goose ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxup o , here 's a wit of cheveril , that stretches from an inch 
▁ narrow to an ell broad ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . i stretch it out for that word ' broad , ' which , added to the 
▁ goose , proves thee far and wide a broad goose . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj why , is not this better now than groaning for love ? xxmaj now art 
▁ thou sociable , now art thou xxmaj romeo ; now art thou what thou art , by 
▁ art as well as by nature . xxmaj for this drivelling love is like a 
▁ great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in 
▁ a hole . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj stop there , stop there ! 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj thou wouldst else have made thy tale large . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxup o , thou art deceiv'd ! i would have made it short ; for i was 
▁ come to the whole depth of my tale , and meant indeed to occupy 
▁ the argument no longer . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj here 's goodly gear ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj nurse and her xxmaj man [ peter ] . 

▁ xxmaj mer . a sail , a sail ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj two , two ! a shirt and a smock . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj peter ! 
▁ xxmaj peter . xxmaj anon . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj my fan , xxmaj peter . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj good xxmaj peter , to hide her face ; for her fan 's the fairer face of 
▁ the two . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj god ye good morrow , gentlemen . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj god ye good - den , fair gentlewoman . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj is it good - den ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . ' tis no less , i tell ye ; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now 
▁ upon the prick of noon . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj out upon you ! xxmaj what a man are you ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj one , gentlewoman , that xxmaj god hath made for himself to mar . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj by my troth , it is well said . ' for himself to mar , ' quoth 
▁ ' a ? xxmaj gentlemen , can any of you tell me where i may find the young 
▁ xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . i can tell you ; but young xxmaj romeo will be older when you have 
▁ found him than he was when you sought him . i am the youngest of 
▁ that name , for fault of a worse . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj you say well . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj yea , is the worst well ? xxmaj very well took , i ' faith ! wisely , 
▁ wisely . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj if you be he , sir , i desire some confidence with you . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj she will endite him to some supper . 
▁ xxmaj mer . a bawd , a bawd , a bawd ! xxmaj so ho ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what hast thou found ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj no hare , sir ; unless a hare , sir , in a lenten pie , that is 
▁ something stale and hoar ere it be spent 
▁ xxmaj he walks by them and sings . 

▁ xxmaj an old hare hoar , 
▁ xxmaj and an old hare hoar , 
▁ xxmaj is very good meat in xxmaj lent ; 
▁ xxmaj but a hare that is hoar 
▁ xxmaj is too much for a score 
▁ xxmaj when it hoars ere it be spent . 

▁ xxmaj romeo , will you come to your father 's ? xxmaj we 'll to dinner thither . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i will follow you . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj farewell , ancient lady . xxmaj farewell , 
▁ [ sings ] lady , lady , lady . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj mercutio , xxmaj benvolio . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj marry , farewell ! i xxmaj pray you , xxmaj sir , what saucy merchant was 
▁ this that was so full of his ropery ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . a gentleman , nurse , that loves to hear himself talk and will 
▁ speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj an ' a speak anything against me , xxmaj i 'll take him down , an ' a 
▁ were lustier than he is , and twenty such jacks ; and if i can not , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find those that shall . xxmaj scurvy knave ! i am none of his 
▁ flirt - gills ; i am none of his skains - mates . xxmaj and thou must stand 
▁ by too , and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure ! 
▁ xxmaj peter . i saw no man use you at his pleasure . xxmaj if i had , my weapon 
▁ should quickly have been out , i warrant you . i dare draw as soon 
▁ as another man , if i see occasion in a good quarrel , and the law 
▁ on my side . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj now , afore xxmaj god , i am so vexed that every part about me 
▁ quivers . xxmaj scurvy knave ! xxmaj pray you , sir , a word ; and , as i told you , 
▁ my young lady bid me enquire you out . xxmaj what she bid me say , i will 
▁ keep to myself ; but first let me tell ye , if ye should lead her 
▁ into a fool 's paradise , as they say , it were a very gross kind of 
▁ behaviour , as they say ; for the gentlewoman is young ; and 
▁ therefore , if you should deal double with her , truly it were an 
▁ ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman , and very weak dealing . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj nurse , commend me to thy lady and mistress . i protest unto 
▁ thee- 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj good heart , and i faith i will tell her as much . xxmaj lord , 
▁ xxmaj lord ! she will be a joyful woman . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what wilt thou tell her , nurse ? xxmaj thou dost not mark me . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . i will tell her , sir , that you do protest , which , as i take 
▁ it , is a gentlemanlike offer . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj bid her devise 
▁ xxmaj some means to come to shrift this afternoon ; 
▁ xxmaj and there she shall at xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence ' cell 
▁ xxmaj be shriv'd and married . xxmaj here is for thy pains . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj no , truly , sir ; not a penny . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj go to ! i say you shall . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj this afternoon , sir ? xxmaj well , she shall be there . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj and stay , good nurse , behind the abbey wall . 
▁ xxmaj within this hour my man shall be with thee 
▁ xxmaj and bring thee cords made like a tackled stair , 
▁ xxmaj which to the high topgallant of my joy 
▁ xxmaj must be my convoy in the secret night . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj be trusty , and xxmaj i 'll quit thy pains . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj commend me to thy mistress . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj now xxmaj god in heaven bless thee ! xxmaj hark you , sir . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what say'st thou , my dear nurse ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj is your man secret ? xxmaj did you ne'er hear say , 
▁ xxmaj two may keep counsel , putting one away ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . i warrant thee my man 's as true as steel . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj well , sir , my mistress is the sweetest lady . xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord ! 
▁ when ' twas a little prating thing- xxup o , there is a nobleman in 
▁ town , one xxmaj paris , that would fain lay knife aboard ; but she , good 
▁ soul , had as lieve see a toad , a very toad , as see him . i anger 
▁ her sometimes , and tell her that xxmaj paris is the properer man ; but 
▁ xxmaj i 'll warrant you , when i say so , she looks as pale as any clout 
▁ in the versal world . xxmaj doth not rosemary and xxmaj romeo begin both with 
▁ a letter ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ay , nurse ; what of that ? xxmaj both with an xxup r. 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj ah , mocker ! that 's the dog 's name . r is for the- xxmaj no ; i know 
▁ it begins with some other letter ; and she hath the prettiest 
▁ sententious of it , of you and rosemary , that it would do you good 
▁ to hear it . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj commend me to thy lady . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj ay , a thousand times . [ exit xxmaj romeo . ] xxmaj peter ! 
▁ xxmaj peter . xxmaj anon . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj peter , take my fan , and go before , and apace . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj capulet 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj the clock struck nine when i did send the nurse ; 
▁ xxmaj in half an hour she ' promis'd to return . 
▁ xxmaj perchance she can not meet him . xxmaj that 's not so . 
▁ xxup o , she is lame ! xxmaj love 's heralds should be thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj which ten times faster glide than the sun 's beams 
▁ xxmaj driving back shadows over low'ring hills . 
▁ xxmaj therefore do nimble - pinion'd doves draw xxmaj love , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore hath the wind - swift xxmaj cupid wings . 
▁ xxmaj now is the sun upon the highmost hill 
▁ xxmaj of this day 's journey , and from nine till twelve 
▁ xxmaj is three long hours ; yet she is not come . 
▁ xxmaj had she affections and warm youthful blood , 
▁ xxmaj she would be as swift in motion as a ball ; 
▁ xxmaj my words would bandy her to my sweet love , 
▁ xxmaj and his to me , 
▁ xxmaj but old folks , many feign as they were dead- 
▁ xxmaj unwieldy , slow , heavy and pale as lead . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj nurse [ and xxmaj peter ] . 

▁ o xxmaj god , she comes ! o honey nurse , what news ? 
▁ xxmaj hast thou met with him ? xxmaj send thy man away . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj peter , stay at the gate . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj peter . ] 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj now , good sweet nurse- o xxmaj lord , why look'st thou sad ? 
▁ xxmaj though news be sad , yet tell them merrily ; 
▁ xxmaj if good , thou shamest the music of sweet news 
▁ xxmaj by playing it to me with so sour a face . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . i am aweary , give me leave awhile . 
▁ xxmaj fie , how my bones ache ! xxmaj what a jaunce have i had ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . i would thou hadst my bones , and i thy news . 
▁ xxmaj nay , come , i pray thee speak . xxmaj good , good nurse , speak . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj jesu , what haste ! xxmaj can you not stay awhile ? 
▁ xxmaj do you not see that i am out of breath ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj how art thou out of breath when thou hast breath 
▁ xxmaj to say to me that thou art out of breath ? 
▁ xxmaj the excuse that thou dost make in this delay 
▁ xxmaj is longer than the tale thou dost excuse . 
▁ xxmaj is thy news good or bad ? xxmaj answer to that . 
▁ xxmaj say either , and xxmaj i 'll stay the circumstance . 
▁ xxmaj let me be satisfied , is't good or bad ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj well , you have made a simple choice ; you know not how to 
▁ choose a man . xxmaj romeo ? xxmaj no , not he . xxmaj though his face be better than 
▁ any man 's , yet his leg excels all men 's ; and for a hand and a 
▁ foot , and a body , though they be not to be talk'd on , yet they 
▁ are past compare . xxmaj he is not the flower of courtesy , but , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ warrant him , as gentle as a lamb . xxmaj go thy ways , wench ; serve xxmaj god . 
▁ xxmaj what , have you din'd at home ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj no , no . xxmaj but all this did i know before . 
▁ xxmaj what says he of our marriage ? xxmaj what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj lord , how my head aches ! xxmaj what a head have xxup i ! 
▁ xxmaj it beats as it would fall in twenty pieces . 
▁ xxmaj my back o ' t ' other side,- ah , my back , my back ! 
▁ xxmaj beshrew your heart for sending me about 
▁ xxmaj to catch my death with jauncing up and down ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup i ' faith , i am sorry that thou art not well . 
▁ xxmaj sweet , sweet , xxmaj sweet nurse , tell me , what says my love ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj your love says , like an honest gentleman , and a courteous , 
▁ and a kind , and a handsome ; and , i warrant , a virtuous- xxmaj where is 
▁ your mother ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj where is my mother ? xxmaj why , she is within . 
▁ xxmaj where should she be ? xxmaj how oddly thou repliest ! 
▁ ' your love says , like an honest gentleman , 
▁ " where is your mother ? " ' 
▁ xxmaj nurse . o xxmaj god 's xxmaj lady dear ! 
▁ xxmaj are you so hot ? xxmaj marry come up , i trow . 
▁ xxmaj is this the poultice for my aching bones ? 
▁ xxmaj henceforward do your messages yourself . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj here 's such a coil ! xxmaj come , what says xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj have you got leave to go to shrift to - day ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . i have . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj then hie you hence to xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence ' cell ; 
▁ xxmaj there stays a husband to make you a wife . 
▁ xxmaj now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks : 
▁ xxmaj they 'll be in scarlet straight at any news . 
▁ xxmaj hie you to church ; i must another way , 
▁ xxmaj to fetch a ladder , by the which your love 
▁ xxmaj must climb a bird 's nest soon when it is dark . 
▁ i am the drudge , and toil in your delight ; 
▁ xxmaj but you shall bear the burthen soon at night . 
▁ xxmaj go ; xxmaj i 'll to dinner ; hie you to the cell . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj hie to high fortune ! xxmaj honest nurse , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence 's cell . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj friar [ laurence ] and xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj so smile the heavens upon this holy act 
▁ xxmaj that after - hours with sorrow chide us not ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj amen , amen ! xxmaj but come what sorrow can , 
▁ xxmaj it can not countervail the exchange of joy 
▁ xxmaj that one short minute gives me in her sight . 
▁ xxmaj do thou but close our hands with holy words , 
▁ xxmaj then love - devouring death do what he dare- 
▁ xxmaj it is enough i may but call her mine . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj these violent delights have violent ends 
▁ xxmaj and in their triumph die , like fire and powder , 
▁ xxmaj which , as they kiss , consume . xxmaj the sweetest honey 
▁ xxmaj is loathsome in his own deliciousness 
▁ xxmaj and in the taste confounds the appetite . 
▁ xxmaj therefore love moderately : long love doth so ; 
▁ xxmaj too swift arrives as tardy as too slow . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet . 

▁ xxmaj here comes the lady . xxup o , so light a foot 
▁ xxmaj will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint . 
▁ a lover may bestride the gossamer 
▁ xxmaj that idles in the wanton summer air , 
▁ xxmaj and yet not fall ; so light is vanity . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj good even to my ghostly confessor . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj romeo shall thank thee , daughter , for us both . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj as much to him , else is his thanks too much . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ah , xxmaj juliet , if the measure of thy joy 
▁ xxmaj be heap'd like mine , and that thy skill be more 
▁ xxmaj to blazon it , then sweeten with thy breath 
▁ xxmaj this neighbour air , and let rich music 's tongue 
▁ xxmaj unfold the imagin'd happiness that both 
▁ xxmaj receive in either by this dear encounter . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj conceit , more rich in matter than in words , 
▁ xxmaj brags of his substance , not of ornament . 
▁ xxmaj they are but beggars that can count their worth ; 
▁ xxmaj but my true love is grown to such excess 
▁ can not sum up sum of half my wealth . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj come , come with me , and we will make short work ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by your leaves , you shall not stay alone 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj holy xxmaj church incorporate two in one . 
▁ [ exeunt . ] 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 a public place . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj mercutio , xxmaj benvolio , and xxmaj men . 

▁ xxmaj ben . i pray thee , good xxmaj mercutio , let 's retire . 
▁ xxmaj the day is hot , the xxmaj capulets abroad . 
▁ xxmaj and if we meet , we shall not scape a brawl , 
▁ xxmaj for now , these hot days , is the mad blood stirring . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj thou art like one of these fellows that , when he enters the 
▁ confines of a tavern , claps me his sword upon the table and says 
▁ ' god send me no need of thee ! ' and by the operation of the second 
▁ cup draws him on the drawer , when indeed there is no need . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj am i like such a fellow ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj come , come , thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in 
▁ xxmaj italy ; and as soon moved to be moody , and as soon moody to be 
▁ moved . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj and what to ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj nay , an there were two such , we should have none shortly , for 
▁ one would kill the other . xxmaj thou ! why , thou wilt quarrel with a man 
▁ that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast . 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts , having no other 
▁ reason but because thou hast hazel eyes . xxmaj what eye but such an eye 
▁ would spy out such a quarrel ? xxmaj thy head is as full of quarrels as 
▁ an egg is full of meat ; and yet thy head hath been beaten as 
▁ addle as an egg for quarrelling . xxmaj thou hast quarrell'd with a man 
▁ for coughing in the street , because he hath wakened thy dog that 
▁ hath lain asleep in the sun . xxmaj didst thou not fall out with a 
▁ tailor for wearing his new doublet before xxmaj easter , with another 
▁ for tying his new shoes with an old riband ? xxmaj and yet thou wilt 
▁ tutor me from quarrelling ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj an i were so apt to quarrel as thou art , any man should buy 
▁ the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj the fee simple ? o simple ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj tybalt and others . 

▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj by my head , here come the xxmaj capulets . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj by my heel , i care not . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj follow me close , for i will speak to them . 
▁ xxmaj gentlemen , good den . a word with one of you . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj and but one word with one of us ? 
▁ xxmaj couple it with something ; make it a word and a blow . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj you shall find me apt enough to that , sir , an you will give me 
▁ occasion . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj could you not take some occasion without giving 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj mercutio , thou consortest with xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj consort ? xxmaj what , dost thou make us minstrels ? xxmaj an thou make 
▁ minstrels of us , look to hear nothing but discords . xxmaj here 's my 
▁ fiddlestick ; here 's that shall make you dance . xxmaj zounds , consort ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj we talk here in the public haunt of men . 
▁ xxmaj either withdraw unto some private place 
▁ xxmaj and reason coldly of your grievances , 
▁ xxmaj or else depart . xxmaj here all eyes gaze on us . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj men 's eyes were made to look , and let them gaze . 
▁ i will not budge for no man 's pleasure , 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj well , peace be with you , sir . xxmaj here comes my man . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll be hang'd , sir , if he wear your livery . 
▁ xxmaj marry , go before to field , he 'll be your follower ! 
▁ xxmaj your worship in that sense may call him man . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj romeo , the love i bear thee can afford 
▁ xxmaj no better term than this : thou art a villain . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj tybalt , the reason that i have to love thee 
▁ xxmaj doth much excuse the appertaining rage 
▁ xxmaj to such a greeting . xxmaj villain am i none . 
▁ xxmaj therefore farewell . i see thou knowest me not . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj boy , this shall not excuse the injuries 
▁ xxmaj that thou hast done me ; therefore turn and draw . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i do protest i never injur'd thee , 
▁ xxmaj but love thee better than thou canst devise 
▁ xxmaj till thou shalt know the reason of my love ; 
▁ xxmaj and so good xxmaj capulet , which name i tender 
▁ xxmaj as dearly as mine own , be satisfied . 
▁ xxmaj mer . o calm , dishonourable , vile submission ! 
▁ xxmaj alla stoccata carries it away . [ draws . ] 
▁ xxmaj tybalt , you ratcatcher , will you walk ? 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj what wouldst thou have with me ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj good xxmaj king of xxmaj cats , nothing but one of your nine lives . xxmaj that i 
▁ mean to make bold withal , and , as you shall use me hereafter , 
▁ dry - beat the rest of the eight . xxmaj will you pluck your sword out of 
▁ his pitcher by the ears ? xxmaj make haste , lest mine be about your ears 
▁ ere it be out . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . i am for you . [ draws . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj gentle xxmaj mercutio , put thy rapier up . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj come , sir , your passado ! 
▁ [ they fight . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj draw , xxmaj benvolio ; beat down their weapons . 
▁ xxmaj gentlemen , for shame ! forbear this outrage ! 
▁ xxmaj tybalt , xxmaj mercutio , the xxmaj prince expressly hath 
▁ xxmaj forbid this bandying in xxmaj verona streets . 
▁ xxmaj hold , xxmaj tybalt ! xxmaj good xxmaj mercutio ! 
▁ xxmaj tybalt under xxmaj romeo 's arm thrusts xxmaj mercutio in , and flies 
▁ [ with his xxmaj followers ] . 
▁ xxmaj mer . i am hurt . 
▁ a plague o ' both your houses ! i am sped . 
▁ xxmaj is he gone and hath nothing ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj what , art thou hurt ? 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj ay , ay , a scratch , a scratch . xxmaj marry , ' tis enough . 
▁ xxmaj where is my page ? xxmaj go , villain , fetch a surgeon . 
▁ [ exit xxmaj page . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj courage , man . xxmaj the hurt can not be much . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj no , ' tis not so deep as a well , nor so wide as a church door ; 
▁ but ' tis enough , ' twill serve . xxmaj ask for me to - morrow , and you 
▁ shall find me a grave man . i am peppered , i warrant , for this 
▁ world . a plague o ' both your houses ! xxmaj zounds , a dog , a rat , a 
▁ mouse , a cat , to scratch a man to death ! a braggart , a rogue , a 
▁ villain , that fights by the book of arithmetic ! xxmaj why the devil 
▁ came you between us ? i was hurt under your arm . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i thought all for the best . 
▁ xxmaj mer . xxmaj help me into some house , xxmaj benvolio , 
▁ xxmaj or i shall faint . a plague o ' both your houses ! 
▁ xxmaj they have made worms ' meat of me . i have it , 
▁ xxmaj and soundly too . xxmaj your houses ! 
▁ [ exit . [ supported by xxmaj benvolio ] . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj this gentleman , the xxmaj prince 's near ally , 
▁ xxmaj my very friend , hath got this mortal hurt 
▁ xxmaj in my behalf- my reputation stain'd 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj tybalt 's slander- xxmaj tybalt , that an hour 
▁ xxmaj hath been my kinsman . o sweet xxmaj juliet , 
▁ xxmaj thy beauty hath made me effeminate 
▁ xxmaj and in my temper soft'ned valour 's steel 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj benvolio . 

▁ xxmaj ben . o xxmaj romeo , xxmaj romeo , brave xxmaj mercutio 's dead ! 
▁ xxmaj that gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds , 
▁ xxmaj which too untimely here did scorn the earth . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj this day 's black fate on moe days doth depend ; 
▁ xxmaj this but begins the woe others must end . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj tybalt . 

▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj here comes the furious xxmaj tybalt back again . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj alive in triumph , and xxmaj mercutio slain ? 
▁ xxmaj away to heaven respective lenity , 
▁ xxmaj and fire - ey'd fury be my conduct now ! 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj tybalt , take the ' villain ' back again 
▁ xxmaj that late thou gavest me ; for xxmaj mercutio 's soul 
▁ xxmaj is but a little way above our heads , 
▁ xxmaj staying for thine to keep him company . 
▁ xxmaj either thou or xxup i , or both , must go with him . 
▁ xxmaj tyb . xxmaj thou , wretched boy , that didst consort him here , 
▁ xxmaj shalt with him hence . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj this shall determine that . 
▁ xxmaj they fight . xxmaj tybalt falls . 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj romeo , away , be gone ! 
▁ xxmaj the citizens are up , and xxmaj tybalt slain . 
▁ xxmaj stand not amaz'd . xxmaj the xxmaj prince will doom thee death 
▁ xxmaj if thou art taken . xxmaj hence , be gone , away ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , i am fortune 's fool ! 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj why dost thou stay ? 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj citizens . 

▁ xxmaj citizen . xxmaj which way ran he that kill'd xxmaj mercutio ? 
▁ xxmaj tybalt , that murtherer , which way ran he ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj there lies that xxmaj tybalt . 
▁ xxmaj citizen . xxmaj up , sir , go with me . 
▁ i charge thee in the xxmaj prince 's name obey . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj prince [ attended ] , xxmaj old xxmaj montague , xxmaj capulet , their xxmaj wives , 
▁ and [ others ] . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj where are the vile beginners of this fray ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . o noble xxmaj prince . i can discover all 
▁ xxmaj the unlucky manage of this fatal brawl . 
▁ xxmaj there lies the man , slain by young xxmaj romeo , 
▁ xxmaj that slew thy kinsman , brave xxmaj mercutio . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj wife . xxmaj tybalt , my cousin ! o my brother 's child ! 
▁ o xxmaj prince ! o husband ! xxup o , the blood is spill'd 
▁ xxmaj of my dear kinsman ! xxmaj prince , as thou art true , 
▁ xxmaj for blood of ours shed blood of xxmaj montague . 
▁ o cousin , cousin ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj benvolio , who began this bloody fray ? 
▁ xxmaj ben . xxmaj tybalt , here slain , whom xxmaj romeo 's hand did stay . 
▁ xxmaj romeo , that spoke him fair , bid him bethink 
▁ xxmaj how nice the quarrel was , and urg'd withal 
▁ xxmaj your high displeasure . xxmaj all this- uttered 
▁ xxmaj with gentle breath , calm look , knees humbly bow'd- 
▁ xxmaj could not take truce with the unruly spleen 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj tybalt deaf to peace , but that he tilts 
▁ xxmaj with piercing steel at bold xxmaj mercutio 's breast ; 
▁ xxmaj who , all as hot , turns deadly point to point , 
▁ xxmaj and , with a martial scorn , with one hand beats 
▁ xxmaj cold death aside and with the other sends 
▁ xxmaj it back to xxmaj tybalt , whose dexterity 
▁ xxmaj retorts it . xxmaj romeo he cries aloud , 
▁ ' hold , friends ! friends , part ! ' and swifter than his tongue , 
▁ xxmaj his agile arm beats down their fatal points , 
▁ xxmaj and ' twixt them rushes ; underneath whose arm 
▁ xxmaj an envious thrust from xxmaj tybalt hit the life 
▁ xxmaj of stout xxmaj mercutio , and then xxmaj tybalt fled ; 
▁ xxmaj but by - and - by comes back to xxmaj romeo , 
▁ xxmaj who had but newly entertain'd revenge , 
▁ xxmaj and to't they go like lightning ; for , ere i 
▁ xxmaj could draw to part them , was stout xxmaj tybalt slain ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as he fell , did xxmaj romeo turn and fly . 
▁ xxmaj this is the truth , or let xxmaj benvolio die . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj wife . xxmaj he is a kinsman to the xxmaj montague ; 
▁ xxmaj affection makes him false , he speaks not true . 
▁ xxmaj some twenty of them fought in this black strife , 
▁ xxmaj and all those twenty could but kill one life . 
▁ i beg for justice , which thou , xxmaj prince , must give . 
▁ xxmaj romeo slew xxmaj tybalt ; xxmaj romeo must not live . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj romeo slew him ; he slew xxmaj mercutio . 
▁ xxmaj who now the price of his dear blood doth owe ? 
▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj not xxmaj romeo , xxmaj prince ; he was xxmaj mercutio 's friend ; 
▁ xxmaj his fault concludes but what the law should end , 
▁ xxmaj the life of xxmaj tybalt . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj and for that offence 
▁ xxmaj immediately we do exile him hence . 
▁ i have an interest in your hate 's proceeding , 
▁ xxmaj my blood for your rude brawls doth lie a - bleeding ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll amerce you with so strong a fine 
▁ xxmaj that you shall all repent the loss of mine . 
▁ i will be deaf to pleading and excuses ; 
▁ xxmaj nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses . 
▁ xxmaj therefore use none . xxmaj let xxmaj romeo hence in haste , 
▁ xxmaj else , when he is found , that hour is his last . 
▁ xxmaj bear hence this body , and attend our will . 
▁ xxmaj mercy but murders , pardoning those that kill . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj capulet 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet alone . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj gallop apace , you fiery - footed steeds , 
▁ xxmaj towards xxmaj phoebus ' lodging ! xxmaj such a wagoner 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj phaeton would whip you to the xxmaj west 
▁ xxmaj and bring in cloudy night immediately . 
▁ xxmaj spread thy close curtain , love - performing night , 
▁ xxmaj that runaway eyes may wink , and xxmaj romeo 
▁ xxmaj leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen . 
▁ xxmaj lovers can see to do their amorous rites 
▁ xxmaj by their own beauties ; or , if love be blind , 
▁ xxmaj it best agrees with night . xxmaj come , civil night , 
▁ xxmaj thou sober - suited matron , all in black , 
▁ xxmaj and learn me how to lose a winning match , 
▁ xxmaj play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods . 
▁ xxmaj hood my unmann'd blood , bating in my cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj with thy black mantle till strange love , grown bold , 
▁ xxmaj think true love acted simple modesty . 
▁ xxmaj come , night ; come , xxmaj romeo ; come , thou day in night ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night 
▁ xxmaj whiter than new snow upon a raven 's back . 
▁ xxmaj come , gentle night ; come , loving , black - brow'd night ; 
▁ xxmaj give me my xxmaj romeo ; and , when he shall die , 
▁ xxmaj take him and cut him out in little stars , 
▁ xxmaj and he will make the face of heaven so fine 
▁ xxmaj that all the world will be in love with night 
▁ xxmaj and pay no worship to the garish sun . 
▁ xxup o , i have bought the mansion of a love , 
▁ xxmaj but not possess'd it ; and though i am sold , 
▁ xxmaj not yet enjoy'd . xxmaj so tedious is this day 
▁ xxmaj as is the night before some festival 
▁ xxmaj to an impatient child that hath new robes 
▁ xxmaj and may not wear them . xxup o , here comes my nurse , 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj nurse , with cords . 

▁ xxmaj and she brings news ; and every tongue that speaks 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj romeo 's name speaks heavenly eloquence . 
▁ xxmaj now , nurse , what news ? xxmaj what hast thou there ? the cords 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj romeo bid thee fetch ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj ay , ay , the cords . 
▁ [ throws them down . ] 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj ay me ! what news ? xxmaj why dost thou wring thy hands 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj ah , weraday ! he 's dead , he 's dead , he 's dead ! 
▁ xxmaj we are undone , lady , we are undone ! 
▁ xxmaj alack the day ! he 's gone , he 's kill'd , he 's dead ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj can heaven be so envious ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj romeo can , 
▁ xxmaj though heaven can not . o xxmaj romeo , xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj who ever would have thought it ? xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what devil art thou that dost torment me thus ? 
▁ xxmaj this torture should be roar'd in dismal hell . 
▁ xxmaj hath xxmaj romeo slain himself ? xxmaj say thou but ' i , ' 
▁ xxmaj and that bare vowel ' i ' shall poison more 
▁ xxmaj than the death - darting eye of cockatrice . 
▁ i am not xxup i , if there be such an ' i ' ; 
▁ xxmaj or those eyes shut that make thee answer ' i. ' 
▁ xxmaj if be be slain , say ' i ' ; or if not , ' no . ' 
▁ xxmaj brief sounds determine of my weal or woe . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . i saw the wound , i saw it with mine eyes , 
▁ ( god save the mark ! ) here on his manly breast . 
▁ a piteous corse , a bloody piteous corse ; 
▁ xxmaj pale , pale as ashes , all bedaub'd in blood , 
▁ xxmaj all in gore - blood . i swounded at the sight . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup o , break , my heart ! poor bankrout , break at once ! 
▁ xxmaj to prison , eyes ; ne'er look on liberty ! 
▁ xxmaj vile earth , to earth resign ; end motion here , 
▁ xxmaj and thou and xxmaj romeo press one heavy bier ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . o xxmaj tybalt , xxmaj tybalt , the best friend i had ! 
▁ o courteous xxmaj tybalt ! honest gentleman 
▁ xxmaj that ever i should live to see thee dead ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what storm is this that blows so contrary ? 
▁ xxmaj is xxmaj romeo slaught'red , and is xxmaj tybalt dead ? 
▁ xxmaj my dear - lov'd cousin , and my dearer lord ? 
▁ xxmaj then , dreadful trumpet , sound the general doom ! 
▁ xxmaj for who is living , if those two are gone ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj tybalt is gone , and xxmaj romeo banished ; 
▁ xxmaj romeo that kill'd him , he is banished . 
▁ xxmaj jul . o xxmaj god ! xxmaj did xxmaj romeo 's hand shed xxmaj tybalt 's blood ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj it did , it did ! alas the day , it did ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . o serpent heart , hid with a flow'ring face ! 
▁ xxmaj did ever dragon keep so fair a cave ? 
▁ xxmaj beautiful tyrant ! fiend angelical ! 
▁ xxmaj dove - feather'd raven ! wolvish - ravening lamb ! 
▁ xxmaj despised substance of divinest show ! 
▁ xxmaj just opposite to what thou justly seem'st- 
▁ a damned saint , an honourable villain ! 
▁ o nature , what hadst thou to do in hell 
▁ xxmaj when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend 
▁ xxmaj in mortal paradise of such sweet flesh ? 
▁ xxmaj was ever book containing such vile matter 
▁ xxmaj so fairly bound ? xxup o , that deceit should dwell 
▁ xxmaj in such a gorgeous palace ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj there 's no trust , 
▁ xxmaj no faith , no honesty in men ; all perjur'd , 
▁ xxmaj all forsworn , all naught , all dissemblers . 
▁ xxmaj ah , where 's my man ? xxmaj give me some aqua vitae . 
▁ xxmaj these griefs , these woes , these sorrows make me old . 
▁ xxmaj shame come to xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj blister'd be thy tongue 
▁ xxmaj for such a wish ! xxmaj he was not born to shame . 
▁ xxmaj upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a throne where honour may be crown'd 
▁ xxmaj sole monarch of the universal earth . 
▁ xxup o , what a beast was i to chide at him ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj shall i speak ill of him that is my husband ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , poor my lord , what tongue shall smooth thy name 
▁ xxmaj when xxup i , thy three - hours wife , have mangled it ? 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore , villain , didst thou kill my cousin ? 
▁ xxmaj that villain cousin would have kill'd my husband . 
▁ xxmaj back , foolish tears , back to your native spring ! 
▁ xxmaj your tributary drops belong to woe , 
▁ xxmaj which you , mistaking , offer up to joy . 
▁ xxmaj my husband lives , that xxmaj tybalt would have slain ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj tybalt 's dead , that would have slain my husband . 
▁ xxmaj all this is comfort ; wherefore weep i then ? 
▁ xxmaj some word there was , worser than xxmaj tybalt 's death , 
▁ xxmaj that murd'red me . i would forget it fain ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxup o , it presses to my memory 
▁ xxmaj like damned guilty deeds to sinners ' minds ! 
▁ ' tybalt is dead , and xxmaj romeo- banished . ' 
▁ xxmaj that ' banished , ' that one word ' banished , ' 
▁ xxmaj hath slain ten thousand xxmaj tybalts . xxmaj tybalt 's death 
▁ xxmaj was woe enough , if it had ended there ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if sour woe delights in fellowship 
▁ xxmaj and needly will be rank'd with other griefs , 
▁ xxmaj why followed not , when she said ' tybalt 's dead , ' 
▁ xxmaj thy father , or thy mother , nay , or both , 
▁ xxmaj which modern lamentation might have mov'd ? 
▁ xxmaj but with a rearward following xxmaj tybalt 's death , 
▁ ' romeo is banished'- to speak that word 
▁ xxmaj is father , mother , xxmaj tybalt , xxmaj romeo , xxmaj juliet , 
▁ xxmaj all slain , all dead . ' romeo is banished'- 
▁ xxmaj there is no end , no limit , measure , bound , 
▁ xxmaj in that word 's death ; no words can that woe sound . 
▁ xxmaj where is my father and my mother , nurse ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj weeping and wailing over xxmaj tybalt 's corse . 
▁ xxmaj will you go to them ? i will bring you thither . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj wash they his wounds with tears ? xxmaj mine shall be spent , 
▁ xxmaj when theirs are dry , for xxmaj romeo 's banishment . 
▁ xxmaj take up those cords . xxmaj poor ropes , you are beguil'd , 
▁ xxmaj both you and xxup i , for xxmaj romeo is exil'd . 
▁ xxmaj he made you for a highway to my bed ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxup i , a maid , die maiden - widowed . 
▁ xxmaj come , cords ; come , nurse . xxmaj i 'll to my wedding bed ; 
▁ xxmaj and death , not xxmaj romeo , take my maidenhead ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj hie to your chamber . xxmaj i 'll find xxmaj romeo 
▁ xxmaj to comfort you . i wot well where he is . 
▁ xxmaj hark ye , your xxmaj romeo will be here at night . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to him ; he is hid at xxmaj laurence ' cell . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup o , find him ! give this ring to my true knight 
▁ xxmaj and bid him come to take his last farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence 's cell . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj friar [ laurence ] . 

▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj romeo , come forth ; come forth , thou fearful man . 
▁ xxmaj affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts , 
▁ xxmaj and thou art wedded to calamity . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj father , what news ? xxmaj what is the xxmaj prince 's doom 
▁ xxmaj what sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand 
▁ xxmaj that i yet know not ? 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj too familiar 
▁ xxmaj is my dear son with such sour company . 
▁ i bring thee tidings of the xxmaj prince 's doom . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj what less than doomsday is the xxmaj prince 's doom ? 
▁ xxmaj friar . a gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips- 
▁ xxmaj not body 's death , but body 's banishment . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj ha , banishment ? xxmaj be merciful , say ' death ' ; 
▁ xxmaj for exile hath more terror in his look , 
▁ xxmaj much more than death . xxmaj do not say ' banishment . ' 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj hence from xxmaj verona art thou banished . 
▁ xxmaj be patient , for the world is broad and wide . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj there is no world without xxmaj verona walls , 
▁ xxmaj but purgatory , torture , hell itself . 
▁ xxmaj hence banished is banish'd from the world , 
▁ xxmaj and world 's exile is death . xxmaj then ' banishment ' 
▁ xxmaj is death misterm'd . xxmaj calling death ' banishment , ' 
▁ xxmaj thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe 
▁ xxmaj and smilest upon the stroke that murders me . 
▁ xxmaj friar . o deadly sin ! o rude unthankfulness ! 
▁ xxmaj thy fault our law calls death ; but the kind xxmaj prince , 
▁ xxmaj taking thy part , hath rush'd aside the law , 
▁ xxmaj and turn'd that black word death to banishment . 
▁ xxmaj this is dear mercy , and thou seest it not . 
▁ xxmaj rom . ' tis torture , and not mercy . xxmaj heaven is here , 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj juliet lives ; and every cat and dog 
▁ xxmaj and little mouse , every unworthy thing , 
▁ xxmaj live here in heaven and may look on her ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj romeo may not . xxmaj more validity , 
▁ xxmaj more honourable state , more courtship lives 
▁ xxmaj in carrion flies than xxmaj romeo . xxmaj they may seize 
▁ xxmaj on the white wonder of dear xxmaj juliet 's hand 
▁ xxmaj and steal immortal blessing from her lips , 
▁ xxmaj who , even in pure and vestal modesty , 
▁ xxmaj still blush , as thinking their own kisses sin ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj romeo may not- he is banished . 
▁ xxmaj this may flies do , when i from this must fly ; 
▁ xxmaj they are free men , but i am banished . 
▁ xxmaj and sayest thou yet that exile is not death ? 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou no poison mix'd , no sharp - ground knife , 
▁ xxmaj no sudden mean of death , though ne'er so mean , 
▁ xxmaj but ' banished ' to kill me- ' banished ' ? 
▁ o friar , the damned use that word in hell ; 
▁ xxmaj howling attends it ! xxmaj how hast thou the heart , 
▁ xxmaj being a divine , a ghostly confessor , 
▁ a sin - absolver , and my friend profess'd , 
▁ xxmaj to mangle me with that word ' banished ' ? 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj thou fond mad man , hear me a little speak . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxup o , thou wilt speak again of banishment . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj i 'll give thee armour to keep off that word ; 
▁ xxmaj adversity 's sweet milk , philosophy , 
▁ xxmaj to comfort thee , though thou art banished . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj yet ' banished ' ? xxmaj hang up philosophy ! 
▁ xxmaj unless philosophy can make a xxmaj juliet , 
▁ xxmaj displant a town , reverse a prince 's doom , 
▁ xxmaj it helps not , it prevails not . xxmaj talk no more . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxup o , then i see that madmen have no ears . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj how should they , when that wise men have no eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj let me dispute with thee of thy estate . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel . 
▁ xxmaj wert thou as young as xxup i , xxmaj juliet thy love , 
▁ xxmaj an hour but married , xxmaj tybalt murdered , 
▁ xxmaj doting like me , and like me banished , 
▁ xxmaj then mightst thou speak , then mightst thou tear thy hair , 
▁ xxmaj and fall upon the ground , as i do now , 
▁ xxmaj taking the measure of an unmade grave . 
▁ xxmaj knock [ within ] . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj arise ; one knocks . xxmaj good xxmaj romeo , hide thyself . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj not xxup i ; unless the breath of heartsick groans , 
▁ xxmaj mist - like infold me from the search of eyes . xxmaj knock . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj hark , how they knock ! xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj romeo , arise ; 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt be taken.- xxmaj stay awhile!- xxmaj stand up ; xxmaj knock . 
▁ xxmaj run to my study.- xxmaj by - and - by!- xxmaj god 's will , 
▁ xxmaj what simpleness is this.- i come , i come ! xxmaj knock . 
▁ xxmaj who knocks so hard ? xxmaj whence come you ? xxmaj what 's your will 
▁ xxmaj nurse . [ within ] xxmaj let me come in , and you shall know my errand . 
▁ i come from xxmaj lady xxmaj juliet . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj welcome then .