xxbos xxmaj enter xxmaj nurse . 

▁ xxmaj nurse . o holy friar , xxup o , tell me , holy friar 
▁ xxmaj where is my lady 's lord , where 's xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj there on the ground , with his own tears made drunk . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxup o , he is even in my mistress ' case , 
▁ xxmaj just in her case ! 
▁ xxmaj friar . o woeful sympathy ! 
▁ xxmaj piteous predicament ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj even so lies she , 
▁ xxmaj blubb'ring and weeping , weeping and blubbering . 
▁ xxmaj stand up , stand up ! xxmaj stand , an you be a man . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj juliet 's sake , for her sake , rise and stand ! 
▁ xxmaj why should you fall into so deep an xxup o ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . ( rises ) xxmaj nurse- 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj ah sir ! ah sir ! xxmaj well , death 's the end of all . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj spakest thou of xxmaj juliet ? xxmaj how is it with her ? 
▁ xxmaj doth not she think me an old murtherer , 
▁ xxmaj now i have stain'd the childhood of our joy 
▁ xxmaj with blood remov'd but little from her own ? 
▁ xxmaj where is she ? and how doth she ! and what says 
▁ xxmaj my conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxup o , she says nothing , sir , but weeps and weeps ; 
▁ xxmaj and now falls on her bed , and then starts up , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj tybalt calls ; and then on xxmaj romeo cries , 
▁ xxmaj and then down falls again . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj as if that name , 
▁ xxmaj shot from the deadly level of a gun , 
▁ xxmaj did murther her ; as that name 's cursed hand 
▁ xxmaj murder'd her kinsman . xxup o , tell me , friar , tell me , 
▁ xxmaj in what vile part of this anatomy 
▁ xxmaj doth my name lodge ? xxmaj tell me , that i may sack 
▁ xxmaj the hateful mansion . [ draws his dagger . ] 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj hold thy desperate hand . 
▁ xxmaj art thou a man ? xxmaj thy form cries out thou art ; 
▁ xxmaj thy tears are womanish , thy wild acts denote 
▁ xxmaj the unreasonable fury of a beast . 
▁ xxmaj unseemly woman in a seeming man ! 
▁ xxmaj or ill - beseeming beast in seeming both ! 
▁ xxmaj thou hast amaz'd me . xxmaj by my holy order , 
▁ i thought thy disposition better temper'd . 
▁ xxmaj hast thou slain xxmaj tybalt ? xxmaj wilt thou slay thyself ? 
▁ xxmaj and slay thy lady that in thy life lives , 
▁ xxmaj by doing damned hate upon thyself ? 
▁ xxmaj why railest thou on thy birth , the heaven , and earth ? 
▁ xxmaj since birth and heaven and earth , all three do meet 
▁ xxmaj in thee at once ; which thou at once wouldst lose . 
▁ xxmaj fie , fie , thou shamest thy shape , thy love , thy wit , 
▁ xxmaj which , like a usurer , abound'st in all , 
▁ xxmaj and usest none in that true use indeed 
▁ xxmaj which should bedeck thy shape , thy love , thy wit . 
▁ xxmaj thy noble shape is but a form of wax 
▁ xxmaj digressing from the valour of a man ; 
▁ xxmaj thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury , 
▁ xxmaj killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish ; 
▁ xxmaj thy wit , that ornament to shape and love , 
▁ xxmaj misshapen in the conduct of them both , 
▁ xxmaj like powder in a skilless soldier 's flask , 
▁ is get afire by thine own ignorance , 
▁ xxmaj and thou dismemb'red with thine own defence . 
▁ xxmaj what , rouse thee , man ! xxmaj thy xxmaj juliet is alive , 
▁ xxmaj for whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead . 
▁ xxmaj there art thou happy . xxmaj tybalt would kill thee , 
▁ xxmaj but thou slewest xxmaj tybalt . xxmaj there art thou happy too . 
▁ xxmaj the law , that threat'ned death , becomes thy friend 
▁ xxmaj and turns it to exile . xxmaj there art thou happy . 
▁ a pack of blessings light upon thy back ; 
▁ xxmaj happiness courts thee in her best array ; 
▁ xxmaj but , like a misbhav'd and sullen wench , 
▁ xxmaj thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love . 
▁ xxmaj take heed , take heed , for such die miserable . 
▁ xxmaj go get thee to thy love , as was decreed , 
▁ xxmaj ascend her chamber , hence and comfort her . 
▁ xxmaj but look thou stay not till the watch be set , 
▁ xxmaj for then thou canst not pass to xxmaj mantua , 
▁ xxmaj where thou shalt live till we can find a time 
▁ xxmaj to blaze your marriage , reconcile your friends , 
▁ xxmaj beg pardon of the xxmaj prince , and call thee back 
▁ xxmaj with twenty hundred thousand times more joy 
▁ xxmaj than thou went'st forth in lamentation . 
▁ xxmaj go before , nurse . xxmaj commend me to thy lady , 
▁ xxmaj and bid her hasten all the house to bed , 
▁ xxmaj which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto . 
▁ xxmaj romeo is coming . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . o xxmaj lord , i could have stay'd here all the night 
▁ xxmaj to hear good counsel . xxup o , what learning is ! 
▁ xxmaj my lord , xxmaj i 'll tell my lady you will come . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj do so , and bid my sweet prepare to chide . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj here is a ring she bid me give you , sir . 
▁ xxmaj hie you , make haste , for it grows very late . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj how well my comfort is reviv'd by this ! 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj go hence ; good night ; and here stands all your state : 
▁ xxmaj either be gone before the watch be set , 
▁ xxmaj or by the break of day disguis'd from hence . 
▁ xxmaj sojourn in xxmaj mantua . xxmaj i 'll find out your man , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall signify from time to time 
▁ xxmaj every good hap to you that chances here . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand . ' tis late . xxmaj farewell ; good night . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj but that a joy past joy calls out on me , 
▁ xxmaj it were a grief so brief to part with thee . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj capulet 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj old xxmaj capulet , his xxmaj wife , and xxmaj paris . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj things have fall'n out , sir , so unluckily 
▁ xxmaj that we have had no time to move our daughter . 
▁ xxmaj look you , she lov'd her kinsman xxmaj tybalt dearly , 
▁ xxmaj and so did xxup i. xxmaj well , we were born to die . 
▁ ' tis very late ; she 'll not come down to - night . 
▁ i promise you , but for your company , 
▁ i would have been abed an hour ago . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj these times of woe afford no tune to woo . 
▁ xxmaj madam , good night . xxmaj commend me to your daughter . 
▁ xxmaj lady . i will , and know her mind early to - morrow ; 
▁ xxmaj to - night she 's mew'd up to her heaviness . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj sir xxmaj paris , i will make a desperate tender 
▁ xxmaj of my child 's love . i think she will be rul'd 
▁ xxmaj in all respects by me ; nay more , i doubt it not . 
▁ xxmaj wife , go you to her ere you go to bed ; 
▁ xxmaj acquaint her here of my son xxmaj paris ' love 
▁ xxmaj and bid her ( mark you me ? ) on xxmaj wednesday next- 
▁ xxmaj but , soft ! what day is this ? 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj monday , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj monday ! ha , ha ! xxmaj well , xxmaj wednesday is too soon . 
▁ xxmaj thursday let it be- a xxmaj thursday , tell her 
▁ xxmaj she shall be married to this noble earl . 
▁ xxmaj will you be ready ? xxmaj do you like this haste ? 
▁ xxmaj we 'll keep no great ado- a friend or two ; 
▁ xxmaj for hark you , xxmaj tybalt being slain so late , 
▁ xxmaj it may be thought we held him carelessly , 
▁ xxmaj being our kinsman , if we revel much . 
▁ xxmaj therefore we 'll have some half a dozen friends , 
▁ xxmaj and there an end . xxmaj but what say you to xxmaj thursday ? 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj my lord , i would that xxmaj thursday were to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj well , get you gone . a xxmaj thursday be it then . 
▁ xxmaj go you to xxmaj juliet ere you go to bed ; 
▁ xxmaj prepare her , wife , against this wedding day . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , xxmaj my lord.- xxmaj light to my chamber , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj afore me , xxmaj it is so very very late 
▁ xxmaj that we may call it early by - and - by . 
▁ xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj capulet 's orchard . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo and xxmaj juliet aloft , at the xxmaj window . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj wilt thou be gone ? xxmaj it is not yet near day . 
▁ xxmaj it was the nightingale , and not the lark , 
▁ xxmaj that pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear . 
▁ xxmaj nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree . 
▁ xxmaj believe me , love , it was the nightingale . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj it was the lark , the herald of the morn ; 
▁ xxmaj no nightingale . xxmaj look , love , what envious streaks 
▁ xxmaj do lace the severing clouds in yonder xxmaj east . 
▁ xxmaj night 's candles are burnt out , and jocund day 
▁ xxmaj stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops . 
▁ i must be gone and live , or stay and die . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj yond light is not daylight ; i know it , xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj it is some meteor that the sun exhales 
▁ xxmaj to be to thee this night a torchbearer 
▁ xxmaj and light thee on the way to xxmaj mantua . 
▁ xxmaj therefore stay yet ; thou need'st not to be gone . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj let me be ta'en , let me be put to death . 
▁ i am content , so thou wilt have it so . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll say yon grey is not the morning 's eye , 
▁ ' tis but the pale reflex of xxmaj cynthia 's brow ; 
▁ xxmaj nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat 
▁ xxmaj the vaulty heaven so high above our heads . 
▁ i have more care to stay than will to go . 
▁ xxmaj come , death , and welcome ! xxmaj juliet wills it so . 
▁ xxmaj how is't , my soul ? xxmaj let 's talk ; it is not day . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj it is , it is ! xxmaj hie hence , be gone , away ! 
▁ xxmaj it is the lark that sings so out of tune , 
▁ xxmaj straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps . 
▁ xxmaj some say the lark makes sweet division ; 
▁ xxmaj this doth not so , for she divideth us . 
▁ xxmaj some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes ; 
▁ xxup o , now i would they had chang'd voices too , 
▁ xxmaj since arm from arm that voice doth us affray , 
▁ xxmaj hunting thee hence with hunt's - up to the day ! 
▁ xxup o , now be gone ! xxmaj more light and light it grows . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj more light and light- more dark and dark our woes ! 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj nurse . 

▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj madam ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj nurse ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj your lady mother is coming to your chamber . 
▁ xxmaj the day is broke ; be wary , look about . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj then , window , let day in , and let life out . 
▁ [ exit . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj farewell , farewell ! xxmaj one kiss , and xxmaj i 'll descend . 
▁ xxmaj he goeth down . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj art thou gone so , my lord , my love , my friend ? 
▁ i must hear from thee every day in the hour , 
▁ xxmaj for in a minute there are many days . 
▁ xxup o , by this count i shall be much in years 
▁ xxmaj ere i again behold my xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj farewell ! 
▁ i will omit no opportunity 
▁ xxmaj that may convey my greetings , love , to thee . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup o , think'st thou we shall ever meet again ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . i doubt it not ; and all these woes shall serve 
▁ xxmaj for sweet discourses in our time to come . 
▁ xxmaj jul . o xxmaj god , i have an ill - divining soul ! 
▁ xxmaj methinks i see thee , now thou art below , 
▁ xxmaj as one dead in the bottom of a tomb . 
▁ xxmaj either my eyesight fails , or thou look'st pale . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj and trust me , love , in my eye so do you . 
▁ xxmaj dry sorrow drinks our blood . xxmaj adieu , adieu ! 
 xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj jul . o xxmaj fortune , xxmaj fortune ! all men call thee fickle . 
▁ xxmaj if thou art fickle , what dost thou with him 
▁ xxmaj that is renown'd for faith ? xxmaj be fickle , xxmaj fortune , 
▁ xxmaj for then i hope thou wilt not keep him long 
▁ xxmaj but send him back . 
▁ xxmaj lady . [ within ] xxmaj ho , daughter ! are you up ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj who is't that calls ? xxmaj it is my lady mother . 
▁ xxmaj is she not down so late , or up so early ? 
▁ xxmaj what unaccustom'd cause procures her hither ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj mother . 
▁
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj juliet ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj madam , i am not well . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj evermore weeping for your cousin 's death ? 
▁ xxmaj what , wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears ? 
▁ xxmaj an if thou couldst , thou couldst not make him live . 
▁ xxmaj therefore have done . xxmaj some grief shows much of love ; 
▁ xxmaj but much of grief shows still some want of wit . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj yet let me weep for such a feeling loss . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj so shall you feel the loss , but not the friend 
▁ xxmaj which you weep for . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj feeling so the loss , 
▁ i can not choose but ever weep the friend . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj well , girl , thou weep'st not so much for his death 
▁ xxmaj as that the villain lives which slaughter'd him . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what villain , madam ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj that same villain xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj jul . [ aside ] xxmaj villain and he be many miles asunder.- 
▁ xxmaj god pardon him ! i do , with all my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet no man like he doth grieve my heart . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj that is because the traitor murderer lives . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj ay , madam , from the reach of these my hands . 
▁ xxmaj would none but i might venge my cousin 's death ! 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj we will have vengeance for it , fear thou not . 
▁ xxmaj then weep no more . xxmaj i 'll send to one in xxmaj mantua , 
▁ xxmaj where that same banish'd runagate doth live , 
▁ xxmaj shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram 
▁ xxmaj that he shall soon keep xxmaj tybalt company ; 
▁ xxmaj and then i hope thou wilt be satisfied . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj indeed i never shall be satisfied 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj romeo till i behold him- dead- 
▁ xxmaj is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd . 
▁ xxmaj madam , if you could find out but a man 
▁ xxmaj to bear a poison , i would temper it ; 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj romeo should , upon receipt thereof , 
▁ xxmaj soon sleep in quiet . xxup o , how my heart abhors 
▁ xxmaj to hear him nam'd and can not come to him , 
▁ xxmaj to wreak the love i bore my cousin xxmaj tybalt 
▁ xxmaj upon his body that hath slaughter'd him ! 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj find thou the means , and xxmaj i 'll find such a man . 
▁ xxmaj but now xxmaj i 'll tell thee joyful tidings , girl . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj and joy comes well in such a needy time . 
▁ xxmaj what are they , i beseech your ladyship ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj well , well , thou hast a careful father , child ; 
▁ xxmaj one who , to put thee from thy heaviness , 
▁ xxmaj hath sorted out a sudden day of joy 
▁ xxmaj that thou expects not nor i look'd not for . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj madam , in happy time ! xxmaj what day is that ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj marry , my child , early next xxmaj thursday morn 
▁ xxmaj the gallant , young , and noble gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj county xxmaj paris , at xxmaj saint xxmaj peter 's xxmaj church , 
▁ xxmaj shall happily make thee there a joyful bride . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj now by xxmaj saint xxmaj peter 's xxmaj church , and xxmaj peter too , 
▁ xxmaj he shall not make me there a joyful bride ! 
▁ i wonder at this haste , that i must we d 
▁ xxmaj ere he that should be husband comes to woo . 
▁ i pray you tell my lord and father , madam , 
▁ i will not marry yet ; and when i do , i swear 
▁ xxmaj it shall be xxmaj romeo , whom you know i hate , 
▁ xxmaj rather than xxmaj paris . xxmaj these are news indeed ! 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj here comes your father . xxmaj tell him so yourself , 
▁ xxmaj and see how be will take it at your hands . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj capulet and xxmaj nurse . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj when the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew , 
▁ xxmaj but for the sunset of my brother 's son 
▁ xxmaj it rains downright . 
▁ xxmaj how now ? a conduit , girl ? xxmaj what , still in tears ? 
▁ xxmaj evermore show'ring ? xxmaj in one little body 
▁ xxmaj thou counterfeit'st a bark , a sea , a wind : 
▁ xxmaj for still thy eyes , which i may call the sea , 
▁ xxmaj do ebb and flow with tears ; the bark thy body is 
▁ xxmaj sailing in this salt flood ; the winds , thy sighs , 
▁ xxmaj who , raging with thy tears and they with them , 
▁ xxmaj without a sudden calm will overset 
▁ xxmaj thy tempest - tossed body . xxmaj how now , wife ? 
▁ xxmaj have you delivered to her our decree ? 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj ay , sir ; but she will none , she gives you thanks . 
▁ i would the fool were married to her grave ! 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj soft ! take me with you , take me with you , wife . 
▁ xxmaj how ? xxmaj will she none ? xxmaj doth she not give us thanks ? 
▁ xxmaj is she not proud ? xxmaj doth she not count her blest , 
▁ xxmaj unworthy as she is , that we have wrought 
▁ xxmaj so worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj not proud you have , but thankful that you have . 
▁ xxmaj proud can i never be of what i hate , 
▁ xxmaj but thankful even for hate that is meant love . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj how , how , how , how , choplogic ? xxmaj what is this ? 
▁ ' proud'- and ' i thank you'- and ' i thank you not'- 
▁ xxmaj and yet ' not proud ' ? xxmaj mistress minion you , 
▁ xxmaj thank me no thankings , nor proud me no prouds , 
▁ xxmaj but fettle your fine joints ' gainst xxmaj thursday next 
▁ xxmaj to go with xxmaj paris to xxmaj saint xxmaj peter 's xxmaj church , 
▁ xxmaj or i will drag thee on a hurdle thither . 
▁ xxmaj out , you green - sickness carrion i out , you baggage ! 
▁ xxmaj you tallow - face ! 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj fie , fie ! what , are you mad ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj good father , i beseech you on my knees , 
▁ xxmaj hear me with patience but to speak a word . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj hang thee , young baggage ! disobedient wretch ! 
▁ i tell thee what- get thee to church a xxmaj thursday 
▁ xxmaj or never after look me in the face . 
▁ xxmaj speak not , reply not , do not answer me ! 
▁ xxmaj my fingers itch . xxmaj wife , we scarce thought us blest 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj god had lent us but this only child ; 
▁ xxmaj but now i see this one is one too much , 
▁ xxmaj and that we have a curse in having her . 
▁ xxmaj out on her , hilding ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj god in heaven bless her ! 
▁ xxmaj you are to blame , my lord , to rate her so . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj and why , my xxmaj lady xxmaj wisdom ? xxmaj hold your tongue , 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj prudence . xxmaj smatter with your gossips , go ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . i speak no treason . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxup o , xxmaj god - i - god - en ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj may not one speak ? 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj peace , you mumbling fool ! 
▁ xxmaj utter your gravity o'er a gossip 's bowl , 
▁ xxmaj for here we need it not . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj you are too hot . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj god 's bread i it makes me mad . xxmaj day , night , late , early , 
▁ xxmaj at home , abroad , alone , in company , 
▁ xxmaj waking or sleeping , still my care hath been 
▁ xxmaj to have her match'd ; and having now provided 
▁ a gentleman of princely parentage , 
▁ xxmaj of fair demesnes , youthful , and nobly train'd , 
▁ xxmaj stuff'd , as they say , with honourable parts , 
▁ xxmaj proportion'd as one 's thought would wish a man- 
▁ xxmaj and then to have a wretched puling fool , 
▁ a whining mammet , in her fortune 's tender , 
▁ xxmaj to answer ' i 'll not we d , i can not love ; 
▁ i am too young , i pray you pardon me ' ! 
▁ xxmaj but , an you will not we d , xxmaj i 'll pardon you . 
▁ xxmaj graze where you will , you shall not house with me . 
▁ xxmaj look to't , think on't ; i do not use to jest . 
▁ xxmaj thursday is near ; lay hand on heart , advise : 
▁ xxmaj an you be mine , xxmaj i 'll give you to my friend ; 
▁ xxmaj an you be not , hang , beg , starve , die in the streets , 
▁ xxmaj for , by my soul , xxmaj i 'll ne'er acknowledge thee , 
▁ xxmaj nor what is mine shall never do thee good . 
▁ xxmaj trust to't . xxmaj bethink you . xxmaj i 'll not be forsworn . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj is there no pity sitting in the clouds 
▁ xxmaj that sees into the bottom of my grief ? 
▁ o sweet my mother , cast me not away ! 
▁ xxmaj delay this marriage for a month , a week ; 
▁ xxmaj or if you do not , make the bridal bed 
▁ xxmaj in that dim monument where xxmaj tybalt lies . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj talk not to me , for xxmaj i 'll not speak a word . 
▁ xxmaj do as thou wilt , for i have done with thee . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj jul . o xxmaj god!- o nurse , how shall this be prevented ? 
▁ xxmaj my husband is on earth , my faith in heaven . 
▁ xxmaj how shall that faith return again to earth 
▁ xxmaj unless that husband send it me from heaven 
▁ xxmaj by leaving earth ? xxmaj comfort me , counsel me . 
▁ xxmaj alack , alack , that heaven should practise stratagems 
▁ xxmaj upon so soft a subject as myself ! 
▁ xxmaj what say'st thou ? xxmaj hast thou not a word of joy ? 
▁ xxmaj some comfort , nurse . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj faith , here it is . 
▁ xxmaj romeo is banish'd ; and all the world to nothing 
▁ xxmaj that he dares ne'er come back to challenge you ; 
▁ xxmaj or if he do , it needs must be by stealth . 
▁ xxmaj then , since the case so stands as now it doth , 
▁ i think it best you married with the xxmaj county . 
▁ xxup o , he 's a lovely gentleman ! 
▁ xxmaj romeo 's a dishclout to him . xxmaj an eagle , madam , 
▁ xxmaj hath not so green , so quick , so fair an eye 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj paris hath . xxmaj beshrew my very heart , 
▁ i think you are happy in this second match , 
▁ xxmaj for it excels your first ; or if it did not , 
▁ xxmaj your first is dead- or ' twere as good he were 
▁ xxmaj as living here and you no use of him . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj speak'st thou this from thy heart ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj and from my soul too ; else beshrew them both . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj amen ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj well , thou hast comforted me marvellous much . 
▁ xxmaj go in ; and tell my lady i am gone , 
▁ xxmaj having displeas'd my father , to xxmaj laurence ' cell , 
▁ xxmaj to make confession and to be absolv'd . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj marry , i will ; and this is wisely done . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj ancient damnation ! o most wicked fiend ! 
▁ xxmaj is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn , 
▁ xxmaj or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue 
▁ xxmaj which she hath prais'd him with above compare 
▁ xxmaj so many thousand times ? xxmaj go , counsellor ! 
▁ xxmaj thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the friar to know his remedy . 
▁ xxmaj if all else fail , myself have power to die . xxmaj exit . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence 's cell . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj friar , [ laurence ] and xxmaj county xxmaj paris . 

▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj on xxmaj thursday , sir ? xxmaj the time is very short . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj my father xxmaj capulet will have it so , 
▁ xxmaj and i am nothing slow to slack his haste . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj you say you do not know the lady 's mind . 
▁ xxmaj uneven is the course ; i like it not . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj immoderately she weeps for xxmaj tybalt 's death , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore have i little talk'd of love ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj venus smiles not in a house of tears . 
▁ xxmaj now , sir , her father counts it dangerous 
▁ xxmaj that she do give her sorrow so much sway , 
▁ xxmaj and in his wisdom hastes our marriage 
▁ xxmaj to stop the inundation of her tears , 
▁ xxmaj which , too much minded by herself alone , 
▁ xxmaj may be put from her by society . 
▁ xxmaj now do you know the reason of this haste . 
▁ xxmaj friar . [ aside ] i would i knew not why it should be slow'd.- 
▁ xxmaj look , sir , here comes the lady toward my cell . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet . 

▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj happily met , my lady and my wife ! 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj that may be , sir , when i may be a wife . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj that may be must be , love , on xxmaj thursday next . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj what must be shall be . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj that 's a certain text . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj come you to make confession to this father ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj to answer that , i should confess to you . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj do not deny to him that you love me . 
▁ xxmaj jul . i will confess to you that i love him . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj so will ye , i am sure , that you love me . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj if i do so , it will be of more price , 
▁ xxmaj being spoke behind your back , than to your face . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj poor soul , thy face is much abus'd with tears . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj the tears have got small victory by that , 
▁ xxmaj for it was bad enough before their spite . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj that is no slander , sir , which is a truth ; 
▁ xxmaj and what i spake , i spake it to my face . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj thy face is mine , and thou hast sland'red it . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj it may be so , for it is not mine own . 
▁ xxmaj are you at leisure , holy father , now , 
▁ xxmaj or shall i come to you at evening mass 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj my leisure serves me , pensive daughter , now . 
▁ xxmaj my lord , we must entreat the time alone . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj god shield i should disturb devotion ! 
▁ xxmaj juliet , on xxmaj thursday early will i rouse ye . 
▁ xxmaj till then , adieu , and keep this holy kiss . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup o , shut the door ! and when thou hast done so , 
▁ xxmaj come weep with me- past hope , past cure , past help ! 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj ah , xxmaj juliet , i already know thy grief ; 
▁ xxmaj it strains me past the compass of my wits . 
▁ i hear thou must , and nothing may prorogue it , 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj thursday next be married to this xxmaj county . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj tell me not , friar , that thou hear'st of this , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou tell me how i may prevent it . 
▁ xxmaj if in thy wisdom thou canst give no help , 
▁ xxmaj do thou but call my resolution wise 
▁ xxmaj and with this knife xxmaj i 'll help it presently . 
▁ xxmaj god join'd my heart and xxmaj romeo 's , thou our hands ; 
▁ xxmaj and ere this hand , by thee to xxmaj romeo 's seal'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall be the label to another deed , 
▁ xxmaj or my true heart with treacherous revolt 
▁ xxmaj turn to another , this shall slay them both . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , out of thy long - experienc'd time , 
▁ xxmaj give me some present counsel ; or , behold , 
▁ ' twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife 
▁ xxmaj shall play the empire , arbitrating that 
▁ xxmaj which the commission of thy years and art 
▁ xxmaj could to no issue of true honour bring . 
▁ xxmaj be not so long to speak . i long to die 
▁ xxmaj if what thou speak'st speak not of remedy . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj hold , daughter . i do spy a kind of hope , 
▁ xxmaj which craves as desperate an execution 
▁ xxmaj as that is desperate which we would prevent . 
▁ xxmaj if , rather than to marry xxmaj county xxmaj paris 
▁ xxmaj thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself , 
▁ xxmaj then is it likely thou wilt undertake 
▁ a thing like death to chide away this shame , 
▁ xxmaj that cop'st with death himself to scape from it ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if thou dar'st , xxmaj i 'll give thee remedy . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxup o , bid me leap , rather than marry xxmaj paris , 
▁ xxmaj from off the battlements of yonder tower , 
▁ xxmaj or walk in thievish ways , or bid me lurk 
▁ xxmaj where serpents are ; chain me with roaring bears , 
▁ xxmaj or shut me nightly in a charnel house , 
▁ xxmaj o'ercover'd quite with dead men 's rattling bones , 
▁ xxmaj with reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls ; 
▁ xxmaj or bid me go into a new - made grave 
▁ xxmaj and hide me with a dead man in his shroud- 
▁ xxmaj things that , to hear them told , have made me tremble- 
▁ xxmaj and i will do it without fear or doubt , 
▁ xxmaj to live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj hold , then . xxmaj go home , be merry , give consent 
▁ xxmaj to marry xxmaj paris . xxmaj wednesday is to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow night look that thou lie alone ; 
▁ xxmaj let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber . 
▁ xxmaj take thou this vial , being then in bed , 
▁ xxmaj and this distilled liquor drink thou off ; 
▁ xxmaj when presently through all thy veins shall run 
▁ a cold and drowsy humour ; for no pulse 
▁ xxmaj shall keep his native progress , but surcease ; 
▁ xxmaj no warmth , no breath , shall testify thou livest ; 
▁ xxmaj the roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade 
▁ xxmaj to paly ashes , thy eyes ' windows fall 
▁ xxmaj like death when he shuts up the day of life ; 
▁ xxmaj each part , depriv'd of supple government , 
▁ xxmaj shall , stiff and stark and cold , appear like death ; 
▁ xxmaj and in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt continue two - and - forty hours , 
▁ xxmaj and then awake as from a pleasant sleep . 
▁ xxmaj now , when the bridegroom in the morning comes 
▁ xxmaj to rouse thee from thy bed , there art thou dead . 
▁ xxmaj then , as the manner of our country is , 
▁ xxmaj in thy best robes uncovered on the bier 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault 
▁ xxmaj where all the kindred of the xxmaj capulets lie . 
▁ xxmaj in the mean time , against thou shalt awake , 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj romeo by my letters know our drift ; 
▁ xxmaj and hither shall he come ; and he and i 
▁ xxmaj will watch thy waking , and that very night 
▁ xxmaj shall xxmaj romeo bear thee hence to xxmaj mantua . 
▁ xxmaj and this shall free thee from this present shame , 
▁ xxmaj if no inconstant toy nor womanish fear 
▁ xxmaj abate thy valour in the acting it . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj give me , give me ! xxup o , tell not me of fear ! 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj hold ! xxmaj get you gone , be strong and prosperous 
▁ xxmaj in this resolve . xxmaj i 'll send a friar with speed 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj mantua , with my letters to thy lord . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj love give me strength ! and strength shall help afford . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , dear father . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj capulet 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj father xxmaj capulet , xxmaj mother , xxmaj nurse , and xxmaj servingmen , 
▁ two or three . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj so many guests invite as here are writ . 
▁ [ exit a xxmaj servingman . ] 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , go hire me twenty cunning cooks . 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj you shall have none ill , sir ; for xxmaj i 'll try if they can lick 
▁ their fingers . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj how canst thou try them so ? 
▁ xxmaj serv . xxmaj marry , sir , ' tis an ill cook that can not lick his own 
▁ fingers . xxmaj therefore he that can not lick his fingers goes not with 
▁ me . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj go , begone . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxmaj servingman . 
▁ xxmaj we shall be much unfurnish'd for this time . 
▁ xxmaj what , is my daughter gone to xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj ay , forsooth . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj well , be may chance to do some good on her . 
▁ a peevish self - will'd harlotry it is . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet . 

▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj see where she comes from shrift with merry look . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj how now , my headstrong ? xxmaj where have you been gadding ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj where i have learnt me to repent the sin 
▁ xxmaj of disobedient opposition 
▁ xxmaj to you and your behests , and am enjoin'd 
▁ xxmaj by holy xxmaj laurence to fall prostrate here 
▁ xxmaj to beg your pardon . xxmaj pardon , i beseech you ! 
▁ xxmaj henceforward i am ever rul'd by you . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj send for the xxmaj county . xxmaj go tell him of this . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have this knot knit up to - morrow morning . 
▁ xxmaj jul . i met the youthful lord at xxmaj laurence ' cell 
▁ xxmaj and gave him what becomed love i might , 
▁ xxmaj not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj why , i am glad on't . xxmaj this is well . xxmaj stand up . 
▁ xxmaj this is as't should be . xxmaj let me see the xxmaj county . 
▁ xxmaj ay , marry , go , i say , and fetch him hither . 
▁ xxmaj now , afore xxmaj god , this reverend holy friar , 
▁ xxmaj all our whole city is much bound to him . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj nurse , will you go with me into my closet 
▁ xxmaj to help me sort such needful ornaments 
▁ xxmaj as you think fit to furnish me to - morrow ? 
▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj no , not till xxmaj thursday . xxmaj there is time enough . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj go , nurse , go with her . xxmaj we 'll to church to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj juliet and xxmaj nurse . 
▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj we shall be short in our provision . 
▁ ' tis now near night . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj tush , i will stir about , 
▁ xxmaj and all things shall be well , i warrant thee , wife . 
▁ xxmaj go thou to xxmaj juliet , help to deck up her . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not to bed to - night ; let me alone . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll play the housewife for this once . xxmaj what , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj they are all forth ; well , i will walk myself 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj county xxmaj paris , to prepare him up 
▁ xxmaj against to - morrow . xxmaj my heart is wondrous light , 
▁ xxmaj since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj juliet 's chamber . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj juliet and xxmaj nurse . 

▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj ay , those attires are best ; but , gentle nurse , 
▁ i pray thee leave me to myself to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have need of many orisons 
▁ xxmaj to move the heavens to smile upon my state , 
▁ xxmaj which , well thou knowest , is cross and full of sin . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj mother . 

▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj what , are you busy , ho ? xxmaj need you my help ? 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj no , madam ; we have cull'd such necessaries 
▁ xxmaj as are behooffull for our state to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj so please you , let me now be left alone , 
▁ xxmaj and let the nurse this night sit up with you ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am sure you have your hands full all 
▁ xxmaj in this so sudden business . 
▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj get thee to bed , and rest ; for thou hast need . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt [ mother and xxmaj nurse . ] 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj farewell ! xxmaj god knows when we shall meet again . 
▁ i have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins 
▁ xxmaj that almost freezes up the heat of life . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll call them back again to comfort me . 
▁ xxmaj nurse!- xxmaj what should she do here ? 
▁ xxmaj my dismal scene i needs must act alone . 
▁ xxmaj come , vial . 
▁ xxmaj what if this mixture do not work at all ? 
▁ xxmaj shall i be married then to - morrow morning ? 
▁ xxmaj no , xxmaj no ! xxmaj this shall forbid it . xxmaj lie thou there . 
▁ xxmaj lays down a dagger . 
▁ xxmaj what if it be a poison which the friar 
▁ xxmaj subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead , 
▁ xxmaj lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd 
▁ xxmaj because he married me before to xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ i fear it is ; and yet methinks it should not , 
▁ xxmaj for he hath still been tried a holy man . 
▁ i will not entertain so bad a thought . 
▁ xxmaj how if , when i am laid into the tomb , 
▁ i wake before the time that xxmaj romeo 
▁ xxmaj come to redeem me ? xxmaj there 's a fearful point ! 
▁ xxmaj shall i not then be stifled in the vault , 
▁ xxmaj to whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in , 
▁ xxmaj and there die strangled ere my xxmaj romeo comes ? 
▁ xxmaj or , if i live , is it not very like 
▁ xxmaj the horrible conceit of death and night , 
▁ xxmaj together with the terror of the place- 
▁ xxmaj as in a vault , an ancient receptacle 
▁ xxmaj where for this many hundred years the bones 
▁ xxmaj of all my buried ancestors are pack'd ; 
▁ xxmaj where bloody xxmaj tybalt , yet but green in earth , 
▁ xxmaj lies fest'ring in his shroud ; where , as they say , 
▁ xxmaj at some hours in the night spirits resort- 
▁ xxmaj alack , alack , is it not like that xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj so early waking- what with loathsome smells , 
▁ xxmaj and shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth , 
▁ xxmaj that living mortals , hearing them , run mad- 
▁ xxup o , if i wake , shall i not be distraught , 
▁ xxmaj environed with all these hideous fears , 
▁ xxmaj and madly play with my forefathers ' joints , 
▁ xxmaj and pluck the mangled xxmaj tybalt from his shroud . , 
▁ xxmaj and , in this rage , with some great kinsman 's bone 
▁ xxmaj as with a club dash out my desp'rate brains ? 
▁ xxup o , look ! methinks i see my cousin 's ghost 
▁ xxmaj seeking out xxmaj romeo , that did spit his body 
▁ xxmaj upon a rapier 's point . xxmaj stay , xxmaj tybalt , stay ! 
▁ xxmaj romeo , i come ! this do i drink to thee . 

▁ xxmaj she [ drinks and ] falls upon her bed within the curtains . 




 xxmaj scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj capulet 's house . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lady of the xxmaj house and xxmaj nurse . 

▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj hold , take these keys and fetch more spices , nurse . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj they call for dates and quinces in the pastry . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj old xxmaj capulet . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj come , stir , stir , stir ! xxmaj the second cock hath crow'd , 
▁ xxmaj the curfew bell hath rung , ' tis three o'clock . 
▁ xxmaj look to the bak'd meats , good xxmaj angelica ; 
▁ xxmaj spare not for cost . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj go , you cot - quean , go , 
▁ xxmaj get you to bed ! xxmaj faith , you 'll be sick to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj for this night 's watching . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj no , not a whit . xxmaj what , i have watch'd ere now 
▁ xxmaj all night for lesser cause , and ne'er been sick . 
▁ xxmaj lady . xxmaj ay , you have been a mouse - hunt in your time ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will watch you from such watching now . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxmaj lady and xxmaj nurse . 
▁ xxmaj cap . a jealous hood , a jealous hood ! 

▁ xxmaj enter three or four [ fellows , with spits and logs and baskets . 

▁ xxmaj what is there ? xxmaj now , fellow , 
▁ xxmaj fellow . xxmaj things for the cook , sir ; but i know not what . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj make haste , make haste . [ exit xxmaj fellow . ] xxmaj sirrah , fetch drier 
▁ logs . 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj peter ; he will show thee where they are . 
▁ xxmaj fellow . i have a head , sir , that will find out logs 
▁ xxmaj and never trouble xxmaj peter for the matter . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj mass , and well said ; a merry whoreson , ha ! 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be loggerhead . [ exit xxmaj fellow . ] xxmaj good faith , ' tis day . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj county will be here with music straight , 
▁ xxmaj for so he said he would . xxmaj play music . 
▁ i hear him near . 
▁ xxmaj nurse ! xxmaj wife ! xxmaj what , ho ! xxmaj what , nurse , i say ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj nurse . 
▁ xxmaj go waken xxmaj juliet ; go and trim her up . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll go and chat with xxmaj paris . xxmaj hie , make haste , 
▁ xxmaj make haste ! xxmaj the bridegroom he is come already : 
▁ xxmaj make haste , i say . 
▁ [ exeunt . ] 




 xxmaj scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj juliet 's chamber . 

 [ enter xxmaj nurse . ] 

▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj mistress ! what , mistress ! xxmaj juliet ! xxmaj fast , i warrant her , she . 
▁ xxmaj why , lamb ! why , lady ! xxmaj fie , you slug - abed ! 
▁ xxmaj why , love , i say ! madam ! sweetheart ! xxmaj why , bride ! 
▁ xxmaj what , not a word ? xxmaj you take your pennyworths now ! 
▁ xxmaj sleep for a week ; for the next night , i warrant , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj county xxmaj paris hath set up his rest 
▁ xxmaj that you shall rest but little . xxmaj god forgive me ! 
▁ xxmaj marry , and amen . xxmaj how sound is she asleep ! 
▁ i needs must wake her . xxmaj madam , madam , madam ! 
▁ xxmaj ay , let the xxmaj county take you in your bed ! 
▁ xxmaj he 'll fright you up , i ' faith . xxmaj will it not be ? 
▁ [ draws aside the curtains . ] 
▁ xxmaj what , dress'd , and in your clothes , and down again ? 
▁ i must needs wake you . xxmaj lady ! lady ! lady ! 
▁ xxmaj alas , alas ! xxmaj help , help ! xxmaj my lady 's dead ! 
▁ o weraday that ever i was born ! 
▁ xxmaj some aqua - vitae , ho ! xxmaj my lord ! my lady ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj mother . 

▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj what noise is here ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . o lamentable day ! 
▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj what is the matter ? 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj look , look ! o heavy day ! 
▁ xxmaj mother . o me , o me ! xxmaj my child , my only life ! 
▁ xxmaj revive , look up , or i will die with thee ! 
▁ xxmaj help , help ! xxmaj call help . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj father . 

▁ xxmaj father . xxmaj for shame , bring xxmaj juliet forth ; her lord is come . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj she 's dead , deceas'd ; she 's dead ! xxmaj alack the day ! 
▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj alack the day , she 's dead , she 's dead , she 's dead ! 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj ha ! let me see her . xxmaj out alas ! she 's cold , 
▁ xxmaj her blood is settled , and her joints are stiff ; 
▁ xxmaj life and these lips have long been separated . 
▁ xxmaj death lies on her like an untimely frost 
▁ xxmaj upon the sweetest flower of all the field . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . o lamentable day ! 
▁ xxmaj mother . o woful time ! 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj death , that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail , 
▁ xxmaj ties up my tongue and will not let me speak . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj friar [ laurence ] and the xxmaj county [ paris ] , with xxmaj musicians . 

▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj come , is the bride ready to go to church ? 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj ready to go , but never to return . 
▁ o son , the night before thy wedding day 
▁ xxmaj hath xxmaj death lain with thy wife . xxmaj see , there she lies , 
▁ xxmaj flower as she was , deflowered by him . 
▁ xxmaj death is my son - in - law , xxmaj death is my heir ; 
▁ xxmaj my daughter he hath wedded . i will die 
▁ xxmaj and leave him all . xxmaj life , living , all is xxmaj death 's . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj have i thought long to see this morning 's face , 
▁ xxmaj and doth it give me such a sight as this ? 
▁ xxmaj mother . xxmaj accurs'd , unhappy , wretched , hateful day ! 
▁ xxmaj most miserable hour that e'er time saw 
▁ xxmaj in lasting labour of his pilgrimage ! 
▁ xxmaj but one , poor one , one poor and loving child , 
▁ xxmaj but one thing to rejoice and solace in , 
▁ xxmaj and cruel xxmaj death hath catch'd it from my sight ! 
▁ xxmaj nurse . o woe ? o woful , woful , woful day ! 
▁ xxmaj most lamentable day , most woful day 
▁ xxmaj that ever ever i did yet behold ! 
▁ o day ! o day ! o day ! o hateful day ! 
▁ xxmaj never was seen so black a day as this . 
▁ o woful day ! o woful day ! 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj beguil'd , divorced , wronged , spited , slain ! 
▁ xxmaj most detestable xxmaj death , by thee beguil'd , 
▁ xxmaj by cruel cruel thee quite overthrown ! 
▁ o love ! o life ! not life , but love in death 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj despis'd , distressed , hated , martyr'd , kill'd ! 
▁ xxmaj uncomfortable time , why cam'st thou now 
▁ xxmaj to murther , murther our solemnity ? 
▁ o child ! o child ! my soul , and not my child ! 
▁ xxmaj dead art thou , dead ! alack , my child is dead , 
▁ xxmaj and with my child my joys are buried ! 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj peace , ho , for shame ! xxmaj confusion 's cure lives not 
▁ xxmaj in these confusions . xxmaj heaven and yourself 
▁ xxmaj had part in this fair maid ! now heaven hath all , 
▁ xxmaj and all the better is it for the maid . 
▁ xxmaj your part in her you could not keep from death , 
▁ xxmaj but heaven keeps his part in eternal life . 
▁ xxmaj the most you sought was her promotion , 
▁ xxmaj for ' twas your heaven she should be advanc'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and weep ye now , seeing she is advanc'd 
▁ xxmaj above the clouds , as high as heaven itself ? 
▁ xxup o , in this love , you love your child so ill 
▁ xxmaj that you run mad , seeing that she is well . 
▁ xxmaj she 's not well married that lives married long , 
▁ xxmaj but she 's best married that dies married young . 
▁ xxmaj dry up your tears and stick your rosemary 
▁ xxmaj on this fair corse , and , as the custom is , 
▁ xxmaj in all her best array bear her to church ; 
▁ xxmaj for though fond nature bids us all lament , 
▁ xxmaj yet nature 's tears are reason 's merriment . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj all things that we ordained festival 
▁ xxmaj turn from their office to black funeral- 
▁ xxmaj our instruments to melancholy bells , 
▁ xxmaj our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast ; 
▁ xxmaj our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change ; 
▁ xxmaj our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse ; 
▁ xxmaj and all things change them to the contrary . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj sir , go you in ; and , madam , go with him ; 
▁ xxmaj and go , xxmaj sir xxmaj paris . xxmaj every one prepare 
▁ xxmaj to follow this fair corse unto her grave . 
▁ xxmaj the heavens do low'r upon you for some ill ; 
▁ xxmaj move them no more by crossing their high will . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj manent xxmaj musicians [ and xxmaj nurse ] . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj faith , we may put up our pipes and be gone . 
▁ xxmaj nurse . xxmaj honest good fellows , ah , put up , put up ! 
▁ xxmaj for well you know this is a pitiful case . [ exit . ] 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj ay , by my troth , the case may be amended . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj peter . 

▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj musicians , xxup o , musicians , ' heart 's ease , ' ' heart 's ease ' ! 
▁ xxup o , an you will have me live , play ' heart 's ease . ' 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj why ' heart 's ease '' , 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxup o , musicians , because my heart itself plays ' my heart is full 
▁ of woe . ' xxup o , play me some merry dump to comfort me . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj not a dump we ! ' tis no time to play now . 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj you will not then ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj pet . i will then give it you soundly . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj what will you give us ? 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj no money , on my faith , but the gleek . i will give you the 
▁ minstrel . 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj then will i give you the serving - creature . 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj then will i lay the serving - creature 's dagger on your pate . 
▁ i will carry no crotchets . xxmaj i 'll re you , xxmaj i 'll fa you . xxmaj do you note 
▁ me ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj an you re us and fa us , you note us . 
▁ 2 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj pray you put up your dagger , and put out your wit . 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj then have at you with my wit ! i will dry - beat you with an iron 
▁ wit , and put up my iron dagger . xxmaj answer me like men . 
▁
▁ ' when griping grief the heart doth wound , 
▁ xxmaj and doleful dumps the mind oppress , 
▁ xxmaj then music with her silver sound'- 

▁ xxmaj why ' silver sound ' ? xxmaj why ' music with her silver sound ' ? 
▁ xxmaj what say you , xxmaj simon xxmaj catling ? 
▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj marry , sir , because silver hath a sweet sound . 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj pretty ! xxmaj what say xxmaj you , xxmaj hugh xxmaj rebeck ? 
▁ 2 . xxmaj mus . i say ' silver sound ' because musicians sound for silver . 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxmaj pretty too ! xxmaj what say you , xxmaj james xxmaj soundpost ? 
▁ 3 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj faith , i know not what to say . 
▁ xxmaj pet . xxup o , i cry you mercy ! you are the singer . i will say for you . xxmaj it 
▁ is ' music with her silver sound ' because musicians have no gold 
▁ for sounding . 

▁ ' then music with her silver sound 
▁ xxmaj with speedy help doth lend redress . ' [ exit . 

▁ 1 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj what a pestilent knave is this same ? 
▁ 2 . xxmaj mus . xxmaj hang him , xxmaj jack ! xxmaj come , we 'll in here , tarry for the 
▁ mourners , and stay dinner . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxmaj scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj mantua . a street . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj if i may trust the flattering truth of sleep 
▁ xxmaj my dreams presage some joyful news at hand . 
▁ xxmaj my bosom 's lord sits lightly in his throne , 
▁ xxmaj and all this day an unaccustom'd spirit 
▁ xxmaj lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts . 
▁ i dreamt my lady came and found me dead 
▁ ( strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think ! ) 
▁ xxmaj and breath'd such life with kisses in my lips 
▁ xxmaj that i reviv'd and was an emperor . 
▁ xxmaj ah me ! how sweet is love itself possess'd , 
▁ xxmaj when but love 's shadows are so rich in joy ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo 's xxmaj man xxmaj balthasar , booted . 

▁ xxmaj news from xxmaj verona ! xxmaj how now , xxmaj balthasar ? 
▁ xxmaj dost thou not bring me letters from the friar ? 
▁ xxmaj how doth my lady ? xxmaj is my father well ? 
▁ xxmaj how fares my xxmaj juliet ? xxmaj that i ask again , 
▁ xxmaj for nothing can be ill if she be well . 
▁ xxmaj man . xxmaj then she is well , and nothing can be ill . 
▁ xxmaj her body sleeps in xxmaj capel 's monument , 
▁ xxmaj and her immortal part with angels lives . 
▁ i saw her laid low in her kindred 's vault 
▁ xxmaj and presently took post to tell it you . 
▁ xxup o , pardon me for bringing these ill news , 
▁ xxmaj since you did leave it for my office , sir . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj is it e'en so ? xxmaj then i defy you , stars ! 
▁ xxmaj thou knowest my lodging . xxmaj get me ink and paper 
▁ xxmaj and hire posthorses . i will hence to - night . 
▁ xxmaj man . i do beseech you , sir , have patience . 
▁ xxmaj your looks are pale and wild and do import 
▁ xxmaj some misadventure . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj tush , thou art deceiv'd . 
▁ xxmaj leave me and do the thing i bid thee do . 
▁ xxmaj hast thou no letters to me from the friar ? 
▁ xxmaj man . xxmaj no , my good lord . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj no matter . xxmaj get thee gone 
▁ xxmaj and hire those horses . xxmaj i 'll be with thee straight . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ balthasar ] . 
▁ xxmaj well , xxmaj juliet , i will lie with thee to - night . 
▁ xxmaj let 's see for means . o mischief , thou art swift 
▁ xxmaj to enter in the thoughts of desperate men ! 
▁ i do remember an apothecary , 
▁ xxmaj and hereabouts ' a dwells , which late i noted 
▁ xxmaj in tatt'red weeds , with overwhelming brows , 
▁ xxmaj culling of simples . xxmaj meagre were his looks ,