xxbos xxmaj sharp misery had worn him to the bones ; 
▁ xxmaj and in his needy shop a tortoise hung , 
▁ xxmaj an alligator stuff'd , and other skins 
▁ xxmaj of ill - shaped fishes ; and about his shelves 
▁ a beggarly account of empty boxes , 
▁ xxmaj green earthen pots , bladders , and musty seeds , 
▁ xxmaj remnants of packthread , and old cakes of roses 
▁ xxmaj were thinly scattered , to make up a show . 
▁ xxmaj noting this penury , to myself i said , 
▁ ' an if a man did need a poison now 
▁ xxmaj whose sale is present death in xxmaj mantua , 
▁ xxmaj here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him . ' 
▁ xxup o , this same thought did but forerun my need , 
▁ xxmaj and this same needy man must sell it me . 
▁ xxmaj as i remember , this should be the house . 
▁ xxmaj being holiday , the beggar 's shop is shut . xxmaj what , ho ! apothecary ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj apothecary . 

▁ xxmaj apoth . xxmaj who calls so loud ? 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj come hither , man . i see that thou art poor . 
▁ xxmaj hold , there is forty ducats . xxmaj let me have 
▁ a dram of poison , such soon - speeding gear 
▁ xxmaj as will disperse itself through all the veins 
▁ xxmaj that the life - weary taker mall fall dead , 
▁ xxmaj and that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath 
▁ xxmaj as violently as hasty powder fir'd 
▁ xxmaj doth hurry from the fatal cannon 's womb . 
▁ xxmaj apoth . xxmaj such mortal drugs i have ; but xxmaj mantua 's law 
▁ xxmaj is death to any he that utters them . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj art thou so bare and full of wretchedness 
▁ xxmaj and fearest to die ? xxmaj famine is in thy cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj need and oppression starveth in thine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back : 
▁ xxmaj the world is not thy friend , nor the world 's law ; 
▁ xxmaj the world affords no law to make thee rich ; 
▁ xxmaj then be not poor , but break it and take this . 
▁ xxmaj apoth . xxmaj my poverty but not my will consents . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i pay thy poverty and not thy will . 
▁ xxmaj apoth . xxmaj put this in any liquid thing you will 
▁ xxmaj and drink it off , and if you had the strength 
▁ xxmaj of twenty men , it would dispatch you straight . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj there is thy gold- worse poison to men 's souls , 
▁ xxmaj doing more murther in this loathsome world , 
▁ xxmaj than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell . 
▁ i sell thee poison ; thou hast sold me none . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj buy food and get thyself in flesh . 
▁ xxmaj come , cordial and not poison , go with me 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj juliet 's grave ; for there must i use thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . 




 xxmaj scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj verona . xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence 's cell . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj friar xxmaj john to xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence . 

▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj holy xxmaj franciscan friar , brother , ho ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj friar xxmaj laurence . 

▁ xxmaj laur . xxmaj this same should be the voice of xxmaj friar xxmaj john . 
▁ xxmaj welcome from xxmaj mantua . xxmaj what says xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj or , if his mind be writ , give me his letter . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj going to find a barefoot brother out , 
▁ xxmaj one of our order , to associate me 
▁ xxmaj here in this city visiting the sick , 
▁ xxmaj and finding him , the searchers of the town , 
▁ xxmaj suspecting that we both were in a house 
▁ xxmaj where the infectious pestilence did reign , 
▁ xxmaj seal'd up the doors , and would not let us forth , 
▁ xxmaj so that my speed to xxmaj mantua there was stay'd . 
▁ xxmaj laur . xxmaj who bare my letter , then , to xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj john . i could not send it- here it is again- 
▁ xxmaj nor get a messenger to bring it thee , 
▁ xxmaj so fearful were they of infection . 
▁ xxmaj laur . xxmaj unhappy fortune ! xxmaj by my brotherhood , 
▁ xxmaj the letter was not nice , but full of charge , 
▁ xxmaj of dear import ; and the neglecting it 
▁ xxmaj may do much danger . xxmaj friar xxmaj john , go hence , 
▁ xxmaj get me an iron crow and bring it straight 
▁ xxmaj unto my cell . 
▁ xxmaj john . xxmaj brother , xxmaj i 'll go and bring it thee . xxmaj exit . 
▁ xxmaj laur . xxmaj now , must i to the monument alone . 
▁ xxmaj within this three hours will fair xxmaj juliet wake . 
▁ xxmaj she will beshrew me much that xxmaj romeo 
▁ xxmaj hath had no notice of these accidents ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will write again to xxmaj mantua , 
▁ xxmaj and keep her at my cell till xxmaj romeo come- 
▁ xxmaj poor living corse , clos'd in a dead man 's tomb ! xxmaj exit . 




 xxmaj scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj verona . a churchyard ; in it the monument of the xxmaj capulets . 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj paris and his xxmaj page with flowers and [ a torch ] . 

▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj give me thy torch , boy . xxmaj hence , and stand aloof . 
▁ xxmaj yet put it out , for i would not be seen . 
▁ xxmaj under yond yew tree lay thee all along , 
▁ xxmaj holding thine ear close to the hollow ground . 
▁ xxmaj so shall no foot upon the churchyard tread 
▁ ( being loose , unfirm , with digging up of graves ) 
▁ xxmaj but thou shalt hear it . xxmaj whistle then to me , 
▁ xxmaj as signal that thou hear'st something approach . 
▁ xxmaj give me those flowers . xxmaj do as i bid thee , go . 
▁ xxmaj page . [ aside ] i am almost afraid to stand alone 
▁ xxmaj here in the churchyard ; yet i will adventure . [ retires . ] 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj sweet flower , with flowers thy bridal bed i strew 
▁ ( o woe ! thy canopy is dust and stones ) 
▁ xxmaj which with sweet water nightly i will dew ; 
▁ xxmaj or , wanting that , with tears distill'd by moans . 
▁ xxmaj the obsequies that i for thee will keep 
▁ xxmaj nightly shall be to strew , thy grave and weep . 
▁ xxmaj whistle xxmaj boy . 
▁ xxmaj the boy gives warning something doth approach . 
▁ xxmaj what cursed foot wanders this way to - night 
▁ xxmaj to cross my obsequies and true love 's rite ? 
▁ xxmaj what , with a torch ? xxmaj muffle me , night , awhile . [ retires . ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj romeo , and xxmaj balthasar with a torch , a mattock , 
▁ and a crow of iron . 

▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj give me that mattock and the wrenching iron . 
▁ xxmaj hold , take this letter . xxmaj early in the morning 
▁ xxmaj see thou deliver it to my lord and father . 
▁ xxmaj give me the light . xxmaj upon thy life i charge thee , 
▁ xxmaj whate'er thou hearest or seest , stand all aloof 
▁ xxmaj and do not interrupt me in my course . 
▁ xxmaj why i descend into this bed of death 
▁ xxmaj is partly to behold my lady 's face , 
▁ xxmaj but chiefly to take thence from her dead finger 
▁ a precious ring- a ring that i must use 
▁ xxmaj in dear employment . xxmaj therefore hence , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj but if thou , jealous , dost return to pry 
▁ xxmaj in what i farther shall intend to do , 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i will tear thee joint by joint 
▁ xxmaj and strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs . 
▁ xxmaj the time and my intents are savage - wild , 
▁ xxmaj more fierce and more inexorable far 
▁ xxmaj than empty tigers or the roaring sea . 
▁ xxmaj bal . i will be gone , sir , and not trouble you . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj so shalt thou show me friendship . xxmaj take thou that . 
▁ xxmaj live , and be prosperous ; and farewell , good fellow . 
▁ xxmaj bal . [ aside ] xxmaj for all this same , xxmaj i 'll hide me hereabout . 
▁ xxmaj his looks i fear , and his intents i doubt . [ retires . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj thou detestable maw , thou womb of death , 
▁ xxmaj gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth , 
▁ xxmaj thus i enforce thy rotten jaws to open , 
▁ xxmaj and in despite xxmaj i 'll cram thee with more food . 
▁ xxmaj romeo opens the tomb . 
▁ xxmaj par . xxmaj this is that banish'd haughty xxmaj montague 
▁ xxmaj that murd'red my love 's cousin- with which grief 
▁ xxmaj it is supposed the fair creature died- 
▁ xxmaj and here is come to do some villanous shame 
▁ xxmaj to the dead bodies . i will apprehend him . 
▁ xxmaj stop thy unhallowed toil , vile xxmaj montague ! 
▁ xxmaj can vengeance be pursu'd further than death ? 
▁ xxmaj condemned villain , i do apprehend thee . 
▁ xxmaj obey , and go with me ; for thou must die . 
▁ xxmaj rom . i must indeed ; and therefore came i hither . 
▁ xxmaj good gentle youth , tempt not a desp'rate man . 
▁ xxmaj fly hence and leave me . xxmaj think upon these gone ; 
▁ xxmaj let them affright thee . i beseech thee , youth , 
▁ xxmaj but not another sin upon my head 
▁ xxmaj by urging me to fury . xxup o , be gone ! 
▁ xxmaj by heaven , i love thee better than myself , 
▁ xxmaj for i come hither arm'd against myself . 
▁ xxmaj stay not , be gone . xxmaj live , and hereafter say 
▁ a madman 's mercy bid thee run away . 
▁ xxmaj par . i do defy thy , conjuration 
▁ xxmaj and apprehend thee for a felon here . 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj wilt thou provoke me ? xxmaj then have at thee , boy ! 
▁ xxmaj they fight . 
▁ xxmaj page . o xxmaj lord , they fight ! i will go call the watch . 
▁ [ exit . xxmaj paris falls . ] 
▁ xxmaj par . xxup o , i am slain ! xxmaj if thou be merciful , 
▁ xxmaj open the tomb , lay me with xxmaj juliet . [ dies . ] 
▁ xxmaj rom . xxmaj in faith , i will . xxmaj let me peruse this face . 
▁ xxmaj mercutio 's kinsman , noble xxmaj county xxmaj paris ! 
▁ xxmaj what said my man when my betossed soul 
▁ xxmaj did not attend him as we rode ? i think 
▁ xxmaj he told me xxmaj paris should have married xxmaj juliet . 
▁ xxmaj said he not so ? or did i dream it so ? 
▁ xxmaj or am i mad , hearing him talk of xxmaj juliet 
▁ xxmaj to think it was so ? xxup o , give me thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj one writ with me in sour misfortune 's book ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bury thee in a triumphant grave . 
▁ a grave ? xxup o , no , a lanthorn , slaught'red youth , 
▁ xxmaj for here lies xxmaj juliet , and her beauty makes 
▁ xxmaj this vault a feasting presence full of light . 
▁ xxmaj death , lie thou there , by a dead man interr'd . 
▁ [ lays him in the tomb . ] 
▁ xxmaj how oft when men are at the point of death 
▁ xxmaj have they been merry ! which their keepers call 
▁ a lightning before death . xxup o , how may i 
▁ xxmaj call this a lightning ? o my love ! my wife ! 
▁ xxmaj death , that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath , 
▁ xxmaj hath had no power yet upon thy beauty . 
▁ xxmaj thou art not conquer'd . xxmaj beauty 's ensign yet 
▁ xxmaj is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj and death 's pale flag is not advanced there . 
▁ xxmaj tybalt , liest thou there in thy bloody sheet ? 
▁ xxup o , what more favour can i do to thee 
▁ xxmaj than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain 
▁ xxmaj to sunder his that was thine enemy ? 
▁ xxmaj forgive me , cousin . ' xxmaj ah , dear xxmaj juliet , 
▁ xxmaj why art thou yet so fair ? xxmaj shall i believe 
▁ xxmaj that unsubstantial xxmaj death is amorous , 
▁ xxmaj and that the lean abhorred monster keeps 
▁ xxmaj thee here in dark to be his paramour ? 
▁ xxmaj for fear of that i still will stay with thee 
▁ xxmaj and never from this palace of dim night 
▁ xxmaj depart again . xxmaj here , here will i remain 
▁ xxmaj with worms that are thy chambermaids . xxup o , here 
▁ xxmaj will i set up my everlasting rest 
▁ xxmaj and shake the yoke of inauspicious stars 
▁ xxmaj from this world - wearied flesh . xxmaj eyes , look your last ! 
▁ xxmaj arms , take your last embrace ! and , lips , o you 
▁ xxmaj the doors of breath , seal with a righteous kiss 
▁ a dateless bargain to engrossing death ! 
▁ xxmaj come , bitter conduct ; come , unsavoury guide ! 
▁ xxmaj thou desperate pilot , now at once run on 
▁ xxmaj the dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark ! 
▁ xxmaj here 's to my love ! [ drinks . ] o true apothecary ! 
▁ xxmaj thy drugs are quick . xxmaj thus with a kiss i die . xxmaj falls . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj friar [ laurence ] , with lanthorn , crow , and spade . 

▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj saint xxmaj francis be my speed ! how oft to - night 
▁ xxmaj have my old feet stumbled at graves ! xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxmaj bal . xxmaj here 's one , a friend , and one that knows you well . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj bliss be upon you ! xxmaj tell me , good my friend , 
▁ xxmaj what torch is yond that vainly lends his light 
▁ xxmaj to grubs and eyeless skulls ? xxmaj as i discern , 
▁ xxmaj it burneth in the xxmaj capels ' monument . 
▁ xxmaj bal . xxmaj it doth so , holy sir ; and there 's my master , 
▁ xxmaj one that you love . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj who is it ? 
▁ xxmaj bal . xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj how long hath he been there ? 
▁ xxmaj bal . xxmaj full half an hour . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj go with me to the vault . 
▁ xxmaj bal . i dare not , sir . 
▁ xxmaj my master knows not but i am gone hence , 
▁ xxmaj and fearfully did menace me with death 
▁ xxmaj if i did stay to look on his intents . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj stay then ; xxmaj i 'll go alone . xxmaj fear comes upon me . 
▁ xxup o , much i fear some ill unthrifty thing . 
▁ xxmaj bal . xxmaj as i did sleep under this yew tree here , 
▁ i dreamt my master and another fought , 
▁ xxmaj and that my master slew him . 
▁ xxmaj friar . xxmaj romeo ! 
▁ xxmaj alack , alack , what blood is this which stains 
▁ xxmaj the stony entrance of this sepulchre ? 
▁ xxmaj what mean these masterless and gory swords 
▁ xxmaj to lie discolour'd by this place of peace ? [ enters the tomb . ] 
▁ xxmaj romeo ! xxup o , pale ! xxmaj who else ? xxmaj what , xxmaj paris too ? 
▁ xxmaj and steep'd in blood ? xxmaj ah , what an unkind hour 
▁ xxmaj is guilty of this lamentable chance ! xxmaj the lady stirs . 
▁ xxmaj juliet rises . 
▁ xxmaj jul . o comfortable friar ! where is my lord ? 
▁ i do remember well where i should be , 
▁ xxmaj and there i am . xxmaj where is my xxmaj romeo ? 
▁ xxmaj friar . i hear some noise . xxmaj lady , come from that nest 
▁ xxmaj of death , contagion , and unnatural sleep . 
▁ a greater power than we can contradict 
▁ xxmaj hath thwarted our intents . xxmaj come , come away . 
▁ xxmaj thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj paris too . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll dispose of thee 
▁ xxmaj among a sisterhood of holy nuns . 
▁ xxmaj stay not to question , for the watch is coming . 
▁ xxmaj come , go , good xxmaj juliet . i dare no longer stay . 
▁ xxmaj jul . xxmaj go , get thee hence , for i will not away . 
▁ xxmaj exit [ friar ] . 
▁ xxmaj what 's here ? a cup , clos'd in my true love 's hand ? 
▁ xxmaj poison , i see , hath been his timeless end . 
▁ o churl ! drunk all , and left no friendly drop 
▁ xxmaj to help me after ? i will kiss thy lips . 
▁ xxmaj haply some poison yet doth hang on them 
▁ xxmaj to make me die with a restorative . [ kisses him . ] 
▁ xxmaj thy lips are warm ! 
▁ xxmaj chief xxmaj watch . [ within ] xxmaj lead , boy . xxmaj which way ? 
▁ xxmaj yea , noise ? xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll be brief . o happy dagger ! 
▁ [ snatches xxmaj romeo 's dagger . ] 
▁ xxmaj this is thy sheath ; there rest , and let me die . 
▁ xxmaj she stabs herself and falls [ on xxmaj romeo 's body ] . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ paris 's ] xxmaj boy and xxmaj watch . 

▁ xxmaj boy . xxmaj this is the place . xxmaj there , where the torch doth burn . 
▁ xxmaj chief xxmaj watch . ' the ground is bloody . xxmaj search about the churchyard . 
▁ xxmaj go , some of you ; whoe'er you find attach . 
▁ [ exeunt some of the xxmaj watch . ] 
▁ xxmaj pitiful sight ! here lies the xxmaj county slain ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj juliet bleeding , warm , and newly dead , 
▁ xxmaj who here hath lain this two days buried . 
▁ xxmaj go , tell the xxmaj prince ; run to the xxmaj capulets ; 
▁ xxmaj raise up the xxmaj montagues ; some others search . 
▁ [ exeunt others of the xxmaj watch . ] 
▁ xxmaj we see the ground whereon these woes do lie , 
▁ xxmaj but the true ground of all these piteous woes 
▁ xxmaj we can not without circumstance descry . 

▁ xxmaj enter [ some of the xxmaj watch , ] with xxmaj romeo 's xxmaj man [ balthasar ] . 

▁ 2 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj here 's xxmaj romeo 's man . xxmaj we found him in the churchyard . 
▁ xxmaj chief xxmaj watch . xxmaj hold him in safety till the xxmaj prince come hither . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj friar [ laurence ] and another xxmaj watchman . 

▁ 3 . xxmaj watch . xxmaj here is a friar that trembles , sighs , and weeps . 
▁ xxmaj we took this mattock and this spade from him 
▁ xxmaj as he was coming from this churchyard side . 
▁ xxmaj chief xxmaj watch . a great suspicion ! xxmaj stay the friar too . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxmaj prince [ and xxmaj attendants ] . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what misadventure is so early up , 
▁ xxmaj that calls our person from our morning rest ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj capulet and his xxmaj wife [ with others ] . 

▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj what should it be , that they so shriek abroad ? 
▁ xxmaj wife . xxmaj the people in the street cry ' romeo , ' 
▁ xxmaj some ' juliet , ' and some ' paris ' ; and all run , 
▁ xxmaj with open outcry , toward our monument . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj what fear is this which startles in our ears ? 
▁ xxmaj chief xxmaj watch . xxmaj sovereign , here lies the xxmaj county xxmaj paris slain ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj romeo dead ; and xxmaj juliet , dead before , 
▁ xxmaj warm and new kill'd . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj search , seek , and know how this foul murder comes . 
▁ xxmaj chief xxmaj watch . xxmaj here is a friar , and slaughter'd xxmaj romeo 's man , 
▁ xxmaj with instruments upon them fit to open 
▁ xxmaj these dead men 's tombs . 
▁ xxmaj cap . o heavens ! o wife , look how our daughter bleeds ! 
▁ xxmaj this dagger hath mista'en , for , lo , his house 
▁ xxmaj is empty on the back of xxmaj montague , 
▁ xxmaj and it missheathed in my daughter 's bosom ! 
▁ xxmaj wife . o me ! this sight of death is as a bell 
▁ xxmaj that warns my old age to a sepulchre . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj montague [ and others ] . 

▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj come , xxmaj montague ; for thou art early up 
▁ xxmaj to see thy son and heir more early down . 
▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj alas , my liege , my wife is dead to - night ! 
▁ xxmaj grief of my son 's exile hath stopp'd her breath . 
▁ xxmaj what further woe conspires against mine age ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj look , and thou shalt see . 
▁ xxmaj mon . o thou untaught ! what manners is in this , 
▁ xxmaj to press before thy father to a grave ? 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj seal up the mouth of outrage for a while , 
▁ xxmaj till we can clear these ambiguities 
▁ xxmaj and know their spring , their head , their true descent ; 
▁ xxmaj and then will i be general of your woes 
▁ xxmaj and lead you even to death . xxmaj meantime forbear , 
▁ xxmaj and let mischance be slave to patience . 
▁ xxmaj bring forth the parties of suspicion . 
▁ xxmaj friar . i am the greatest , able to do least , 
▁ xxmaj yet most suspected , as the time and place 
▁ xxmaj doth make against me , of this direful murther ; 
▁ xxmaj and here i stand , both to impeach and purge 
▁ xxmaj myself condemned and myself excus'd . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj then say it once what thou dost know in this . 
▁ xxmaj friar . i will be brief , for my short date of breath 
▁ xxmaj is not so long as is a tedious tale . 
▁ xxmaj romeo , there dead , was husband to that xxmaj juliet ; 
▁ xxmaj and she , there dead , that xxmaj romeo 's faithful wife . 
▁ i married them ; and their stol'n marriage day 
▁ xxmaj was xxmaj tybalt 's doomsday , whose untimely death 
▁ xxmaj banish'd the new - made bridegroom from this city ; 
▁ xxmaj for whom , and not for xxmaj tybalt , xxmaj juliet pin'd . 
▁ xxmaj you , to remove that siege of grief from her , 
▁ xxmaj betroth'd and would have married her perforce 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj county xxmaj paris . xxmaj then comes she to me 
▁ xxmaj and with wild looks bid me devise some mean 
▁ xxmaj to rid her from this second marriage , 
▁ xxmaj or in my cell there would she kill herself . 
▁ xxmaj then gave i her ( so tutored by my art ) 
▁ a sleeping potion ; which so took effect 
▁ xxmaj as i intended , for it wrought on her 
▁ xxmaj the form of death . xxmaj meantime i writ to xxmaj romeo 
▁ xxmaj that he should hither come as this dire night 
▁ xxmaj to help to take her from her borrowed grave , 
▁ xxmaj being the time the potion 's force should cease . 
▁ xxmaj but he which bore my letter , xxmaj friar xxmaj john , 
▁ xxmaj was stay'd by accident , and yesternight 
▁ xxmaj return'd my letter back . xxmaj then all alone 
▁ xxmaj at the prefixed hour of her waking 
▁ xxmaj came i to take her from her kindred 's vault ; 
▁ xxmaj meaning to keep her closely at my cell 
▁ xxmaj till i conveniently could send to xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj but when i came , some minute ere the time 
▁ xxmaj of her awaking , here untimely lay 
▁ xxmaj the noble xxmaj paris and true xxmaj romeo dead . 
▁ xxmaj she wakes ; and i entreated her come forth 
▁ xxmaj and bear this work of heaven with patience ; 
▁ xxmaj but then a noise did scare me from the tomb , 
▁ xxmaj and she , too desperate , would not go with me , 
▁ xxmaj but , as it seems , did violence on herself . 
▁ xxmaj all this i know , and to the marriage 
▁ xxmaj her nurse is privy ; and if aught in this 
▁ xxmaj miscarried by my fault , let my old life 
▁ xxmaj be sacrific'd , some hour before his time , 
▁ xxmaj unto the rigour of severest law . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj we still have known thee for a holy man . 
▁ xxmaj where 's xxmaj romeo 's man ? xxmaj what can he say in this ? 
▁ xxmaj bal . i brought my master news of xxmaj juliet 's death ; 
▁ xxmaj and then in post he came from xxmaj mantua 
▁ xxmaj to this same place , to this same monument . 
▁ xxmaj this letter he early bid me give his father , 
▁ xxmaj and threat'ned me with death , going in the vault , 
▁ xxmaj if i departed not and left him there . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj give me the letter . i will look on it . 
▁ xxmaj where is the xxmaj county 's page that rais'd the watch ? 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , what made your master in this place ? 
▁ xxmaj boy . xxmaj he came with flowers to strew his lady 's grave ; 
▁ xxmaj and bid me stand aloof , and so i did . 
▁ xxmaj anon comes one with light to ope the tomb ; 
▁ xxmaj and by - and - by my master drew on him ; 
▁ xxmaj and then i ran away to call the watch . 
▁ xxmaj prince . xxmaj this letter doth make good the friar 's words , 
▁ xxmaj their course of love , the tidings of her death ; 
▁ xxmaj and here he writes that he did buy a poison 
▁ xxmaj of a poor pothecary , and therewithal 
▁ xxmaj came to this vault to die , and lie with xxmaj juliet . 
▁ xxmaj where be these enemies ? xxmaj capulet , xxmaj montage , 
▁ xxmaj see what a scourge is laid upon your hate , 
▁ xxmaj that heaven finds means to kill your joys with love ! 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , for winking at you , discords too , 
▁ xxmaj have lost a brace of kinsmen . xxmaj all are punish'd . 
▁ xxmaj cap . o brother xxmaj montague , give me thy hand . 
▁ xxmaj this is my daughter 's jointure , for no more 
▁ xxmaj can i demand . 
▁ xxmaj mon . xxmaj but i can give thee more ; 
▁ xxmaj for i will raise her xxmaj statue in pure gold , 
▁ xxmaj that whiles xxmaj verona by that name is known , 
▁ xxmaj there shall no figure at such rate be set 
▁ xxmaj as that of true and faithful xxmaj juliet . 
▁ xxmaj cap . xxmaj as rich shall xxmaj romeo 's by his lady 's lie- 
▁ xxmaj poor sacrifices of our enmity ! 
▁ xxmaj prince . a glooming peace this morning with it brings . 
▁ xxmaj the sun for sorrow will not show his head . 
▁ xxmaj go hence , to have more talk of these sad things ; 
▁ xxmaj some shall be pardon'd , and some punished ; 
▁ xxmaj for never was a story of more woe 
▁ xxmaj than this of xxmaj juliet and her xxmaj romeo . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt omnes . 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 

 1594 





 xxup the xxup taming xxup of xxup the xxup shrew 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxmaj persons in the xxmaj induction 
▁ a xxup lord 
▁ xxup christopher xxup sly , a tinker 
▁ xxup hostess 
▁ xxup page 
▁ xxup players 
▁ xxup huntsmen 
▁ xxup servants 

▁ xxup baptista xxup minola , a gentleman of xxmaj padua 
▁ xxup vincentio , a xxmaj merchant of xxmaj pisa 
▁ xxup lucentio , son to xxmaj vincentio , in love with xxmaj bianca 
▁ xxup petruchio , a gentleman of xxmaj verona , a suitor to xxmaj katherina 

▁ xxmaj suitors to xxmaj bianca 
▁ xxup gremio 
▁ xxup hortensio 

▁ xxmaj servants to xxmaj lucentio 
▁ xxup tranio 
▁ xxup biondello 

▁ xxmaj servants to xxmaj petruchio 
▁ xxup grumio 
▁ xxup curtis 

▁ a xxup pedant 

▁ xxmaj daughters to xxmaj baptista 
▁ xxup katherina , the shrew 
▁ xxup bianca 

▁ a xxup widow 

▁ xxmaj tailor , xxmaj haberdasher , and xxmaj servants attending on xxmaj baptista and 
▁ xxmaj petruchio 

▁ xxup scene : 
▁ xxmaj padua , and xxup petruchio 's house in the country 

 xxup sc_1 
▁ xxup induction . xxup scene xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj before an alehouse on a heath 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hostess and xxup sly 

▁ xxup sly . xxmaj i 'll pheeze you , in faith . 
▁ xxup hostess . a pair of stocks , you rogue ! 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj y'are a baggage ; the xxmaj slys are no rogues . xxmaj look in the 
▁ chronicles : we came in with xxmaj richard xxmaj conqueror . xxmaj therefore , paucas 
▁ pallabris ; let the world slide . xxmaj sessa ! 
▁ xxup hostess . xxmaj you will not pay for the glasses you have burst ? 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj no , not a denier . xxmaj go by , xxmaj saint xxmaj jeronimy , go to thy cold bed 
▁ and warm thee . 
▁ xxup hostess . i know my remedy ; i must go fetch the third - borough . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj third , or fourth , or fifth borough , xxmaj i 'll answer him by law . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not budge an inch , boy ; let him come , and kindly . 
▁ [ falls asleep ] 

▁ xxmaj wind horns . xxmaj enter a xxup lord from bunting , with his train 

▁ xxup lord . xxmaj huntsman , i charge thee , tender well my hounds ; 
▁ xxmaj brach xxmaj merriman , the poor cur , is emboss'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and couple xxmaj clowder with the deep - mouth'd brach . 
▁ xxmaj saw'st thou not , boy , how xxmaj silver made it good 
▁ xxmaj at the hedge corner , in the coldest fault ? 
▁ i would not lose the dog for twenty pound . 
▁ xxup first xxup huntsman . xxmaj why , xxmaj belman is as good as he , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj he cried upon it at the merest loss , 
▁ xxmaj and twice to - day pick'd out the dullest scent ; 
▁ xxmaj trust me , i take him for the better dog . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj thou art a fool ; if xxmaj echo were as fleet , 
▁ i would esteem him worth a dozen such . 
▁ xxmaj but sup them well , and look unto them all ; 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow i intend to hunt again . 
▁ xxup first xxup huntsman . i will , my lord . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj what 's here ? xxmaj one dead , or drunk ? 
▁ xxmaj see , doth he breathe ? 
▁ xxup second xxup huntsman . xxmaj he breathes , my lord . xxmaj were he not warm'd with ale , 
▁ xxmaj this were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly . 
▁ xxup lord . o monstrous beast , how like a swine he lies ! 
▁ xxmaj grim death , how foul and loathsome is thine image ! 
▁ xxmaj sirs , i will practise on this drunken man . 
▁ xxmaj what think you , if he were convey'd to bed , 
▁ xxmaj wrapp'd in sweet clothes , rings put upon his fingers , 
▁ a most delicious banquet by his bed , 
▁ xxmaj and brave attendants near him when he wakes , 
▁ xxmaj would not the beggar then forget himself ? 
▁ xxup first xxup huntsman . xxmaj believe me , lord , i think he can not choose . 
▁ xxup second xxup huntsman . xxmaj it would seem strange unto him when he wak'd . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy . 
▁ xxmaj then take him up , and manage well the jest : 
▁ xxmaj carry him gently to my fairest chamber , 
▁ xxmaj and hang it round with all my wanton pictures ; 
▁ xxmaj balm his foul head in warm distilled waters , 
▁ xxmaj and burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet ; 
▁ xxmaj procure me music ready when he wakes , 
▁ xxmaj to make a dulcet and a heavenly sound ; 
▁ xxmaj and if he chance to speak , be ready straight , 
▁ xxmaj and with a low submissive reverence 
▁ xxmaj say ' what is it your honour will command ? ' 
▁ xxmaj let one attend him with a silver basin 
▁ xxmaj full of rose - water and bestrew'd with flowers ; 
▁ xxmaj another bear the ewer , the third a diaper , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' will't please your lordship cool your hands ? ' 
▁ xxmaj some one be ready with a costly suit , 
▁ xxmaj and ask him what apparel he will wear ; 
▁ xxmaj another tell him of his hounds and horse , 
▁ xxmaj and that his lady mourns at his disease ; 
▁ xxmaj persuade him that he hath been lunatic , 
▁ xxmaj and , when he says he is , say that he dreams , 
▁ xxmaj for he is nothing but a mighty lord . 
▁ xxmaj this do , and do it kindly , gentle sirs ; 
▁ xxmaj it will be pastime passing excellent , 
▁ xxmaj if it be husbanded with modesty . 
▁ xxup first xxup huntsman . xxmaj my lord , i warrant you we will play our part 
▁ xxmaj as he shall think by our true diligence 
▁ xxmaj he is no less than what we say he is . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj take him up gently , and to bed with him ; 
▁ xxmaj and each one to his office when he wakes . 
▁ [ sly is carried out . a trumpet sounds ] 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , go see what trumpet ' tis that sounds- 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup servant 
▁ xxmaj belike some noble gentleman that means , 
▁ xxmaj travelling some journey , to repose him here . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter a xxup servingman 

▁ xxmaj how now ! who is it ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj an't please your honour , players 
▁ xxmaj that offer service to your lordship . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj bid them come near . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup players 

▁ xxmaj now , fellows , you are welcome . 
▁ xxup players . xxmaj we thank your honour . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj do you intend to stay with me to - night ? 
▁ xxup player . xxmaj so please your lordship to accept our duty . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj with all my heart . xxmaj this fellow i remember 
▁ xxmaj since once he play'd a farmer 's eldest son ; 
▁ ' twas where you woo'd the gentlewoman so well . 
▁ i have forgot your name ; but , sure , that part 
▁ xxmaj was aptly fitted and naturally perform'd . 
▁ xxup player . i think ' twas xxmaj soto that your honour means . 
▁ xxup lord . ' tis very true ; thou didst it excellent . 
▁ xxmaj well , you are come to me in happy time , 
▁ xxmaj the rather for i have some sport in hand 
▁ xxmaj wherein your cunning can assist me much . 
▁ xxmaj there is a lord will hear you play to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj but i am doubtful of your modesties , 
▁ xxmaj lest , over - eying of his odd behaviour , 
▁ xxmaj for yet his honour never heard a play , 
▁ xxmaj you break into some merry passion 
▁ xxmaj and so offend him ; for i tell you , sirs , 
▁ xxmaj if you should smile , he grows impatient . 
▁ xxup player . xxmaj fear not , my lord ; we can contain ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj were he the veriest antic in the world . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj go , sirrah , take them to the buttery , 
▁ xxmaj and give them friendly welcome every one ; 
▁ xxmaj let them want nothing that my house affords . 
▁ xxmaj exit one with the xxup players 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , go you to xxmaj bartholomew my page , 
▁ xxmaj and see him dress'd in all suits like a lady ; 
▁ xxmaj that done , conduct him to the drunkard 's chamber , 
▁ xxmaj and call him ' madam , ' do him obeisance . 
▁ xxmaj tell him from me- as he will win my love- 
▁ xxmaj he bear himself with honourable action , 
▁ xxmaj such as he hath observ'd in noble ladies 
▁ xxmaj unto their lords , by them accomplished ; 
▁ xxmaj such duty to the drunkard let him do , 
▁ xxmaj with soft low tongue and lowly courtesy , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' what is't your honour will command , 
▁ xxmaj wherein your lady and your humble wife 
▁ xxmaj may show her duty and make known her love ? ' 
▁ xxmaj and then with kind embracements , tempting kisses , 
▁ xxmaj and with declining head into his bosom , 
▁ xxmaj bid him shed tears , as being overjoyed 
▁ xxmaj to see her noble lord restor'd to health , 
▁ xxmaj who for this seven years hath esteemed him 
▁ xxmaj no better than a poor and loathsome beggar . 
▁ xxmaj and if the boy have not a woman 's gift 
▁ xxmaj to rain a shower of commanded tears , 
▁ xxmaj an onion will do well for such a shift , 
▁ xxmaj which , in a napkin being close convey'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall in despite enforce a watery eye . 
▁ xxmaj see this dispatch'd with all the haste thou canst ; 
▁ xxmaj anon xxmaj i 'll give thee more instructions . xxmaj exit a xxup servingman 
▁ i know the boy will well usurp the grace , 
▁ xxmaj voice , gait , and action , of a gentlewoman ; 
▁ i long to hear him call the drunkard ' husband ' ; 
▁ xxmaj and how my men will stay themselves from laughter 
▁ xxmaj when they do homage to this simple peasant . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll in to counsel them ; haply my presence 
▁ xxmaj may well abate the over - merry spleen , 
▁ xxmaj which otherwise would grow into extremes . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup sc_2 
▁ xxup scene xxup ii . 
▁ a bedchamber in the xxup lord 's house 

▁ xxmaj enter aloft xxup sly , with xxup attendants ; some with apparel , basin 
▁ and ewer , and other appurtenances ; and xxup lord 

▁ xxup sly . xxmaj for xxmaj god 's sake , a pot of small ale . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj will't please your lordship drink a cup of sack ? 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj will't please your honour taste of these conserves ? 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj what raiment will your honour wear to - day ? 
▁ xxup sly . i am xxmaj christophero xxmaj sly ; call not me ' honour ' nor ' lordship . ' i 
▁ ne'er drank sack in my life ; and if you give me any conserves , 
▁ give me conserves of beef . xxmaj ne'er ask me what raiment xxmaj i 'll wear , 
▁ for i have no more doublets than backs , no more stockings than 
▁ legs , nor no more shoes than feet- nay , sometime more feet than 
▁ shoes , or such shoes as my toes look through the overleather . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj heaven cease this idle humour in your honour ! 
▁ xxup o , that a mighty man of such descent , 
▁ xxmaj of such possessions , and so high esteem , 
▁ xxmaj should be infused with so foul a spirit ! 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj what , would you make me mad ? xxmaj am not i xxmaj christopher xxmaj sly , old 
▁ xxmaj sly 's son of xxmaj burton xxmaj heath ; by birth a pedlar , by education a 
▁ cardmaker , by transmutation a bear - herd , and now by present 
▁ profession a tinker ? xxmaj ask xxmaj marian xxmaj hacket , the fat ale - wife of 
▁ xxmaj wincot , if she know me not ; if she say i am not fourteen pence on 
▁ the score for sheer ale , score me up for the lying'st knave in 
▁ xxmaj christendom . xxmaj what ! i am not bestraught . [ taking a pot of ale ] 
▁ xxmaj here's- 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxup o , this it is that makes your lady mourn ! 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxup o , this is it that makes your servants droop ! 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house , 
▁ xxmaj as beaten hence by your strange lunacy . 
▁ o noble lord , bethink thee of thy birth ! 
▁ xxmaj call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment , 
▁ xxmaj and banish hence these abject lowly dreams . 
▁ xxmaj look how thy servants do attend on thee , 
▁ xxmaj each in his office ready at thy beck . 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou have music ? xxmaj hark ! xxmaj apollo plays , [ music ] 
▁ xxmaj and twenty caged nightingales do sing . 
▁ xxmaj or wilt thou sleep ? xxmaj we 'll have thee to a couch 
▁ xxmaj softer and sweeter than the lustful bed 
▁ xxmaj on purpose trimm'd up for xxmaj semiramis . 
▁ xxmaj say thou wilt walk : we will bestrew the ground . 
▁ xxmaj or wilt thou ride ? xxmaj thy horses shall be trapp'd , 
▁ xxmaj their harness studded all with gold and pearl . 
▁ xxmaj dost thou love hawking ? xxmaj thou hast hawks will soar 
▁ xxmaj above the morning lark . xxmaj or wilt thou hunt ? 
▁ xxmaj thy hounds shall make the welkin answer them 
▁ xxmaj and fetch shall echoes from the hollow earth . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj say thou wilt course ; thy greyhounds are as swift 
▁ xxmaj as breathed stags ; ay , fleeter than the roe . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj dost thou love pictures ? xxmaj we will fetch thee 
▁ straight 
▁ xxmaj adonis painted by a running brook , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cytherea all in sedges hid , 
▁ xxmaj which seem to move and wanton with her breath 
▁ xxmaj even as the waving sedges play wi ' th ' wind . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj we 'll show thee lo as she was a maid 
▁ xxmaj and how she was beguiled and surpris'd , 
▁ xxmaj as lively painted as the deed was done . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj or xxmaj daphne roaming through a thorny wood , 
▁ xxmaj scratching her legs , that one shall swear she bleeds 
▁ xxmaj and at that sight shall sad xxmaj apollo weep , 
▁ xxmaj so workmanly the blood and tears are drawn . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj thou art a lord , and nothing but a lord . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast a lady far more beautiful 
▁ xxmaj than any woman in this waning age . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj and , till the tears that she hath shed for thee 
▁ xxmaj like envious floods o'er - run her lovely face , 
▁ xxmaj she was the fairest creature in the world ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet she is inferior to none . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj am i a lord and have i such a lady ? 
▁ xxmaj or do i dream ? xxmaj or have i dream'd till now ? 
▁ i do not sleep : i see , i hear , i speak ; 
▁ i smell sweet savours , and i feel soft things . 
▁ xxmaj upon my life , i am a lord indeed , 
▁ xxmaj and not a tinker , nor xxmaj christopher xxmaj sly . 
▁ xxmaj well , bring our lady hither to our sight ; 
▁ xxmaj and once again , a pot o ' th ' smallest ale . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj will't please your xxmaj mightiness to wash your hands ? 
▁ xxup o , how we joy to see your wit restor'd ! 
▁ xxup o , that once more you knew but what you are ! 
▁ xxmaj these fifteen years you have been in a dream ; 
▁ xxmaj or , when you wak'd , so wak'd as if you slept . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj these fifteen years ! by my fay , a goodly nap . 
▁ xxmaj but did i never speak of all that time ? 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxup o , yes , my lord , but very idle words ; 
▁ xxmaj for though you lay here in this goodly chamber , 
▁ xxmaj yet would you say ye were beaten out of door ; 
▁ xxmaj and rail upon the hostess of the house , 
▁ xxmaj and say you would present her at the leet , 
▁ xxmaj because she brought stone jugs and no seal'd quarts . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes you would call out for xxmaj cicely xxmaj hacket . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj ay , the woman 's maid of the house . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj why , sir , you know no house nor no such maid , 
▁ xxmaj nor no such men as you have reckon'd up , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj stephen xxmaj sly , and old xxmaj john xxmaj naps of xxmaj greece , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj peter xxmaj turph , and xxmaj henry xxmaj pimpernell ; 
▁ xxmaj and twenty more such names and men as these , 
▁ xxmaj which never were , nor no man ever saw . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj now , xxmaj lord be thanked for my good amends ! 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj amen . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup page as a lady , with xxup attendants 

▁ xxup sly . i thank thee ; thou shalt not lose by it . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj how fares my noble lord ? 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj marry , i fare well ; for here is cheer enough . 
▁ xxmaj where is my wife ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj here , noble lord ; what is thy will with her ? 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj are you my wife , and will not call me husband ? 
▁ xxmaj my men should call me ' lord ' ; i am your goodman . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj my husband and my lord , my lord and husband ; 
▁ i am your wife in all obedience . 
▁ xxup sly . i know it well . xxmaj what must i call her ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj madam . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj al'ce madam , or xxmaj joan madam ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj madam , and nothing else ; so lords call ladies . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj madam wife , they say that i have dream'd 
▁ xxmaj and slept above some fifteen year or more . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj ay , and the time seems thirty unto me , 
▁ xxmaj being all this time abandon'd from your bed . 
▁ xxup sly . ' tis much . xxmaj servants , leave me and her alone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup servants 
▁ xxmaj madam , undress you , and come now to bed . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj thrice noble lord , let me entreat of you 
▁ xxmaj to pardon me yet for a night or two ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if not so , until the sun be set . 
▁ xxmaj for your physicians have expressly charg'd , 
▁ xxmaj in peril to incur your former malady , 
▁ xxmaj that i should yet absent me from your bed . 
▁ i hope this reason stands for my excuse . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj ay , it stands so that i may hardly tarry so long . xxmaj but i would 
▁ be loath to fall into my dreams again . i will therefore tarry in 
▁ despite of the flesh and the blood . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj your honour 's players , hearing your amendment , 
▁ xxmaj are come to play a pleasant comedy ; 
▁ xxmaj for so your doctors hold it very meet , 
▁ xxmaj seeing too much sadness hath congeal'd your blood , 
▁ xxmaj and melancholy is the nurse of frenzy . 
▁ xxmaj therefore they thought it good you hear a play 
▁ xxmaj and frame your mind to mirth and merriment , 
▁ xxmaj which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj marry , i will ; let them play it . xxmaj is not a comonty a 
▁ xxmaj christmas gambold or a tumbling - trick ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj no , my good lord , it is more pleasing stuff . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj what , household stuff ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj it is a kind of history . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj well , we 'll see't . xxmaj come , madam wife , sit by my side and let 
▁ the world slip;-we shall ne'er be younger . 
▁ [ they sit down ] 

▁ a flourish of trumpets announces the play 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj padua . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup lucentio and his man xxup tranio 

▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj tranio , since for the great desire i had 
▁ xxmaj to see fair xxmaj padua , nursery of arts , 
▁ i am arriv'd for fruitful xxmaj lombardy , 
▁ xxmaj the pleasant garden of great xxmaj italy , 
▁ xxmaj and by my father 's love and leave am arm'd 
▁ xxmaj with his good will and thy good company , 
▁ xxmaj my trusty servant well approv'd in all , 
▁ xxmaj here let us breathe , and haply institute 
▁ a course of learning and ingenious studies . 
▁ xxmaj pisa , renowned for grave citizens , 
▁ xxmaj gave me my being and my father first , 
▁ a merchant of great traffic through the world , 
▁ xxmaj vincentio , come of the xxmaj bentivolii ; 
▁ xxmaj vincentio 's son , brought up in xxmaj florence , 
▁ xxmaj it shall become to serve all hopes conceiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj to deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , xxmaj tranio , for the time i study , 
▁ xxmaj virtue and that part of philosophy 
▁ xxmaj will i apply that treats of happiness 
▁ xxmaj by virtue specially to be achiev'd . 
▁ xxmaj tell me thy mind ; for i have xxmaj pisa left 
▁ xxmaj and am to xxmaj padua come as he that leaves 
▁ a shallow plash to plunge him in the deep , 
▁ xxmaj and with satiety seeks to quench his thirst . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj mi perdonato , gentle master mine ; 
▁ i am in all affected as yourself ; 
▁ xxmaj glad that you thus continue your resolve 
▁ xxmaj to suck the sweets of sweet philosophy . 
▁ xxmaj only , good master , while we do admire 
▁ xxmaj this virtue and this moral discipline , 
▁ xxmaj let 's be no xxmaj stoics nor no stocks , i pray , 
▁ xxmaj or so devote to xxmaj aristotle 's checks 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj ovid be an outcast quite abjur'd . 
▁ xxmaj balk logic with acquaintance that you have , 
▁ xxmaj and practise rhetoric in your common talk ; 
▁ xxmaj music and poesy use to quicken you ; 
▁ xxmaj the mathematics and the metaphysics , 
▁ xxmaj fall to them as you find your stomach serves you . 
▁ xxmaj no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en ; 
▁ xxmaj in brief , sir , study what you most affect . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj gramercies , xxmaj tranio , well dost thou advise . 
▁ xxmaj if , xxmaj biondello , thou wert come ashore , 
▁ xxmaj we could at once put us in readiness , 
▁ xxmaj and take a lodging fit to entertain 
▁ xxmaj such friends as time in xxmaj padua shall beget . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup baptista with his two daughters , xxup katherina 
▁ and xxup bianca ; xxup gremio , a pantaloon ; xxup hortensio , 
▁ suitor to xxup bianca . xxup lucentio and xxup tranio stand by 

▁ xxmaj but stay awhile ; what company is this ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj master , some show to welcome us to town . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj gentlemen , importune me no farther , 
▁ xxmaj for how i firmly am resolv'd you know ; 
▁ xxmaj that is , not to bestow my youngest daughter 
▁ xxmaj before i have a husband for the elder . 
▁ xxmaj if either of you both love xxmaj katherina , 
▁ xxmaj because i know you well and love you well , 
▁ xxmaj leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj to cart her rather . xxmaj she 's too rough for me . 
▁ xxmaj there , there , xxmaj hortensio , will you any wife ? 
▁ xxup katherina . [ to xxup baptista ] i pray you , sir , is it your will 
▁ xxmaj to make a stale of me amongst these mates ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj mates , maid ! xxmaj how mean you that ? xxmaj no mates for you , 
▁ xxmaj unless you were of gentler , milder mould . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxup i ' faith , sir , you shall never need to fear ; 
▁ xxmaj iwis it is not halfway to her heart ; 
▁ xxmaj but if it were , doubt not her care should be 
▁ xxmaj to comb your noddle with a three - legg'd stool , 
▁ xxmaj and paint your face , and use you like a fool . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj from all such devils , good xxmaj lord deliver us ! 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj and me , too , good xxmaj lord ! 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj husht , master ! xxmaj here 's some good pastime toward ; 
▁ xxmaj that wench is stark mad or wonderful froward . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj but in the other 's silence do i see 
▁ xxmaj maid 's mild behaviour and sobriety . 
▁ xxmaj peace , xxmaj tranio ! 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj well said , master ; mum ! and gaze your fill . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj gentlemen , that i may soon make good 
▁ xxmaj what i have said- xxmaj bianca , get you in ; 
▁ xxmaj and let it not displease thee , good xxmaj bianca , 
▁ xxmaj for i will love thee ne'er the less , my girl . 
▁ xxup katherina . a pretty peat ! it is best 
▁ xxmaj put finger in the eye , an she knew why . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj sister , content you in my discontent . 
▁ xxmaj sir , to your pleasure humbly i subscribe ; 
▁ xxmaj my books and instruments shall be my company , 
▁ xxmaj on them to look , and practise by myself . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj hark , xxmaj tranio , thou mayst hear xxmaj minerva speak ! 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , will you be so strange ? 
▁ xxmaj sorry am i that our good will effects 
▁ xxmaj bianca 's grief . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj why will you mew her up , 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , for this fiend of hell , 
▁ xxmaj and make her bear the penance of her tongue ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj gentlemen , content ye ; i am resolv'd . 
▁ xxmaj go in , xxmaj bianca . xxmaj exit xxup bianca 
▁ xxmaj and for i know she taketh most delight 
▁ xxmaj in music , instruments , and poetry , 
▁ xxmaj schoolmasters will i keep within my house 
▁ xxmaj fit to instruct her youth . xxmaj if you , xxmaj hortensio , 
▁ xxmaj or , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio , you , know any such , 
▁ xxmaj prefer them hither ; for to cunning men 
▁ i will be very kind , and liberal 
▁ xxmaj to mine own children in good bringing - up ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , farewell . xxmaj katherina , you may stay ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have more to commune with xxmaj bianca . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj why , and i trust i may go too , may i not ? 
▁ xxmaj what ! shall i be appointed hours , as though , belike , 
▁ i knew not what to take and what to leave ? xxmaj ha ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj you may go to the devil 's dam ; your gifts are so good 
▁ here 's none will hold you . xxmaj there ! xxmaj love is not so great , 
▁ xxmaj hortensio , but we may blow our nails together , and fast it fairly 
▁ out ; our cake 's dough on both sides . xxmaj farewell ; yet , for the love 
▁ i bear my sweet xxmaj bianca , if i can by any means light on a fit man 
▁ to teach her that wherein she delights , i will wish him to her 
▁ father . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxup so xxmaj will xxup i , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ; but a word , i pray . xxmaj though 
▁ the nature of our quarrel yet never brook'd parle , know now , upon 
▁ advice , it toucheth us both- that we may yet again have access to 
▁ our fair mistress , and be happy rivals in xxmaj bianca 's love- to 
▁ labour and effect one thing specially . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj what 's that , i pray ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj marry , sir , to get a husband for her sister . 
▁ xxup gremio . a husband ? a devil . 
▁ xxup hortensio . i say a husband . 
▁ xxup gremio . i say a devil . xxmaj think'st thou , xxmaj hortensio , though her father 
▁ be very rich , any man is so very a fool to be married to hell ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj tush , xxmaj gremio ! xxmaj though it pass your patience and mine to 
▁ endure her loud alarums , why , man , there be good fellows in the 
▁ world , an a man could light on them , would take her with all 
▁ faults , and money enough . 
▁ xxup gremio . i can not tell ; but i had as lief take her dowry with this 
▁ condition : to be whipp'd at the high cross every morning . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj faith , as you say , there 's small choice in rotten 
▁ apples . xxmaj but , come ; since this bar in law makes us friends , it 
▁ shall be so far forth friendly maintain'd till by helping 
▁ xxmaj baptista 's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free 
▁ for a husband , and then have to't afresh . xxmaj sweet xxmaj bianca ! xxmaj happy man 
▁ be his dole ! xxmaj he that runs fastest gets the ring . xxmaj how say you , 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ? 
▁ xxup gremio . i am agreed ; and would i had given him the best horse in 
▁ xxmaj padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her , we d her , 
▁ and bed her , and rid the house of her ! xxmaj come on .