xxbos xxmaj exeunt xxup gremio and xxup hortensio 
▁ xxup tranio . i pray , sir , tell me , is it possible 
▁ xxmaj that love should of a sudden take such hold ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . o xxmaj tranio , till i found it to be true , 
▁ i never thought it possible or likely . 
▁ xxmaj but see ! while idly i stood looking on , 
▁ i found the effect of love in idleness ; 
▁ xxmaj and now in plainness do confess to thee , 
▁ xxmaj that art to me as secret and as dear 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj anna to the xxmaj queen of xxmaj carthage was- 
▁ xxmaj tranio , i burn , i pine , i perish , xxmaj tranio , 
▁ xxmaj if i achieve not this young modest girl . 
▁ xxmaj counsel me , xxmaj tranio , for i know thou canst ; 
▁ xxmaj assist me , xxmaj tranio , for i know thou wilt . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj master , it is no time to chide you now ; 
▁ xxmaj affection is not rated from the heart ; 
▁ xxmaj if love have touch'd you , nought remains but so : 
▁ ' redime te captum quam queas minimo . ' 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj gramercies , lad . xxmaj go forward ; this contents ; 
▁ xxmaj the rest will comfort , for thy counsel 's sound . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj master , you look'd so longly on the maid . 
▁ xxmaj perhaps you mark'd not what 's the pith of all . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxup o , yes , i saw sweet beauty in her face , 
▁ xxmaj such as the daughter of xxmaj agenor had , 
▁ xxmaj that made great xxmaj jove to humble him to her hand , 
▁ xxmaj when with his knees he kiss'd the xxmaj cretan strand . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj saw you no more ? xxmaj mark'd you not how her sister 
▁ xxmaj began to scold and raise up such a storm 
▁ xxmaj that mortal ears might hardly endure the din ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj tranio , i saw her coral lips to move , 
▁ xxmaj and with her breath she did perfume the air ; 
▁ xxmaj sacred and sweet was all i saw in her . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj nay , then ' tis time to stir him from his trance . 
▁ i pray , awake , sir . xxmaj if you love the maid , 
▁ xxmaj bend thoughts and wits to achieve her . xxmaj thus it stands : 
▁ xxmaj her elder sister is so curst and shrewd 
▁ xxmaj that , till the father rid his hands of her , 
▁ xxmaj master , your love must live a maid at home ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore has he closely mew'd her up , 
▁ xxmaj because she will not be annoy'd with suitors . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj ah , xxmaj tranio , what a cruel father 's he ! 
▁ xxmaj but art thou not advis'd he took some care 
▁ xxmaj to get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj ay , marry , am xxup i , sir , and now ' tis plotted . 
▁ xxup lucentio . i have it , xxmaj tranio . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj master , for my hand , 
▁ xxmaj both our inventions meet and jump in one . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj tell me thine first . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj you will be schoolmaster , 
▁ xxmaj and undertake the teaching of the maid- 
▁ xxmaj that 's your device . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj it is . xxmaj may it be done ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj not possible ; for who shall bear your part 
▁ xxmaj and be in xxmaj padua here xxmaj vincentio 's son ; 
▁ xxmaj keep house and ply his book , welcome his friends , 
▁ xxmaj visit his countrymen , and banquet them ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj basta , content thee , for i have it full . 
▁ xxmaj we have not yet been seen in any house , 
▁ xxmaj nor can we be distinguish'd by our faces 
▁ xxmaj for man or master . xxmaj then it follows thus : 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be master , xxmaj tranio , in my stead , 
▁ xxmaj keep house and port and servants , as i should ; 
▁ i will some other be- some xxmaj florentine , 
▁ xxmaj some xxmaj neapolitan , or meaner man of xxmaj pisa . 
▁ ' tis hatch'd , and shall be so . xxmaj tranio , at once 
▁ xxmaj uncase thee ; take my colour'd hat and cloak . 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj biondello comes , he waits on thee ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will charm him first to keep his tongue . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj so had you need . [ they exchange habits ] 
▁ xxmaj in brief , sir , sith it your pleasure is , 
▁ xxmaj and i am tied to be obedient- 
▁ xxmaj for so your father charg'd me at our parting : 
▁ ' be serviceable to my son ' quoth he , 
▁ xxmaj although i think ' twas in another sense- 
▁ i am content to be xxmaj lucentio , 
▁ xxmaj because so well i love xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj tranio , be so because xxmaj lucentio loves ; 
▁ xxmaj and let me be a slave t ' achieve that maid 
▁ xxmaj whose sudden sight hath thrall'd my wounded eye . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup biondello . 

▁ xxmaj here comes the rogue . xxmaj sirrah , where have you been ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj where have i been ! xxmaj nay , how now ! where are you ? 
▁ xxmaj master , has my fellow xxmaj tranio stol'n your clothes ? 
▁ xxmaj or you stol'n his ? or both ? xxmaj pray , what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj sirrah , come hither ; ' tis no time to jest , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore frame your manners to the time . 
▁ xxmaj your fellow xxmaj tranio here , to save my life , 
▁ xxmaj puts my apparel and my count'nance on , 
▁ xxmaj and i for my escape have put on his ; 
▁ xxmaj for in a quarrel since i came ashore 
▁ i kill'd a man , and fear i was descried . 
▁ xxmaj wait you on him , i charge you , as becomes , 
▁ xxmaj while i make way from hence to save my life . 
▁ xxmaj you understand me ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxup i , sir ? xxmaj ne'er a whit . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj and not a jot of xxmaj tranio in your mouth : 
▁ xxmaj tranio is chang'd into xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj the better for him ; would i were so too ! 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj so could xxup i , faith , boy , to have the next wish after , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj lucentio indeed had xxmaj baptista 's youngest daughter . 
▁ xxmaj but , sirrah , not for my sake but your master 's , i advise 
▁ xxmaj you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies . 
▁ xxmaj when i am alone , why , then i am xxmaj tranio ; 
▁ xxmaj but in all places else your master xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj tranio , let 's go . 
▁ xxmaj one thing more rests , that thyself execute- 
▁ xxmaj to make one among these wooers . xxmaj if thou ask me why- 
▁ xxmaj sufficeth , my reasons are both good and weighty . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj the xxmaj presenters above speak 
▁
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj my lord , you nod ; you do not mind the play . 
▁ xxup sly . xxmaj yes , by xxmaj saint xxmaj anne do xxup i. a good matter , surely ; comes there 
▁ any more of it ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj my lord , ' tis but begun . 
▁ xxup sly . ' tis a very excellent piece of work , madam lady 
▁ xxmaj would ' twere done ! [ they sit and mark ] 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj padua . xxmaj before xxup hortensio 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup petruchio and his man xxup grumio 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj verona , for a while i take my leave , 
▁ xxmaj to see my friends in xxmaj padua ; but of all 
▁ xxmaj my best beloved and approved friend , 
▁ xxmaj hortensio ; and i trow this is his house . 
▁ xxmaj here , sirrah xxmaj grumio , knock , i say . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj knock , sir ! xxmaj whom should i knock ? 
▁ xxmaj is there any man has rebus'd your worship ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj villain , i say , knock me here soundly . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj knock you here , sir ? xxmaj why , sir , what am xxup i , sir , that i 
▁ should knock you here , sir ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj villain , i say , knock me at this gate , 
▁ xxmaj and rap me well , or xxmaj i 'll knock your knave 's pate . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj my master is grown quarrelsome . i should knock you first , 
▁ xxmaj and then i know after who comes by the worst . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj will it not be ? 
▁ xxmaj faith , sirrah , an you 'll not knock xxmaj i 'll ring it ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll try how you can sol - fa , and sing it . 
▁ [ he wrings him by the ears ] 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj help , masters , help ! xxmaj my master is mad . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj now knock when i bid you , sirrah villain ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hortensio 

▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj how now ! what 's the matter ? xxmaj my old friend xxmaj grumio and my 
▁ good friend xxmaj petruchio ! xxmaj how do you all at xxmaj verona ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj signior xxmaj hortensio , come you to part the fray ? 
▁ ' con tutto il cuore ben trovato ' may i say . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj alla nostra casa ben venuto , 
▁ xxmaj molto honorato signor mio xxmaj petruchio . 
▁ xxmaj rise , xxmaj grumio , rise ; we will compound this quarrel . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj nay , ' tis no matter , sir , what he ' leges in xxmaj latin . xxmaj if this 
▁ be not a lawful cause for me to leave his service- look you , sir : 
▁ he bid me knock him and rap him soundly , sir . xxmaj well , was it fit 
▁ for a servant to use his master so ; being , perhaps , for aught i 
▁ see , two and thirty , a pip out ? 
▁ xxmaj whom would to xxmaj god i had well knock'd at first , 
▁ xxmaj then had not xxmaj grumio come by the worst . 
▁ xxup petruchio . a senseless villain ! xxmaj good xxmaj hortensio , 
▁ i bade the rascal knock upon your gate , 
▁ xxmaj and could not get him for my heart to do it . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj knock at the gate ? o heavens ! xxmaj spake you not these words 
▁ plain : ' sirrah knock me here , rap me here , knock me well , and 
▁ knock me soundly ' ? xxmaj and come you now with ' knocking at the gate ' ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj sirrah , be gone , or talk not , i advise you . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj petruchio , patience ; i am xxmaj grumio 's pledge ; 
▁ xxmaj why , this 's a heavy chance ' twixt him and you , 
▁ xxmaj your ancient , trusty , pleasant servant xxmaj grumio . 
▁ xxmaj and tell me now , sweet friend , what happy gale 
▁ xxmaj blows you to xxmaj padua here from old xxmaj verona ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj such wind as scatters young men through the world 
▁ xxmaj to seek their fortunes farther than at home , 
▁ xxmaj where small experience grows . xxmaj but in a few , 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj hortensio , thus it stands with me : 
▁ xxmaj antonio , my father , is deceas'd , 
▁ xxmaj and i have thrust myself into this maze , 
▁ xxmaj haply to wive and thrive as best i may ; 
▁ xxmaj crowns in my purse i have , and goods at home , 
▁ xxmaj and so am come abroad to see the world . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj petruchio , shall i then come roundly to thee 
▁ xxmaj and wish thee to a shrewd ill - favour'd wife ? 
▁ xxmaj thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel , 
▁ xxmaj and yet xxmaj i 'll promise thee she shall be rich , 
▁ xxmaj and very rich ; but th'art too much my friend , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll not wish thee to her . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj signior xxmaj hortensio , ' twixt such friends as we 
▁ xxmaj few words suffice ; and therefore , if thou know 
▁ xxmaj one rich enough to be xxmaj petruchio 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj as wealth is burden of my wooing dance , 
▁ xxmaj be she as foul as was xxmaj florentius ' love , 
▁ xxmaj as old as xxmaj sibyl , and as curst and shrewd 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj socrates ' xxmaj xanthippe or a worse- 
▁ xxmaj she moves me not , or not removes , at least , 
▁ xxmaj affection 's edge in me , were she as rough 
▁ xxmaj as are the swelling xxmaj adriatic seas . 
▁ i come to wive it wealthily in xxmaj padua ; 
▁ xxmaj if wealthily , then happily in xxmaj padua . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj nay , look you , sir , he tells you flatly what his mind is . 
▁ xxmaj why , give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an 
▁ aglet - baby , or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head , though 
▁ she has as many diseases as two and fifty horses . xxmaj why , nothing 
▁ comes amiss , so money comes withal . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj petruchio , since we are stepp'd thus far in , 
▁ i will continue that i broach'd in jest . 
▁ i can , xxmaj petruchio , help thee to a wife 
▁ xxmaj with wealth enough , and young and beauteous ; 
▁ xxmaj brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman ; 
▁ xxmaj her only fault , and that is faults enough , 
▁ xxmaj is- that she is intolerable curst , 
▁ xxmaj and shrewd and froward so beyond all measure 
▁ xxmaj that , were my state far worser than it is , 
▁ i would not we d her for a mine of gold . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj hortensio , peace ! thou know'st not gold 's effect . 
▁ xxmaj tell me her father 's name , and ' tis enough ; 
▁ xxmaj for i will board her though she chide as loud 
▁ xxmaj as thunder when the clouds in autumn crack . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj her father is xxmaj baptista xxmaj minola , 
▁ xxmaj an affable and courteous gentleman ; 
▁ xxmaj her name is xxmaj katherina xxmaj minola , 
▁ xxmaj renown'd in xxmaj padua for her scolding tongue . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i know her father , though i know not her ; 
▁ xxmaj and he knew my deceased father well . 
▁ i will not sleep , xxmaj hortensio , till i see her ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore let me be thus bold with you 
▁ xxmaj to give you over at this first encounter , 
▁ xxmaj unless you will accompany me thither . 
▁ xxup grumio . i pray you , sir , let him go while the humour lasts . xxup o ' my 
▁ word , and she knew him as well as i do , she would think scolding 
▁ would do little good upon him . xxmaj she may perhaps call him half a 
▁ score knaves or so . xxmaj why , that 's nothing ; and he begin once , he 'll 
▁ rail in his rope - tricks . xxmaj i 'll tell you what , sir : an she stand 
▁ him but a little , he will throw a figure in her face , and so 
▁ disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see 
▁ withal than a cat . xxmaj you know him not , sir . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj tarry , xxmaj petruchio , i must go with thee , 
▁ xxmaj for in xxmaj baptista 's keep my treasure is . 
▁ xxmaj he hath the jewel of my life in hold , 
▁ xxmaj his youngest daughter , beautiful xxmaj bianca ; 
▁ xxmaj and her withholds from me , and other more , 
▁ xxmaj suitors to her and rivals in my love ; 
▁ xxmaj supposing it a thing impossible- 
▁ xxmaj for those defects i have before rehears'd- 
▁ xxmaj that ever xxmaj katherina will be woo'd . 
▁ xxmaj therefore this order hath xxmaj baptista ta'en , 
▁ xxmaj that none shall have access unto xxmaj bianca 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj katherine the curst have got a husband . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj katherine the curst ! 
▁ a title for a maid of all titles the worst . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj now shall my friend xxmaj petruchio do me grace , 
▁ xxmaj and offer me disguis'd in sober robes 
▁ xxmaj to old xxmaj baptista as a schoolmaster 
▁ xxmaj well seen in music , to instruct xxmaj bianca ; 
▁ xxmaj that so i may by this device at least 
▁ xxmaj have leave and leisure to make love to her , 
▁ xxmaj and unsuspected court her by herself . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gremio with xxup lucentio disguised as xxup cambio 

▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj here 's no knavery ! xxmaj see , to beguile the old folks , how the 
▁ young folks lay their heads together ! xxmaj master , master , look about 
▁ you . xxmaj who goes there , ha ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj peace , xxmaj grumio ! xxmaj it is the rival of my love . xxmaj petruchio , 
▁ stand by awhile . 
▁ xxup grumio . a proper stripling , and an amorous ! 
▁ [ they stand aside ] 
▁ xxup gremio . xxup o , very well ; i have perus'd the note . 
▁ xxmaj hark you , sir ; xxmaj i 'll have them very fairly bound- 
▁ xxmaj all books of love , see that at any hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and see you read no other lectures to her . 
▁ xxmaj you understand me- over and beside 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista 's liberality , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll mend it with a largess . xxmaj take your paper too , 
▁ xxmaj and let me have them very well perfum'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for she is sweeter than perfume itself 
▁ xxmaj to whom they go to . xxmaj what will you read to her ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj whate'er i read to her , xxmaj i 'll plead for you 
▁ xxmaj as for my patron , stand you so assur'd , 
▁ xxmaj as firmly as yourself were still in place ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , and perhaps with more successful words 
▁ xxmaj than you , unless you were a scholar , sir . 
▁ xxup gremio . o this learning , what a thing it is ! 
▁ xxup grumio . o this woodcock , what an ass it is ! 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj peace , sirrah ! 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj grumio , mum ! [ coming forward ] 
▁ xxmaj god save you , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ! 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj and you are well met , xxmaj signior xxmaj hortensio . 
▁ xxmaj trow you whither i am going ? xxmaj to xxmaj baptista xxmaj minola . 
▁ i promis'd to enquire carefully 
▁ xxmaj about a schoolmaster for the fair xxmaj bianca ; 
▁ xxmaj and by good fortune i have lighted well 
▁ xxmaj on this young man ; for learning and behaviour 
▁ xxmaj fit for her turn , well read in poetry 
▁ xxmaj and other books- good ones , i warrant ye . 
▁ xxup hortensio . ' tis well ; and i have met a gentleman 
▁ xxmaj hath promis'd me to help me to another , 
▁ a fine musician to instruct our mistress ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall i no whit be behind in duty 
▁ xxmaj to fair xxmaj bianca , so beloved of me . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj beloved of me- and that my deeds shall prove . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj and that his bags shall prove . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj gremio , ' tis now no time to vent our love . 
▁ xxmaj listen to me , and if you speak me fair 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell you news indifferent good for either . 
▁ xxmaj here is a gentleman whom by chance i met , 
▁ xxmaj upon agreement from us to his liking , 
▁ xxmaj will undertake to woo curst xxmaj katherine ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , and to marry her , if her dowry please . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj so said , so done , is well . 
▁ xxmaj hortensio , have you told him all her faults ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . i know she is an irksome brawling scold ; 
▁ xxmaj if that be all , masters , i hear no harm . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj no , say'st me so , friend ? xxmaj what countryman ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj born in xxmaj verona , old xxmaj antonio 's son . 
▁ xxmaj my father dead , my fortune lives for me ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do hope good days and long to see . 
▁ xxup gremio . o xxmaj sir , such a life with such a wife were strange ! 
▁ xxmaj but if you have a stomach , to't a xxmaj god 's name ; 
▁ xxmaj you shall have me assisting you in all . 
▁ xxmaj but will you woo this wild - cat ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj will i live ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj will he woo her ? xxmaj ay , or xxmaj i 'll hang her . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why came i hither but to that intent ? 
▁ xxmaj think you a little din can daunt mine ears ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not in my time heard lions roar ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not heard the sea , puff'd up with winds , 
▁ xxmaj rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not heard great ordnance in the field , 
▁ xxmaj and heaven 's artillery thunder in the skies ? 
▁ xxmaj have i not in a pitched battle heard 
▁ xxmaj loud ' larums , neighing steeds , and trumpets ' clang ? 
▁ xxmaj and do you tell me of a woman 's tongue , 
▁ xxmaj that gives not half so great a blow to hear 
▁ xxmaj as will a chestnut in a fariner 's fire ? 
▁ xxmaj tush ! tush ! fear boys with bugs . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj for he fears none . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj hortensio , hark : 
▁ xxmaj this gentleman is happily arriv'd , 
▁ xxmaj my mind presumes , for his own good and ours . 
▁ xxup hortensio . i promis'd we would be contributors 
▁ xxmaj and bear his charge of wooing , whatsoe'er . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj and so we will- provided that he win her . 
▁ xxup grumio . i would i were as sure of a good dinner . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup tranio , bravely apparelled as xxup lucentio , and xxup biondello 

▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj gentlemen , xxmaj god save you ! xxmaj if i may be bold , 
▁ xxmaj tell me , i beseech you , which is the readiest way 
▁ xxmaj to the house of xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista xxmaj minola ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj he that has the two fair daughters ; is't he you mean ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj even he , xxmaj biondello . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj hark you , sir , you mean not her to- 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj perhaps him and her , sir ; what have you to do ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj not her that chides , sir , at any hand , i pray . 
▁ xxup tranio . i love no chiders , sir . xxmaj biondello , let 's away . 
▁ xxup lucentio . [ aside ] xxmaj well begun , xxmaj tranio . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj sir , a word ere you go . 
▁ xxmaj are you a suitor to the maid you talk of , yea or no ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj and if i be , sir , is it any offence ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj no ; if without more words you will get you hence . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj why , sir , i pray , are not the streets as free 
▁ xxmaj for me as for you ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj but so is not she . 

▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj for what reason , i beseech you ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj for this reason , if you 'll know , 
▁ xxmaj that she 's the choice love of xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj that she 's the chosen of xxmaj signior xxmaj hortensio . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj softly , my masters ! xxmaj if you be gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj do me this right- hear me with patience . 
▁ xxmaj baptista is a noble gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj to whom my father is not all unknown , 
▁ xxmaj and , were his daughter fairer than she is , 
▁ xxmaj she may more suitors have , and me for one . 
▁ xxmaj fair xxmaj leda 's daughter had a thousand wooers ; 
▁ xxmaj then well one more may fair xxmaj bianca have ; 
▁ xxmaj and so she shall : xxmaj lucentio shall make one , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj paris came in hope to speed alone . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj what , this gentleman will out - talk us all ! 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj sir , give him head ; i know he 'll prove a jade . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj hortensio , to what end are all these words ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj sir , let me be so bold as ask you , 
▁ xxmaj did you yet ever see xxmaj baptista 's daughter ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj no , sir , but hear i do that he hath two : 
▁ xxmaj the one as famous for a scolding tongue 
▁ xxmaj as is the other for beauteous modesty . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj sir , sir , the first 's for me ; let her go by . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj yea , leave that labour to great xxmaj hercules , 
▁ xxmaj and let it be more than xxmaj alcides ' twelve . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj sir , understand you this of me , in sooth : 
▁ xxmaj the youngest daughter , whom you hearken for , 
▁ xxmaj her father keeps from all access of suitors , 
▁ xxmaj and will not promise her to any man 
▁ xxmaj until the elder sister first be we d. 
▁ xxmaj the younger then is free , and not before . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj if it be so , sir , that you are the man 
▁ xxmaj must stead us all , and me amongst the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj and if you break the ice , and do this feat , 
▁ xxmaj achieve the elder , set the younger free 
▁ xxmaj for our access- whose hap shall be to have her 
▁ xxmaj will not so graceless be to be ingrate . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj sir , you say well , and well you do conceive ; 
▁ xxmaj and since you do profess to be a suitor , 
▁ xxmaj you must , as we do , gratify this gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj to whom we all rest generally beholding . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj sir , i shall not be slack ; in sign whereof , 
▁ xxmaj please ye we may contrive this afternoon , 
▁ xxmaj and quaff carouses to our mistress ' health ; 
▁ xxmaj and do as adversaries do in law- 
▁ xxmaj strive mightily , but eat and drink as friends . 
▁ xxup grumio , xxup biondello . o excellent motion ! xxmaj fellows , let 's be gone . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj the motion 's good indeed , and be it so . 
▁ xxmaj petruchio , i shall be your ben venuto . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxmaj il . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj padua . xxup baptista 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup katherina and xxup bianca 

▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj good sister , wrong me not , nor wrong yourself , 
▁ xxmaj to make a bondmaid and a slave of me- 
▁ xxmaj that i disdain ; but for these other gawds , 
▁ xxmaj unbind my hands , xxmaj i 'll pull them off myself , 
▁ xxmaj yea , all my raiment , to my petticoat ; 
▁ xxmaj or what you will command me will i do , 
▁ xxmaj so well i know my duty to my elders . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj of all thy suitors here i charge thee tell 
▁ xxmaj whom thou lov'st best . xxmaj see thou dissemble not . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj believe me , sister , of all the men alive 
▁ i never yet beheld that special face 
▁ xxmaj which i could fancy more than any other . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj minion , thou liest . xxmaj is't not xxmaj hortensio ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj if you affect him , sister , here i swear 
▁ xxmaj i 'll plead for you myself but you shall have him . 
▁ xxup katherina . o then , belike , you fancy riches more : 
▁ xxmaj you will have xxmaj gremio to keep you fair . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj is it for him you do envy me so ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , then you jest ; and now i well perceive 
▁ xxmaj you have but jested with me all this while . 
▁ i prithee , sister xxmaj kate , untie my hands . 
▁ xxup katherina . [ strikes her ] xxmaj if that be jest , then an the rest was so . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup baptista 

▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj why , how now , dame ! xxmaj whence grows this insolence ? 
▁ xxmaj bianca , stand aside- poor girl ! she weeps . 
▁ [ he unbinds her ] 
▁ xxmaj go ply thy needle ; meddle not with her . 
▁ xxmaj for shame , thou hilding of a devilish spirit , 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee ? 
▁ xxmaj when did she cross thee with a bitter word ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj her silence flouts me , and xxmaj i 'll be reveng'd . 
▁ [ flies after xxup bianca ] 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj what , in my sight ? xxmaj bianca , get thee in . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup bianca 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj what , will you not suffer me ? xxmaj nay , now i see 
▁ xxmaj she is your treasure , she must have a husband ; 
▁ i must dance bare - foot on her wedding - day , 
▁ xxmaj and for your love to her lead apes in hell . 
▁ xxmaj talk not to me ; i will go sit and weep , 
▁ xxmaj till i can find occasion of revenge . xxmaj exit xxup katherina 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj was ever gentleman thus griev'd as xxup i ? 
▁ xxmaj but who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup gremio , with xxup lucentio in the habit of a mean man ; 
▁ xxup petruchio , with xxup hortensio as a musician ; and xxup tranio , 
▁ as xxup lucentio , with his boy , xxup biondello , bearing a lute and books 

▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj good morrow , neighbour xxmaj baptista . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj good morrow , neighbour xxmaj gremio . 
▁ xxmaj god save you , gentlemen ! 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj and you , good sir ! xxmaj pray , have you not a daughter 
▁ xxmaj call'd xxmaj katherina , fair and virtuous ? 
▁ xxup baptista . i have a daughter , sir , call'd xxmaj katherina . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj you are too blunt ; go to it orderly . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj you wrong me , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ; give me leave . 
▁ i am a gentleman of xxmaj verona , sir , 
▁ xxmaj that , hearing of her beauty and her wit , 
▁ xxmaj her affability and bashful modesty , 
▁ xxmaj her wondrous qualities and mild behaviour , 
▁ xxmaj am bold to show myself a forward guest 
▁ xxmaj within your house , to make mine eye the witness 
▁ xxmaj of that report which i so oft have heard . 
▁ xxmaj and , for an entrance to my entertainment , 
▁ i do present you with a man of mine , 
▁ [ presenting xxup hortensio ] 
▁ xxmaj cunning in music and the mathematics , 
▁ xxmaj to instruct her fully in those sciences , 
▁ xxmaj whereof i know she is not ignorant . 
▁ xxmaj accept of him , or else you do me wrong- 
▁ xxmaj his name is xxmaj licio , born in xxmaj mantua . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj y'are welcome , sir , and he for your good sake ; 
▁ xxmaj but for my daughter xxmaj katherine , this i know , 
▁ xxmaj she is not for your turn , the more my grief . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i see you do not mean to part with her ; 
▁ xxmaj or else you like not of my company . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj mistake me not ; i speak but as i find . 
▁ xxmaj whence are you , sir ? xxmaj what may i call your name ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj petruchio is my name , xxmaj antonio 's son , 
▁ a man well known throughout all xxmaj italy . 
▁ xxup baptista . i know him well ; you are welcome for his sake . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj saving your tale , xxmaj petruchio , i pray , 
▁ xxmaj let us that are poor petitioners speak too . 
▁ xxmaj bacare ! you are marvellous forward . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxup o , pardon me , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ! i would fain be doing . 
▁ xxup gremio . i doubt it not , sir ; but you will curse your wooing . 
▁ xxmaj neighbour , this is a gift very grateful , i am sure of it . xxmaj to 
▁ express the like kindness , myself , that have been more kindly 
▁ beholding to you than any , freely give unto you this young 
▁ scholar [ presenting xxup lucentio ] that hath been long studying at 
▁ xxmaj rheims ; as cunning in xxmaj greek , xxmaj latin , and other languages , as the 
▁ other in music and mathematics . xxmaj his name is xxmaj cambio . xxmaj pray accept 
▁ his service . 
▁ xxup baptista . a thousand thanks , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio . xxmaj welcome , good xxmaj cambio . 
▁ [ to xxup tranio ] xxmaj but , gentle sir , methinks you walk like a stranger . 
▁ xxmaj may i be so bold to know the cause of your coming ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj pardon me , sir , the boldness is mine own 
▁ xxmaj that , being a stranger in this city here , 
▁ xxmaj do make myself a suitor to your daughter , 
▁ xxmaj unto xxmaj bianca , fair and virtuous . 
▁ xxmaj nor is your firm resolve unknown to me 
▁ xxmaj in the preferment of the eldest sister . 
▁ xxmaj this liberty is all that i request- 
▁ xxmaj that , upon knowledge of my parentage , 
▁ i may have welcome ' mongst the rest that woo , 
▁ xxmaj and free access and favour as the rest . 
▁ xxmaj and toward the education of your daughters 
▁ i here bestow a simple instrument , 
▁ xxmaj and this small packet of xxmaj greek and xxmaj latin books . 
▁ xxmaj if you accept them , then their worth is great . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj lucentio is your name ? xxmaj of whence , i pray ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj of xxmaj pisa , sir ; son to xxmaj vincentio . 
▁ xxup baptista . a mighty man of xxmaj pisa . xxmaj by report 
▁ i know him well . xxmaj you are very welcome , sir . 
▁ xxmaj take you the lute , and you the set of books ; 
▁ xxmaj you shall go see your pupils presently . 
▁ xxmaj holla , within ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxmaj sirrah , lead these gentlemen 
▁ xxmaj to my daughters ; and tell them both 
▁ xxmaj these are their tutors . xxmaj bid them use them well . 

▁ xxmaj exit xxup servant leading xxup hortensio carrying the lute 
▁ and xxup lucentio with the books 

▁ xxmaj we will go walk a little in the orchard , 
▁ xxmaj and then to dinner . xxmaj you are passing welcome , 
▁ xxmaj and so i pray you all to think yourselves . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , my business asketh haste , 
▁ xxmaj and every day i can not come to woo . 
▁ xxmaj you knew my father well , and in him me , 
▁ xxmaj left solely heir to all his lands and goods , 
▁ xxmaj which i have bettered rather than decreas'd . 
▁ xxmaj then tell me , if i get your daughter 's love , 
▁ xxmaj what dowry shall i have with her to wife ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj after my death , the one half of my lands 
▁ xxmaj and , in possession , twenty thousand crowns . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj and for that dowry , xxmaj i 'll assure her of 
▁ xxmaj her widowhood , be it that she survive me , 
▁ xxmaj in all my lands and leases whatsoever . 
▁ xxmaj let specialities be therefore drawn between us , 
▁ xxmaj that covenants may be kept on either hand . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj ay , when the special thing is well obtain'd , 
▁ xxmaj that is , her love ; for that is all in all . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , that is nothing ; for i tell you , father , 
▁ i am as peremptory as she proud - minded ; 
▁ xxmaj and where two raging fires meet together , 
▁ xxmaj they do consume the thing that feeds their fury . 
▁ xxmaj though little fire grows great with little wind , 
▁ xxmaj yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all . 
▁ xxmaj so i to her , and so she yields to me ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am rough , and woo not like a babe . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj well mayst thou woo , and happy be thy speed 
▁ xxmaj but be thou arm'd for some unhappy words . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj ay , to the proof , as mountains are for winds , 
▁ xxmaj that shake not though they blow perpetually . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup hortensio , with his head broke 

▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj how now , my friend ! xxmaj why dost thou look so pale ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj for fear , i promise you , if i look pale . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj what , will my daughter prove a good musician ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . i think she 'll sooner prove a soldier : 
▁ xxmaj iron may hold with her , but never lutes . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj why , then thou canst not break her to the lute ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj why , no ; for she hath broke the lute to me . 
▁ i did but tell her she mistook her frets , 
▁ xxmaj and bow'd her hand to teach her fingering , 
▁ xxmaj when , with a most impatient devilish spirit , 
▁ ' frets , call you these ? ' quoth she ' i 'll fume with them . ' 
▁ xxmaj and with that word she struck me on the head , 
▁ xxmaj and through the instrument my pate made way ; 
▁ xxmaj and there i stood amazed for a while , 
▁ xxmaj as on a pillory , looking through the lute , 
▁ xxmaj while she did call me rascal fiddler 
▁ xxmaj and twangling xxmaj jack , with twenty such vile terms , 
▁ xxmaj as she had studied to misuse me so . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj now , by the world , it is a lusty wench ; 
▁ i love her ten times more than e'er i did . 
▁ xxup o , how i long to have some chat with her ! 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj well , go with me , and be not so discomfited ; 
▁ xxmaj proceed in practice with my younger daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj she 's apt to learn , and thankful for good turns . 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj petruchio , will you go with us , 
▁ xxmaj or shall i send my daughter xxmaj kate to you ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . i pray you do . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup petruchio 
▁ xxmaj i 'll attend her here , 
▁ xxmaj and woo her with some spirit when she comes . 
▁ xxmaj say that she rail ; why , then xxmaj i 'll tell her plain 
▁ xxmaj she sings as sweetly as a nightingale . 
▁ xxmaj say that she frown ; xxmaj i 'll say she looks as clear 
▁ xxmaj as morning roses newly wash'd with dew . 
▁ xxmaj say she be mute , and will not speak a word ; 
▁ xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll commend her volubility , 
▁ xxmaj and say she uttereth piercing eloquence . 
▁ xxmaj if she do bid me pack , xxmaj i 'll give her thanks , 
▁ xxmaj as though she bid me stay by her a week ; 
▁ xxmaj if she deny to we d , xxmaj i 'll crave the day 
▁ xxmaj when i shall ask the banns , and when be married . 
▁ xxmaj but here she comes ; : lnd.now , xxmaj petruchio , speak . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup katherina 

▁ xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj kate- for that 's your name , i hear . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj well have you heard , but something hard of hearing : 
▁ xxmaj they call me xxmaj katherine that do talk of me . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj you lie , in faith , for you are call'd plain xxmaj kate , 
▁ xxmaj and bonny xxmaj kate , and sometimes xxmaj kate the curst ; 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj kate , the prettiest xxmaj kate in xxmaj christendom , 
▁ xxmaj kate of xxmaj kate xxmaj hall , my super - dainty xxmaj kate , 
▁ xxmaj for dainties are all xxmaj kates , and therefore , xxmaj kate , 
▁ xxmaj take this of me , xxmaj kate of my consolation- 
▁ xxmaj hearing thy mildness prais'd in every town , 
▁ xxmaj thy virtues spoke of , and thy beauty sounded , 
▁ xxmaj yet not so deeply as to thee belongs , 
▁ xxmaj myself am mov'd to woo thee for my wife . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj mov'd ! in good time ! xxmaj let him that mov'd you hither 
▁ xxmaj remove you hence . i knew you at the first 
▁ xxmaj you were a moveable . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , what 's a moveable ? 
▁ xxup katherina . a join'd - stool . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj thou hast hit it . xxmaj come , sit on me . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj asses are made to bear , and so are you . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj women are made to bear , and so are you . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj no such jade as you , if me you mean . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj alas , good xxmaj kate , i will not burden thee ! 
▁ xxmaj for , knowing thee to be but young and light- 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj too light for such a swain as you to catch ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet as heavy as my weight should be . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj should be ! should- buzz ! 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj well ta'en , and like a buzzard . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxup o , slow - wing'd turtle , shall a buzzard take thee ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj ay , for a turtle , as he takes a buzzard . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj come , come , you wasp ; i ' faith , you are too angry . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj if i be waspish , best beware my sting . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj my remedy is then to pluck it out . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj ay , if the fool could find it where it lies . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting ? 
▁ xxmaj in his tail . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj in his tongue . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj whose tongue ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj yours , if you talk of tales ; and so farewell . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj what , with my tongue in your tail ? xxmaj nay , come again , 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj kate ; i am a gentleman . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj that xxmaj i 'll try . [ she strikes him ] 
▁ xxup petruchio . i swear xxmaj i 'll cuff you , if you strike again . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj so may you lose your arms . 
▁ xxmaj if you strike me , you are no gentleman ; 
▁ xxmaj and if no gentleman , why then no arms . 
▁ xxup petruchio . a herald , xxmaj kate ? xxup o , put me in thy books ! 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj what is your crest- a coxcomb ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . a combless cock , so xxmaj kate will be my hen . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj no cock of mine : you crow too like a craven . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nay , come , xxmaj kate , come ; you must not look so sour . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj it is my fashion , when i see a crab . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , here 's no crab ; and therefore look not sour . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj there is , there is . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj then show it me . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj had i a glass i would . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj what , you mean my face ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj well aim'd of such a young one . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj now , by xxmaj saint xxmaj george , i am too young for you . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj yet you are wither'd . 
▁ xxup petruchio . ' tis with cares . 
▁ xxup katherina . i care not . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nay , hear you , xxmaj kate- in sooth , you scape not so . 
▁ xxup katherina . i chafe you , if i tarry ; let me go . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj no , not a whit ; i find you passing gentle . 
▁ ' twas told me you were rough , and coy , and sullen , 
▁ xxmaj and now i find report a very liar ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou art pleasant , gamesome , passing courteous , 
▁ xxmaj but slow in speech , yet sweet as springtime flowers . 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not frown , thou canst not look askance , 
▁ xxmaj nor bite the lip , as angry wenches will , 
▁ xxmaj nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk ; 
▁ xxmaj but thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers ; 
▁ xxmaj with gentle conference , soft and affable . 
▁ xxmaj why does the world report that xxmaj kate doth limp ? 
▁ o sland'rous world ! xxmaj kate like the hazel - twig 
▁ xxmaj is straight and slender , and as brown in hue 
▁ xxmaj as hazel - nuts , and sweeter than the kernels . 
▁ xxup o , let me see thee walk . xxmaj thou dost not halt . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj go , fool , and whom thou keep'st command . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj did ever xxmaj dian so become a grove 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj kate this chamber with her princely gait ? 
▁ xxup o , be thou xxmaj dian , and let her be xxmaj kate ; 
▁ xxmaj and then let xxmaj kate be chaste , and xxmaj dian sportful ! 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj where did you study all this goodly speech ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj it is extempore , from my mother wit . 
▁ xxup katherina . a witty mother ! witless else her son . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj am i not wise ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj yes , keep you warm . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj marry , so i mean , sweet xxmaj katherine , in thy bed . 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , setting all this chat aside , 
▁ xxmaj thus in plain terms : your father hath consented 
▁ xxmaj that you shall be my wife your dowry greed on ; 
▁ xxmaj and will you , nill you , i will marry you . 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj kate , i am a husband for your turn ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by this light , whereby i see thy beauty , 
▁ xxmaj thy beauty that doth make me like thee well , 
▁ xxmaj thou must be married to no man but me ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am he am born to tame you , xxmaj kate , 
▁ xxmaj and bring you from a wild xxmaj kate to a xxmaj kate 
▁ xxmaj conformable as other household xxmaj kates . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup baptista , xxup gremio , and xxup tranio 

▁ xxmaj here comes your father . xxmaj never make denial ; 
▁ i must and will have xxmaj katherine to my wife . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj now , xxmaj signior xxmaj petruchio , how speed you with my daughter ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj how but well , sir ? how but well ? 
▁ xxmaj it were impossible i should speed amiss . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj why , how now , daughter xxmaj katherine , in your dumps ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj call you me daughter ? xxmaj now i promise you 
▁ xxmaj you have show'd a tender fatherly regard 
▁ xxmaj to wish me we d to one half lunatic , 
▁ a mad - cap ruffian and a swearing xxmaj jack , 
▁ xxmaj that thinks with oaths to face the matter out . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj father , ' tis thus : yourself and all the world 
▁ xxmaj that talk'd of her have talk'd amiss of her . 
▁ xxmaj if she be curst , it is for policy , 
▁ xxmaj for , she 's not froward , but modest as the dove ; 
▁ xxmaj she is not hot , but temperate as the morn ; 
▁ xxmaj for patience she will prove a second xxmaj grissel , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj roman xxmaj lucrece for her chastity . 
▁ xxmaj and , to conclude , we have ' greed so well together 
▁ xxmaj that upon xxmaj sunday is the wedding - day . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj i 'll see thee hang'd on xxmaj sunday first . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj hark , xxmaj petruchio ; she says she 'll see thee hang'd first . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj is this your speeding ? xxmaj nay , then good - night our part ! 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj be patient , gentlemen . i choose her for myself ; 
▁ xxmaj if she and i be pleas'd , what 's that to you ? 
▁ ' tis bargain'd ' twixt us twain , being alone , 
▁ xxmaj that she shall still be curst in company . 
▁ i tell you ' tis incredible to believe . 
▁ xxmaj how much she loves me- xxup o , the kindest xxmaj kate ! 
▁ xxmaj she hung about my neck , and kiss on kiss 
▁ xxmaj she vied so fast , protesting oath on oath , 
▁ xxmaj that in a twink she won me to her love . 
▁ xxup o , you are novices ! ' tis a world to see , 
▁ xxmaj how tame , when men and women are alone , 
▁ a meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy hand , xxmaj kate ; i will unto xxmaj venice , 
▁ xxmaj to buy apparel ' gainst the wedding - day . 
▁ xxmaj provide the feast , father , and bid the guests ; 
▁ i will be sure my xxmaj katherine shall be fine . 
▁ xxup baptista . i know not what to say ; but give me your hands . 
▁ xxmaj god send you joy , xxmaj petruchio ! ' tis a match . 
▁ xxup gremio , xxup tranio . xxmaj amen , say we ; we will be witnesses . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj father , and wife , and gentlemen , adieu . 
▁ i will to xxmaj venice ; xxmaj sunday comes apace ; 
▁ xxmaj we will have rings and things , and fine array ; 
▁ xxmaj and kiss me , xxmaj kate ; we will be married a xxmaj sunday . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup petruchio and xxup katherina severally 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj was ever match clapp'd up so suddenly ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj faith , gentlemen , now i play a merchant 's part , 
▁ xxmaj and venture madly on a desperate mart . 
▁ xxup tranio . ' twas a commodity lay fretting by you ; 
▁ ' twill bring you gain , or perish on the seas . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj the gain i seek is quiet in the match . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj no doubt but he hath got a quiet catch . 
▁ xxmaj but now , xxmaj baptista , to your younger daughter : 
▁ xxmaj now is the day we long have looked for ; 
▁ i am your neighbour , and was suitor first . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj and i am one that love xxmaj bianca more 
▁ xxmaj than words can witness or your thoughts can guess . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj youngling , thou canst not love so dear as xxup i. 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj greybeard , thy love doth freeze . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj but thine doth fry . 
▁ xxmaj skipper , stand back ; ' tis age that nourisheth . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj but youth in ladies ' eyes that flourisheth . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj content you , gentlemen ; i will compound this strife . 
▁ ' tis deeds must win the prize , and he of both 
▁ xxmaj that can assure my daughter greatest dower 
▁ xxmaj shall have my xxmaj bianca 's love . 
▁ xxmaj say , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio , what can you assure her ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj first , as you know , my house within the city 
▁ xxmaj is richly furnished with plate and gold , 
▁ xxmaj basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands ; 
▁ xxmaj my hangings all of xxmaj tyrian tapestry ; 
▁ xxmaj in ivory coffers i have stuff'd my crowns ; 
▁ xxmaj in cypress chests my arras counterpoints , 
▁ xxmaj costly apparel , tents , and canopies , 
▁ xxmaj fine linen , xxmaj turkey cushions boss'd with pearl , 
▁ xxmaj valance of xxmaj venice gold in needle - work ; 
▁ xxmaj pewter and brass , and all things that belongs 
▁ xxmaj to house or housekeeping . xxmaj then at my farm 
▁ i have a hundred milch - kine to the pail , 
▁ xxmaj six score fat oxen standing in my stalls , 
▁ xxmaj and all things answerable to this portion . 
▁ xxmaj myself am struck in years , i must confess ; 
▁ xxmaj and if i die to - morrow this is hers , 
▁ xxmaj if whilst i live she will be only mine . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj that ' only ' came well in . xxmaj sir , list to me : 
▁ i am my father 's heir and only son ; 
▁ xxmaj if i may have your daughter to my wife , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave her houses three or four as good 
▁ xxmaj within rich xxmaj pisa 's walls as any one 
▁ xxmaj old xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio has in xxmaj padua ; 
▁ xxmaj besides two thousand ducats by the year 
▁ xxmaj of fruitful land , all which shall be her jointure . 
▁ xxmaj what , have i pinch'd you , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj two thousand ducats by the year of land ! 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj my land amounts not to so much in all.- 
▁ xxmaj that she shall have , besides an argosy 
▁ xxmaj that now is lying in xxmaj marseilles road . 
▁ xxmaj what , have i chok'd you with an argosy ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj gremio , ' tis known my father hath no less 
▁ xxmaj than three great argosies , besides two galliasses , 
▁ xxmaj and twelve tight galleys . xxmaj these i will assure her , 
▁ xxmaj and twice as much whate'er thou off'rest next . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj nay , i have off'red all ; i have no more ; 
▁ xxmaj and she can have no more than all i have ; 
▁ xxmaj if you like me , she shall have me and mine . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj why , then the maid is mine from all the world 
▁ xxmaj by your firm promise ; xxmaj gremio is out - vied . 
▁ xxup baptista . i must confess your offer is the best ; 
▁ xxmaj and let your father make her the assurance , 
▁ xxmaj she is your own . xxmaj else , you must pardon me ; 
▁ xxmaj if you should die before him , where 's her dower ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj that 's but a cavil ; he is old , i young . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj and may not young men die as well as old ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj well , gentlemen , 
▁ i am thus resolv'd : on xxmaj sunday next you know 
▁ xxmaj my daughter xxmaj katherine is to be married ; 
▁ xxmaj now , on the xxmaj sunday following shall xxmaj bianca 
▁ xxmaj be bride to you , if you make this assurance ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , to xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio . 
▁ xxmaj and so i take my leave , and thank you both . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj adieu , good neighbour . xxmaj exit xxup baptista 
▁ xxmaj now , i fear thee not . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah young gamester , your father were a fool 
▁ xxmaj to give thee all , and in his waning age 
▁ xxmaj set foot under thy table . xxmaj tut , a toy ! 
▁ xxmaj an old xxmaj italian fox is not so kind , my boy . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup tranio . a vengeance on your crafty withered hide ! 
▁ xxmaj yet i have fac'd it with a card of ten . 
▁ ' tis in my head to do my master good : 
▁ i see no reason but suppos'd xxmaj lucentio 
▁ xxmaj must get a father , call'd suppos'd xxmaj vincentio ; 
▁ xxmaj and that 's a wonder- fathers commonly 
▁ xxmaj do get their children ; but in this case of wooing 
▁ a child shall get a sire , if i fail not of my cunning . 
▁ xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj padua . xxup baptista 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup lucentio as xxup cambio , xxup hortensio as xxup licio , and xxup bianca 

▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj fiddler , forbear ; you grow too forward , sir . 
▁ xxmaj have you so soon forgot the entertainment 
▁ xxmaj her sister xxmaj katherine welcome'd you withal ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj but , wrangling pedant , this is 
▁ xxmaj the patroness of heavenly harmony . 
▁ xxmaj then give me leave to have prerogative ; 
▁ xxmaj and when in music we have spent an hour , 
▁ xxmaj your lecture shall have leisure for as much . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj preposterous ass , that never read so far 
▁ xxmaj to know the cause why music was ordain'd ! 
▁ xxmaj was it not to refresh the mind of man 
▁ xxmaj after his studies or his usual pain ? 
▁ xxmaj then give me leave to read philosophy , 
▁ xxmaj and while i pause serve in your harmony . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj sirrah , i will not bear these braves of thine . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj why , gentlemen , you do me double wrong 
▁ xxmaj to strive for that which resteth in my choice . 
▁ i arn no breeching scholar in the schools , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not be tied to hours nor ' pointed times , 
▁ xxmaj but learn my lessons as i please myself . 
▁ xxmaj and to cut off all strife : here sit we down ; 
▁ xxmaj take you your instrument , play you the whiles ! 
▁ xxmaj his lecture will be done ere you have tun'd . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj you 'll leave his lecture when i am in tune ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj that will be never- tune your instrument . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj where left we last ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj here , madam : 
▁ ' hic ibat xxmaj simois , hic est xxmaj sigeia tellus , 
▁ xxmaj hic steterat xxmaj priami regia celsa senis . ' 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj construe them . 
▁ xxup lucentio . ' hic ibat ' as i told you before- ' simois ' i am xxmaj lucentio- 
▁ ' hic est ' son unto xxmaj vincentio of xxmaj pisa- ' sigeia tellus ' disguised 
▁ thus to get your love- ' hic steterat ' and that xxmaj lucentio that 
▁ comes a - wooing- ' priami ' is my man xxmaj tranio- ' regia ' bearing my 
▁ port- ' celsa senis ' that we might beguile the old pantaloon . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj madam , my instrument 's in tune . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj let 's hear . o fie ! the treble jars . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj spit in the hole , man , and tune again . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj now let me see if i can construe it : ' hic ibat xxmaj simois ' i 
▁ know you not- ' hic est xxmaj sigeia tellus ' i trust you not- ' hic 
▁ steterat xxmaj priami ' take heed he hear us not- ' regia ' presume not- 
▁ ' celsa senis ' despair not . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj madam , ' tis now in tune . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj all but the bass . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj the bass is right ; ' tis the base knave that jars . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj how fiery and forward our pedant is ! 
▁ xxmaj now , for my life , the knave doth court my love . 
▁ xxmaj pedascule , xxmaj i 'll watch you better yet . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj in time i may believe , yet i mistrust . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj mistrust it not- for sure , aeacides 
▁ xxmaj was xxmaj ajax , call'd so from his grandfather . 
▁ xxup bianca . i must believe my master ; else , i promise you , 
▁ i should be arguing still upon that doubt ; 
▁ xxmaj but let it rest . xxmaj now , xxmaj licio , to you . 
▁ xxmaj good master , take it not unkindly , pray , 
▁ xxmaj that i have been thus pleasant with you both . 
▁ xxup hortensio . [ to xxup lucentio ] xxmaj you may go walk and give me leave 
▁ awhile ; 
▁ xxmaj my lessons make no music in three xxmaj parts . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj are you so formal , sir ? xxmaj well , i must wait , 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj and watch withal ; for , but i be deceiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj our fine musician groweth amorous . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj madam , before you touch the instrument 
▁ xxmaj to learn the order of my fingering , 
▁ i must begin with rudiments of art , 
▁ xxmaj to teach you gamut in a briefer sort , 
▁ xxmaj more pleasant , pithy , and effectual , 
▁ xxmaj than hath been taught by any of my trade ; 
▁ xxmaj and there it is in writing fairly drawn . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj why , i am past my gamut long ago . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj yet read the gamut of xxmaj hortensio . 
▁ xxup bianca . [ reads ] 
▁ ' " gamut " i am , the ground of all accord- 
▁ " a re " to plead xxmaj hortensio 's passion- 
▁ " b mi " xxmaj bianca , take him for thy lord- 
▁ " c fa ut " that loves with all affection- 
▁ " d sol re " one clef , two notes have xxup i- 
▁ " e la mi " show pity or i die . ' 
▁ xxmaj call you this gamut ? xxmaj tut , i like it not ! 
▁ xxmaj old fashions please me best ; i am not so nice 
▁ xxmaj to change true rules for odd inventions . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj mistress , your father prays you leave your books 
▁ xxmaj and help to dress your sister 's chamber up . 
▁ xxmaj you know to - morrow is the wedding - day . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj farewell , sweet masters , both ; i must be gone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup bianca and xxup servant 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj faith , mistress , then i have no cause to stay . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj but i have cause to pry into this pedant ; 
▁ xxmaj methinks he looks as though he were in love . 
▁ xxmaj yet if thy thoughts , xxmaj bianca , be so humble