xxbos xxmaj to cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale- 
▁ xxmaj seize thee that list . xxmaj if once i find thee ranging , 
▁ xxup hortensio will be quit with thee by changing . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj padua . xxmaj before baptista'so house 

 xxmaj enter xxup baptista , xxup gremio , xxup tranio as xxup lucentio , xxup katherina , xxup bianca , 
 xxup lucentio as xxup cambio , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup baptista . [ to xxup tranio ] xxmaj signior xxmaj lucentio , this is the ' pointed day 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj katherine and xxmaj petruchio should be married , 
▁ xxmaj and yet we hear not of our son - in - law . 
▁ xxmaj what will be said ? xxmaj what mockery will it be 
▁ xxmaj to want the bridegroom when the priest attends 
▁ xxmaj to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage ! 
▁ xxmaj what says xxmaj lucentio to this shame of ours ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj no shame but mine ; i must , forsooth , be forc'd 
▁ xxmaj to give my hand , oppos'd against my heart , 
▁ xxmaj unto a mad - brain rudesby , full of spleen , 
▁ xxmaj who woo'd in haste and means to we d at leisure . 
▁ i told you , xxup i , he was a frantic fool , 
▁ xxmaj hiding his bitter jests in blunt behaviour ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to be noted for a merry man , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll woo a thousand , ' point the day of marriage , 
▁ xxmaj make friends invited , and proclaim the banns ; 
▁ xxmaj yet never means to we d where he hath woo'd . 
▁ xxmaj now must the world point at poor xxmaj katherine , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' lo , there is mad xxmaj petruchio 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj if it would please him come and marry her ! ' 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj patience , good xxmaj katherine , and xxmaj baptista too . 
▁ xxmaj upon my life , xxmaj petruchio means but well , 
▁ xxmaj whatever fortune stays him from his word . 
▁ xxmaj though he be blunt , i know him passing wise ; 
▁ xxmaj though he be merry , yet withal he 's honest . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj would xxmaj katherine had never seen him though ! 
▁ xxmaj exit , weeping , followed by xxup bianca and others 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj go , girl , i can not blame thee now to weep , 
▁ xxmaj for such an injury would vex a very saint ; 
▁ xxmaj much more a shrew of thy impatient humour . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup biondello 

▁ xxmaj master , master ! xxmaj news , and such old news as you never heard of ! 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj is it new and old too ? xxmaj how may that be ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj why , is it not news to hear of xxmaj petruchio 's coming ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj is he come ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj why , no , sir . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj he is coming . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj when will he be here ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj when he stands where i am and sees you there . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj but , say , what to thine old news ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj why , xxmaj petruchio is coming- in a new hat and an old 
▁ jerkin ; a pair of old breeches thrice turn'd ; a pair of boots 
▁ that have been candle - cases , one buckled , another lac'd ; an old 
▁ rusty sword ta'en out of the town armoury , with a broken hilt , 
▁ and chapeless ; with two broken points ; his horse hipp'd , with an 
▁ old motley saddle and stirrups of no kindred ; besides , possess'd 
▁ with the glanders and like to mose in the chine , troubled with 
▁ the lampass , infected with the fashions , full of windgalls , sped 
▁ with spavins , rayed with the yellows , past cure of the fives , 
▁ stark spoil'd with the staggers , begnawn with the bots , sway'd in 
▁ the back and shoulder - shotten , near - legg'd before , and with a 
▁ half - cheek'd bit , and a head - stall of sheep 's leather which , 
▁ being restrained to keep him from stumbling , hath been often 
▁ burst , and now repaired with knots ; one girth six times piec'd , 
▁ and a woman 's crupper of velure , which hath two letters for her 
▁ name fairly set down in studs , and here and there piec'd with 
▁ pack - thread . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj who comes with him ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxup o , sir , his lackey , for all the world caparison'd like 
▁ the horse- with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot - hose 
▁ on the other , gart'red with a red and blue list ; an old hat , and 
▁ the humour of forty fancies prick'd in't for a feather ; a 
▁ monster , a very monster in apparel , and not like a xxmaj christian 
▁ footboy or a gentleman 's lackey . 
▁ xxup tranio . ' tis some odd humour pricks him to this fashion ; 
▁ xxmaj yet oftentimes lie goes but mean - apparell'd . 
▁ xxup baptista . i am glad he 's come , howsoe'er he comes . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj why , sir , he comes not . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj didst thou not say he comes ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj who ? that xxmaj petruchio came ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj ay , that xxmaj petruchio came . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj no , sir ; i say his horse comes with him on his back . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj why , that 's all one . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj nay , by xxmaj saint xxmaj jamy , 
▁ i hold you a penny , 
▁ a horse and a man 
▁ xxmaj is more than one , 
▁ xxmaj and yet not many . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup petruchio and xxup grumio 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj come , where be these gallants ? xxmaj who 's at home ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj you are welcome , sir . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj and yet i come not well . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj and yet you halt not . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj not so well apparell'd 
▁ xxmaj as i wish you were . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj were it better , i should rush in thus . 
▁ xxmaj but where is xxmaj kate ? xxmaj where is my lovely bride ? 
▁ xxmaj how does my father ? xxmaj gentles , methinks you frown ; 
▁ xxmaj and wherefore gaze this goodly company 
▁ xxmaj as if they saw some wondrous monument , 
▁ xxmaj some comet or unusual prodigy ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj why , sir , you know this is your wedding - day . 
▁ xxmaj first were we sad , fearing you would not come ; 
▁ xxmaj now sadder , that you come so unprovided . 
▁ xxmaj fie , doff this habit , shame to your estate , 
▁ xxmaj an eye - sore to our solemn festival ! 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj and tell us what occasion of import 
▁ xxmaj hath all so long detain'd you from your wife , 
▁ xxmaj and sent you hither so unlike yourself ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj tedious it were to tell , and harsh to hear ; 
▁ xxmaj sufficeth i am come to keep my word , 
▁ xxmaj though in some part enforced to digress , 
▁ xxmaj which at more leisure i will so excuse 
▁ xxmaj as you shall well be satisfied withal . 
▁ xxmaj but where is xxmaj kate ? i stay too long from her ; 
▁ xxmaj the morning wears , ' tis time we were at church . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj see not your bride in these unreverent robes ; 
▁ xxmaj go to my chamber , put on clothes of mine . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj not xxup i , believe me ; thus xxmaj i 'll visit her . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj but thus , i trust , you will not marry her . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj good sooth , even thus ; therefore ha ' done with words ; 
▁ xxmaj to me she 's married , not unto my clothes . 
▁ xxmaj could i repair what she will wear in me 
▁ xxmaj as i can change these poor accoutrements , 
▁ ' twere well for xxmaj kate and better for myself . 
▁ xxmaj but what a fool am i to chat with you , 
▁ xxmaj when i should bid good - morrow to my bride 
▁ xxmaj and seal the title with a lovely kiss ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup petruchio and xxup petruchio 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj he hath some meaning in his mad attire . 
▁ xxmaj we will persuade him , be it possible , 
▁ xxmaj to put on better ere he go to church . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj i 'll after him and see the event of this . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup baptista , xxup gremio , xxup biondello , and xxup attendents 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj but to her love concerneth us to ad 
▁ xxmaj her father 's liking ; which to bring to pass , 
▁ xxmaj as i before imparted to your worship , 
▁ i am to get a man- whate'er he be 
▁ xxmaj it skills not much ; we 'll fit him to our turn- 
▁ xxmaj and he shall be xxmaj vincentio of xxmaj pisa , 
▁ xxmaj and make assurance here in xxmaj padua 
▁ xxmaj of greater sums than i have promised . 
▁ xxmaj so shall you quietly enjoy your hope 
▁ xxmaj and marry sweet xxmaj bianca with consent . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj were it not that my fellow schoolmaster 
▁ xxmaj doth watch xxmaj bianca 's steps so narrowly , 
▁ ' twere good , methinks , to steal our marriage ; 
▁ xxmaj which once perform'd , let all the world say no , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll keep mine own despite of all the world . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj that by degrees we mean to look into 
▁ xxmaj and watch our vantage in this business ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll over - reach the greybeard , xxmaj gremio , 
▁ xxmaj the narrow - prying father , xxmaj minola , 
▁ xxmaj the quaint musician , amorous xxmaj licio- 
▁ xxmaj all for my master 's sake , xxmaj lucentio . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gremio 

▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio , came you from the church ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj as willingly as e'er i came from school . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj and is the bride and bridegroom coming home ? 
▁ xxup gremio . a bridegroom , say you ? ' tis a groom indeed , 
▁ a grumbling groom , and that the girl shall find . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj curster than she ? xxmaj why , ' tis impossible . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj why , he 's a devil , a devil , a very fiend . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj why , she 's a devil , a devil , the devil 's dam . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj tut , she 's a lamb , a dove , a fool , to him ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell you , xxmaj sir xxmaj lucentio : when the priest 
▁ xxmaj should ask if xxmaj katherine should be his wife , 
▁ ' ay , by gogs - wouns ' quoth he , and swore so loud 
▁ xxmaj that , all amaz'd , the priest let fall the book ; 
▁ xxmaj and as he stoop'd again to take it up , 
▁ xxmaj this mad - brain'd bridegroom took him such a cuff 
▁ xxmaj that down fell priest and book , and book and priest . 
▁ ' now take them up , ' quoth he ' if any list . ' 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj what said the wench , when he rose again ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj trembled and shook , for why he stamp'd and swore 
▁ xxmaj as if the vicar meant to cozen him . 
▁ xxmaj but after many ceremonies done 
▁ xxmaj he calls for wine : ' a health ! ' quoth he , as if 
▁ xxmaj he had been abroad , carousing to his mates 
▁ xxmaj after a storm ; quaff'd off the muscadel , 
▁ xxmaj and threw the sops all in the sexton 's face , 
▁ xxmaj having no other reason 
▁ xxmaj but that his beard grew thin and hungerly 
▁ xxmaj and seem'd to ask him sops as he was drinking . 
▁ xxmaj this done , he took the bride about the neck , 
▁ xxmaj and kiss'd her lips with such a clamorous smack 
▁ xxmaj that at the parting all the church did echo . 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , seeing this , came thence for very shame ; 
▁ xxmaj and after me , i know , the rout is coming . 
▁ xxmaj such a mad marriage never was before . 
▁ xxmaj hark , hark ! i hear the minstrels play . [ music plays ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup petruchio , xxup katherina , xxup bianca , xxup baptista , xxup hortensio , 
▁ xxup grumio , and train 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj gentlemen and friends , i thank you for your pains . 
▁ i know you think to dine with me to - day , 
▁ xxmaj and have prepar'd great store of wedding cheer 
▁ xxmaj but so it is- my haste doth call me hence , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore here i mean to take my leave . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj is't possible you will away to - night ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . i must away to - day before night come . 
▁ xxmaj make it no wonder ; if you knew my business , 
▁ xxmaj you would entreat me rather go than stay . 
▁ xxmaj and , honest company , i thank you all 
▁ xxmaj that have beheld me give away myself 
▁ xxmaj to this most patient , sweet , and virtuous wife . 
▁ xxmaj dine with my father , drink a health to me . 
▁ xxmaj for i must hence ; and farewell to you all . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj let us entreat you stay till after dinner . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj it may not be . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj let me entreat you . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj it can not be . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj let me entreat you . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i am content . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj are you content to stay ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . i am content you shall entreat me stay ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet not stay , entreat me how you can . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj now , if you love me , stay . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj grumio , my horse . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj ay , sir , they be ready ; the oats have eaten the horses . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj nay , then , 
▁ xxmaj do what thou canst , i will not go to - day ; 
▁ xxmaj no , nor to - morrow , not till i please myself . 
▁ xxmaj the door is open , sir ; there lies your way ; 
▁ xxmaj you may be jogging whiles your boots are green ; 
▁ xxmaj for me , xxmaj i 'll not be gone till i please myself . 
▁ ' tis like you 'll prove a jolly surly groom 
▁ xxmaj that take it on you at the first so roundly . 
▁ xxup petruchio . o xxmaj kate , content thee ; prithee be not angry . 
▁ xxup katherina . i will be angry ; what hast thou to do ? 
▁ xxmaj father , be quiet ; he shall stay my leisure . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj ay , marry , sir , now it begins to work . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj gentlemen , forward to the bridal dinner . 
▁ i see a woman may be made a fool 
▁ xxmaj if she had not a spirit to resist . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj they shall go forward , xxmaj kate , at thy command . 
▁ xxmaj obey the bride , you that attend on her ; 
▁ xxmaj go to the feast , revel and domineer , 
▁ xxmaj carouse full measure to her maidenhead ; 
▁ xxmaj be mad and merry , or go hang yourselves . 
▁ xxmaj but for my bonny xxmaj kate , she must with me . 
▁ xxmaj nay , look not big , nor stamp , nor stare , nor fret ; 
▁ i will be master of what is mine own- 
▁ xxmaj she is my goods , my chattels , she is my house , 
▁ xxmaj my household stuff , my field , my barn , 
▁ xxmaj my horse , my ox , my ass , my any thing , 
▁ xxmaj and here she stands ; touch her whoever dare ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bring mine action on the proudest he 
▁ xxmaj that stops my way in xxmaj padua . xxmaj grumio , 
▁ xxmaj draw forth thy weapon ; we are beset with thieves ; 
▁ xxmaj rescue thy mistress , if thou be a man . 
▁ xxmaj fear not , sweet wench ; they shall not touch thee , xxmaj kate ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll buckler thee against a million . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup petruchio , xxup katherina , and xxup grumio 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj nay , let them go , a couple of quiet ones . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj went they not quickly , i should die with laughing . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj of all mad matches , never was the like . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj mistress , what 's your opinion of your sister ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj that , being mad herself , she 's madly mated . 
▁ xxup gremio . i warrant him , xxmaj petruchio is xxmaj kated . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj neighbours and friends , though bride and bridegroom wants 
▁ xxmaj for to supply the places at the table , 
▁ xxmaj you know there wants no junkets at the feast . 
▁ xxmaj lucentio , you shall supply the bridegroom 's place ; 
▁ xxmaj and let xxmaj bianca take her sister 's room . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj shall sweet xxmaj bianca practise how to bride it ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj she shall , xxmaj lucentio . xxmaj come , gentlemen , let 's go . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxup petruchio 's country house 

 xxmaj enter xxup grumio 

▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj fie , fie on all tired jades , on all mad masters , and all 
▁ foul ways ! xxmaj was ever man so beaten ? xxmaj was ever man so ray'd ? xxmaj was 
▁ ever man so weary ? i am sent before to make a fire , and they are 
▁ coming after to warm them . xxmaj now were not i a little pot and soon 
▁ hot , my very lips might freeze to my teeth , my tongue to the roof 
▁ of my mouth , my heart in my belly , ere i should come by a fire to 
▁ thaw me . xxmaj but i with blowing the fire shall warm myself ; for , 
▁ considering the weather , a taller man than i will take cold . 
▁ xxmaj holla , ho ! xxmaj curtis ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup curtis 

▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj who is that calls so coldly ? 
▁ xxup grumio . a piece of ice . xxmaj if thou doubt it , thou mayst slide from my 
▁ shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my 
▁ neck . a fire , good xxmaj curtis . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj is my master and his wife coming , xxmaj grumio ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxup o , ay , xxmaj curtis , ay ; and therefore fire , fire ; cast on no 
▁ water . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj is she so hot a shrew as she 's reported ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj she was , good xxmaj curtis , before this frost ; but thou know'st 
▁ winter tames man , woman , and beast ; for it hath tam'd my old 
▁ master , and my new mistress , and myself , fellow xxmaj curtis . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj away , you three - inch fool ! i am no beast . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj am i but three inches ? xxmaj why , thy horn is a foot , and so long 
▁ am i at the least . xxmaj but wilt thou make a fire , or shall i complain 
▁ on thee to our mistress , whose hand- she being now at hand- thou 
▁ shalt soon feel , to thy cold comfort , for being slow in thy hot 
▁ office ? 
▁ xxup curtis . i prithee , good xxmaj grumio , tell me how goes the world ? 
▁ xxup grumio . a cold world , xxmaj curtis , in every office but thine ; and 
▁ therefore fire . xxmaj do thy duty , and have thy duty , for my master and 
▁ mistress are almost frozen to death . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj there 's fire ready ; and therefore , good xxmaj grumio , the news ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj why , ' jack boy ! ho , boy ! ' and as much news as thou wilt . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj come , you are so full of cony - catching ! 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj why , therefore , fire ; for i have caught extreme cold . 
▁ xxmaj where 's the cook ? xxmaj is supper ready , the house trimm'd , rushes 
▁ strew'd , cobwebs swept , the serving - men in their new fustian , 
▁ their white stockings , and every officer his wedding - garment on ? 
▁ xxmaj be the jacks fair within , the jills fair without , the carpets 
▁ laid , and everything in order ? 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj all ready ; and therefore , i pray thee , news . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj first know my horse is tired ; my master and mistress fall'n 
▁ out . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj how ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj out of their saddles into the dirt ; and thereby hangs a 
▁ tale . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj let 's ha't , good xxmaj grumio . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj lend thine ear . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj here . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj there . [ striking him ] 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj this ' tis to feel a tale , not to hear a tale . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj and therefore ' tis call'd a sensible tale ; and this cuff 
▁ was but to knock at your car and beseech list'ning . xxmaj now i begin : 
▁ xxmaj imprimis , we came down a foul hill , my master riding behind my 
▁ mistress- 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj both of one horse ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj what 's that to thee ? 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj why , a horse . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj tell thou the tale . xxmaj but hadst thou not cross'd me , thou 
▁ shouldst have heard how her horse fell and she under her horse ; 
▁ thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place , how she was 
▁ bemoil'd , how he left her with the horse upon her , how he beat me 
▁ because her horse stumbled , how she waded through the dirt to 
▁ pluck him off me , how he swore , how she pray'd that never pray'd 
▁ before , how i cried , how the horses ran away , how her bridle was 
▁ burst , how i lost my crupper- with many things of worthy memory , 
▁ which now shall die in oblivion , and thou return unexperienc'd to 
▁ thy grave . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj by this reck'ning he is more shrew than she . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj ay , and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find 
▁ when he comes home . xxmaj but what talk i of this ? xxmaj call forth 
▁ xxmaj nathaniel , xxmaj joseph , xxmaj nicholas , xxmaj philip , xxmaj walter , xxmaj sugarsop , and the 
▁ rest ; let their heads be sleekly comb'd , their blue coats brush'd 
▁ and their garters of an indifferent knit ; let them curtsy with 
▁ their left legs , and not presume to touch a hair of my mastcr 's 
▁ horse - tail till they kiss their hands . xxmaj are they all ready ? 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj they are . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj call them forth . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj do you hear , ho ? xxmaj you must meet my master , to countenance my 
▁ mistress . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj why , she hath a face of her own . 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj who knows not that ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj thou , it seems , that calls for company to countenance her . 
▁ xxup curtis . i call them forth to credit her . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj why , she comes to borrow nothing of them . 

▁ xxmaj enter four or five xxup servingmen 

▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj welcome home , xxmaj grumio ! 
▁ xxup philip . xxmaj how now , xxmaj grumio ! 
▁ xxup joseph . xxmaj what , xxmaj grumio ! 
▁ xxup nicholas . xxmaj fellow xxmaj grumio ! 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj how now , old lad ! 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj welcome , you!- how now , you!- what , you!- fellow , you!- and 
▁ thus much for greeting . xxmaj now , my spruce companions , is all ready , 
▁ and all things neat ? 
▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj all things is ready . xxmaj how near is our master ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj e'en at hand , alighted by this ; and therefore be not- 
▁ xxmaj cock 's passion , silence ! i hear my master . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup petruchio and xxup katherina 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj where be these knaves ? xxmaj what , no man at door 
▁ xxmaj to hold my stirrup nor to take my horse ! 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj nathaniel , xxmaj gregory , xxmaj philip ? 
▁ xxup all xxup servants . xxmaj here , here , sir ; here , sir . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj here , sir ! here , sir ! here , sir ! here , sir ! 
▁ xxmaj you logger - headed and unpolish'd grooms ! 
▁ xxmaj what , no attendance ? no regard ? no duty ? 
▁ xxmaj where is the foolish knave i sent before ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj here , sir ; as foolish as i was before . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxup you peasant swain ! you whoreson malt - horse drudge ! 
▁ xxmaj did i not bid thee meet me in the park 
▁ xxmaj and bring along these rascal knaves with thee ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj nathaniel 's coat , sir , was not fully made , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj gabriel 's pumps were all unpink'd i ' th ' heel ; 
▁ xxmaj there was no link to colour xxmaj peter 's hat , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj walter 's dagger was not come from sheathing ; 
▁ xxmaj there were none fine but xxmaj adam , xxmaj ralph , and xxmaj gregory ; 
▁ xxmaj the rest were ragged , old , and beggarly ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , as they are , here are they come to meet you . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj go , rascals , go and fetch my supper in . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt some of the xxup servingmen 

▁ [ sings ] xxmaj where is the life that late i led ? 
▁ xxmaj where are those- 

▁ xxmaj sit down , xxmaj kate , and welcome . xxmaj soud , soud , soud , soud ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servants with supper 

▁ xxmaj why , when , i say ? xxmaj nay , good sweet xxmaj kate , be merry . 
▁ xxmaj off with my boots , you rogues ! you villains , when ? 

▁ [ sings ] xxmaj it was the friar of orders grey , 
▁ xxmaj as he forth walked on his way- 

▁ xxmaj out , you rogue ! you pluck my foot awry ; 
▁ xxmaj take that , and mend the plucking off the other . 
▁ [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxmaj be merry , xxmaj kate . xxmaj some water , here , what , ho ! 

▁ xxmaj enter one with water 

▁ xxmaj where 's my spaniel xxmaj troilus ? xxmaj sirrah , get you hence , 
▁ xxmaj and bid my cousin xxmaj ferdinand come hither : 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup servingman 
▁ xxmaj one , xxmaj kate , that you must kiss and be acquainted with . 
▁ xxmaj where are my slippers ? xxmaj shall i have some water ? 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj kate , and wash , and welcome heartily . 
▁ xxmaj you whoreson villain ! will you let it fall ? [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj patience , i pray you ; ' twas a fault unwilling . 
▁ xxup petruchio . a whoreson , beetle - headed , flap - ear'd knave ! 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj kate , sit down ; i know you have a stomach . 
▁ xxmaj will you give thanks , sweet xxmaj kate , or else shall xxup i ? 
▁ xxmaj what 's this ? xxmaj mutton ? 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj who brought it ? 
▁ xxup peter . xxup i. 
▁ xxup petruchio . ' tis burnt ; and so is all the meat . 
▁ xxmaj what dogs are these ? xxmaj where is the rascal cook ? 
▁ xxmaj how durst you villains bring it from the dresser 
▁ xxmaj and serve it thus to me that love it not ? 
▁ xxmaj there , take it to you , trenchers , cups , and all ; 
▁ [ throws the meat , etc . , at them ] 
▁ xxmaj you heedless joltheads and unmanner'd slaves ! 
▁ xxmaj what , do you grumble ? xxmaj i 'll be with you straight . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup servants 
▁ xxup katherina . i pray you , husband , be not so disquiet ; 
▁ xxmaj the meat was well , if you were so contented . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i tell thee , xxmaj kate , ' twas burnt and dried away , 
▁ xxmaj and i expressly am forbid to touch it ; 
▁ xxmaj for it engenders choler , planteth anger ; 
▁ xxmaj and better ' twere that both of us did fast , 
▁ xxmaj since , of ourselves , ourselves are choleric , 
▁ xxmaj than feed it with such over - roasted flesh . 
▁ xxmaj be patient ; to - morrow ' t shall be mended . 
▁ xxmaj and for this night we 'll fast for company . 
▁ xxmaj come , i will bring thee to thy bridal chamber . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servants severally 

▁ xxup nathaniel . xxmaj peter , didst ever see the like ? 
▁ xxup peter . xxmaj he kills her in her own humour . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup curtis 

▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj where is he ? 
▁ xxup curtis . xxmaj in her chamber . xxmaj making a sermon of continency to her , 
▁ xxmaj and rails , and swears , and rates , that she , poor soul , 
▁ xxmaj knows not which way to stand , to look , to speak . 
▁ xxmaj and sits as one new risen from a dream . 
▁ xxmaj away , away ! for he is coming hither . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup petruchio 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj thus have i politicly begun my reign , 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis my hope to end successfully . 
▁ xxmaj my falcon now is sharp and passing empty . 
▁ xxmaj and till she stoop she must not be full - gorg'd , 
▁ xxmaj for then she never looks upon her lure . 
▁ xxmaj another way i have to man my haggard , 
▁ xxmaj to make her come , and know her keeper 's call , 
▁ xxmaj that is , to watch her , as we watch these kites 
▁ xxmaj that bate and beat , and will not be obedient . 
▁ xxmaj she eat no meat to - day , nor none shall eat ; 
▁ xxmaj last night she slept not , nor to - night she shall not ; 
▁ xxmaj as with the meat , some undeserved fault 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find about the making of the bed ; 
▁ xxmaj and here xxmaj i 'll fling the pillow , there the bolster , 
▁ xxmaj this way the coverlet , another way the sheets ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , and amid this hurly i intend 
▁ xxmaj that all is done in reverend care of her- 
▁ xxmaj and , in conclusion , she shall watch all night ; 
▁ xxmaj and if she chance to nod xxmaj i 'll rail and brawl 
▁ xxmaj and with the clamour keep her still awake . 
▁ xxmaj this is a way to kill a wife with kindness , 
▁ xxmaj and thus xxmaj i 'll curb her mad and headstrong humour . 
▁ xxmaj he that knows better how to tame a shrew , 
▁ xxmaj now let him speak ; ' tis charity to show . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj padua . xxmaj before xxup baptista 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup tranio as xxup lucentio , and xxup hortensio as xxup licio 

▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj is ' t possible , friend xxmaj licio , that xxmaj mistress xxmaj bianca 
▁ xxmaj doth fancy any other but xxmaj lucentio ? 
▁ i tell you , sir , she bears me fair in hand . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj sir , to satisfy you in what i have said , 
▁ xxmaj stand by and mark the manner of his teaching . 
▁ [ they stand aside ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bianca , and xxup lucentio as xxup cambio 

▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj now , mistress , profit you in what you read ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj what , master , read you , xxmaj first resolve me that . 
▁ xxup lucentio . i read that i profess , ' the xxmaj art to xxmaj love . ' 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj and may you prove , sir , master of your art ! 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj while you , sweet dear , prove mistress of my heart . 
▁ [ they retire ] 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj quick proceeders , marry ! xxmaj now tell me , i pray , 
▁ xxmaj you that durst swear that your xxmaj mistress xxmaj blanca 
▁ xxmaj lov'd none in the world so well as xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup tranio . o despiteful love ! unconstant womankind ! 
▁ i tell thee , xxmaj licio , this is wonderful . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj mistake no more ; i am not xxmaj licio . 
▁ xxmaj nor a musician as i seem to be ; 
▁ xxmaj but one that scorn to live in this disguise 
▁ xxmaj for such a one as leaves a gentleman 
▁ xxmaj and makes a god of such a cullion . 
▁ xxmaj know , sir , that i am call'd xxmaj hortensio . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj signior xxmaj hortensio , i have often heard 
▁ xxmaj of your entire affection to xxmaj bianca ; 
▁ xxmaj and since mine eyes are witness of her lightness , 
▁ i will with you , if you be so contented , 
▁ xxmaj forswear xxmaj bianca and her love for ever . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj see , how they kiss and court ! xxmaj signior xxmaj lucentio , 
▁ xxmaj here is my hand , and here i firmly vow 
▁ xxmaj never to woo her more , but do forswear her , 
▁ xxmaj as one unworthy all the former favours 
▁ xxmaj that i have fondly flatter'd her withal . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj and here i take the like unfeigned oath , 
▁ xxmaj never to marry with her though she would entreat ; 
▁ xxmaj fie on her ! xxmaj see how beastly she doth court him ! 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj would all the world but he had quite forsworn ! 
▁ xxmaj for me , that i may surely keep mine oath , 
▁ i will be married to a wealtlly widow 
▁ xxmaj ere three days pass , which hath as long lov'd me 
▁ xxmaj as i have lov'd this proud disdainful haggard . 
▁ xxmaj and so farewell , xxmaj signior xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxmaj kindness in women , not their beauteous looks , 
▁ xxmaj shall win my love ; and so i take my leave , 
▁ xxmaj in resolution as i swore before . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj mistress xxmaj bianca , bless you with such grace 
▁ xxmaj as ' longeth to a lover 's blessed case ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , i have ta'en you napping , gentle love , 
▁ xxmaj and have forsworn you with xxmaj hortensio . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj tranio , you jest ; but have you both forsworn me ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj mistress , we have . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj then we are rid of xxmaj licio . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxup i ' faith , he 'll have a lusty widow now , 
▁ xxmaj that shall be woo'd and wedded in a day . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj god give him joy ! 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj ay , and he 'll tame her . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj he says so , xxmaj tranio . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj faith , he is gone unto the taming - school . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj the taming - school ! xxmaj what , is there such a place ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj ay , mistress ; and xxmaj petruchio is the master , 
▁ xxmaj that teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long , 
▁ xxmaj to tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup biondello 

▁ xxup biondello . o master , master , have watch'd so long 
▁ xxmaj that i am dog - weary ; but at last i spied 
▁ xxmaj an ancient angel coming down the hill 
▁ xxmaj will serve the turn . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj what is he , xxmaj biondello ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj master , a mercatante or a pedant , 
▁ i know not what ; but formal in apparel , 
▁ xxmaj in gait and countenance surely like a father . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj and what of him , xxmaj tranio ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj if he be credulous and trust my tale , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make him glad to seem xxmaj vincentio , 
▁ xxmaj and give assurance to xxmaj baptista xxmaj minola 
▁ xxmaj as if he were the right xxmaj vincentio . 
▁ xxmaj take in your love , and then let me alone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucentio and xxup bianca 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup pedant 

▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj god save you , sir ! 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj and you , sir ; you are welcome . 
▁ xxmaj travel you far on , or are you at the farthest ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj sir , at the farthest for a week or two ; 
▁ xxmaj but then up farther , and as far as xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj and so to xxmaj tripoli , if xxmaj god lend me life . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj what countryman , i pray ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj of xxmaj mantua . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj of xxmaj mantua , sir ? xxmaj marry , xxmaj god forbid , 
▁ xxmaj and come to xxmaj padua , careless of your life ! 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj my life , sir ! xxmaj how , i pray ? xxmaj for that goes hard . 
▁ xxup tranio . ' tis death for any one in xxmaj mantua 
▁ xxmaj to come to xxmaj padua . xxmaj know you not the cause ? 
▁ xxmaj your ships are stay'd at xxmaj venice ; and the xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj for private quarrel ' twixt your xxmaj duke and him , 
▁ xxmaj hath publish'd and proclaim'd it openly . 
▁ ' tis marvel- but that you are but newly come , 
▁ xxmaj you might have heard it else proclaim'd about . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj alas , sir , it is worse for me than so ! 
▁ xxmaj for i have bills for money by exchange 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj florence , and must here deliver them . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj well , sir , to do you courtesy , 
▁ xxmaj this will i do , and this i will advise you- 
▁ xxmaj first , tell me , have you ever been at xxmaj pisa ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj ay , sir , in xxmaj pisa have i often been , 
▁ xxmaj pisa renowned for grave citizens . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj among them know you one xxmaj vincentio ? 
▁ xxup pedant . i know him not , but i have heard of him , 
▁ a merchant of incomparable wealth . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj he is my father , sir ; and , sooth to say , 
▁ xxmaj in count'nance somewhat doth resemble you . 
▁ xxup biondello . [ aside ] xxmaj as much as an apple doth an oyster , and all 
▁ one . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj to save your life in this extremity , 
▁ xxmaj this favour will i do you for his sake ; 
▁ xxmaj and think it not the worst of all your fortunes 
▁ xxmaj that you are like to xxmaj sir xxmaj vincentio . 
▁ xxmaj his name and credit shall you undertake , 
▁ xxmaj and in my house you shall be friendly lodg'd ; 
▁ xxmaj look that you take upon you as you should . 
▁ xxmaj you understand me , sir . xxmaj so shall you stay 
▁ xxmaj till you have done your business in the city . 
▁ xxmaj if this be court'sy , sir , accept of it . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxup o , sir , i do ; and will repute you ever 
▁ xxmaj the patron of my life and liberty . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj then go with me to make the matter good . 
▁ xxmaj this , by the way , i let you understand : 
▁ xxmaj my father is here look'd for every day 
▁ xxmaj to pass assurance of a dow'r in marriage 
▁ ' twixt me and one xxmaj baptista 's daughter here . 
▁ xxmaj in all these circumstances xxmaj i 'll instruct you . 
▁ xxmaj go with me to clothe you as becomes you . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxup petruchio 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup katherina and xxup grumio 

▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj no , no , forsooth ; i dare not for my life . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj the more my wrong , the more his spite appears . 
▁ xxmaj what , did he marry me to famish me ? 
▁ xxmaj beggars that come unto my father 's door 
▁ xxmaj upon entreaty have a present alms ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , elsewhere they meet with charity ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxup i , who never knew how to entreat , 
▁ xxmaj nor never needed that i should entreat , 
▁ xxmaj am starv'd for meat , giddy for lack of sleep ; 
▁ xxmaj with oaths kept waking , and with brawling fed ; 
▁ xxmaj and that which spites me more than all these wants- 
▁ xxmaj he does it under name of perfect love ; 
▁ xxmaj as who should say , if i should sleep or eat , 
▁ ' twere deadly sickness or else present death . 
▁ i prithee go and get me some repast ; 
▁ i care not what , so it be wholesome food . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj what say you to a neat 's foot ? 
▁ xxup katherina . ' tis passing good ; i prithee let me have it . 
▁ xxup grumio . i fear it is too choleric a meat . 
▁ xxmaj how say you to a fat tripe finely broil'd ? 
▁ xxup katherina . i like it well ; good xxmaj grumio , fetch it me . 
▁ xxup grumio . i can not tell ; i fear ' tis choleric . 
▁ xxmaj what say you to a piece of beef and mustard ? 
▁ xxup katherina . a dish that i do love to feed upon . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj ay , but the mustard is too hot a little . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj why then the beef , and let the mustard rest . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj nay , then i will not ; you shall have the mustard , 
▁ xxmaj or else you get no beef of xxmaj grumio . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj then both , or one , or anything thou wilt . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj why then the mustard without the beef . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj go , get thee gone , thou false deluding slave , 
▁ [ beats him ] 
▁ xxmaj that feed'st me with the very name of meat . 
▁ xxmaj sorrow on thee and all the pack of you 
▁ xxmaj that triumph thus upon my misery ! 
▁ xxmaj go , get thee gone , i say . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup petruchio , and xxup hortensio with meat 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj how fares my xxmaj kate ? xxmaj what , sweeting , all amort ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj mistress , what cheer ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj faith , as cold as can be . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj pluck up thy spirits , look cheerfully upon me . 
▁ xxmaj here , love , thou seest how diligent i am , 
▁ xxmaj to dress thy meat myself , and bring it thee . 
▁ i am sure , sweet xxmaj kate , this kindness merits thanks . 
▁ xxmaj what , not a word ? xxmaj nay , then thou lov'st it not , 
▁ xxmaj and all my pains is sorted to no proof . 
▁ xxmaj here , take away this dish . 
▁ xxup katherina . i pray you , let it stand . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj the poorest service is repaid with thanks ; 
▁ xxmaj and so shall mine , before you touch the meat . 
▁ xxup katherina . i thank you , sir . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj signior xxmaj petruchio , fie ! you are to blame . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj mistress xxmaj kate , xxmaj i 'll bear you company . 
▁ xxup petruchio . [ aside ] xxmaj eat it up all , xxmaj hortensio , if thou lovest me.- 
▁ xxmaj much good do it unto thy gentle heart ! 
▁ xxmaj kate , eat apace . xxmaj and now , my honey love , 
▁ xxmaj will we return unto thy father 's house 
▁ xxmaj and revel it as bravely as the best , 
▁ xxmaj with silken coats and caps , and golden rings , 
▁ xxmaj with ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things , 
▁ xxmaj with scarfs and fans and double change of brav'ry . 
▁ xxmaj with amber bracelets , beads , and all this knav'ry . 
▁ xxmaj what , hast thou din'd ? xxmaj the tailor stays thy leisure , 
▁ xxmaj to deck thy body with his ruffling treasure . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup tailor 

▁ xxmaj come , tailor , let us see these ornaments ; 
▁ xxmaj lay forth the gown . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup haberdasher 

▁ xxmaj what news with you , sir ? 
▁ xxup haberdasher . xxmaj here is the cap your worship did bespeak . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , this was moulded on a porringer ; 
▁ a velvet dish . xxmaj fie , fie ! ' tis lewd and filthy ; 
▁ xxmaj why , ' tis a cockle or a walnut - shell , 
▁ a knack , a toy , a trick , a baby 's cap . 
▁ xxmaj away with it . xxmaj come , let me have a bigger . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj i 'll have no bigger ; this doth fit the time , 
▁ xxmaj and gentlewomen wear such caps as these . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj when you are gentle , you shall have one too , 
▁ xxmaj and not till then . 
▁ xxup hortensio . [ aside ] xxmaj that will not be in haste . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj why , sir , i trust i may have leave to speak ; 
▁ xxmaj and speak i will . i am no child , no babe . 
▁ xxmaj your betters have endur'd me say my mind , 
▁ xxmaj and if you can not , best you stop your ears . 
▁ xxmaj my tongue will tell the anger of my heart , 
▁ xxmaj or else my heart , concealing it , will break ; 
▁ xxmaj and rather than it shall , i will be free 
▁ xxmaj even to the uttermost , as i please , in words . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , thou say'st true ; it is a paltry cap , 
▁ a custard - coffin , a bauble , a silken pie ; 
▁ i love thee well in that thou lik'st it not . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj love me or love me not , i like the cap ; 
▁ xxmaj and it i will have , or i will have none . xxmaj exit xxup haberdasher 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj thy gown ? xxmaj why , ay . xxmaj come , tailor , let us see't . 
▁ o mercy , xxmaj god ! what masquing stuff is here ? 
▁ xxmaj what 's this ? a sleeve ? ' tis like a demi - cannon . 
▁ xxmaj what , up and down , carv'd like an appletart ? 
▁ xxmaj here 's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash , 
▁ xxmaj like to a censer in a barber 's shop . 
▁ xxmaj why , what a devil 's name , tailor , call'st thou this ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . [ aside ] i see she 's like to have neither cap nor gown . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj you bid me make it orderly and well , 
▁ xxmaj according to the fashion and the time . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj marry , and did ; but if you be rememb'red , 
▁ i did not bid you mar it to the time . 
▁ xxmaj go , hop me over every kennel home , 
▁ xxmaj for you shall hop without my custom , sir . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll none of it ; hence ! make your best of it . 
▁ xxup katherina . i never saw a better fashion'd gown , 
▁ xxmaj more quaint , more pleasing , nor more commendable ; 
▁ xxmaj belike you mean to make a puppet of me . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , true ; he means to make a puppet of thee . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj she says your worship means to make a puppet of her . 
▁ xxup petruchio . o monstrous arrogance ! xxmaj thou liest , thou thread , thou 
▁ thimble , 
▁ xxmaj thou yard , three - quarters , half - yard , quarter , nail , 
▁ xxmaj thou flea , thou nit , thou winter - cricket thou- 
▁ xxmaj brav'd in mine own house with a skein of thread ! 
▁ xxmaj away , thou rag , thou quantity , thou remnant ; 
▁ xxmaj or i shall so bemete thee with thy yard 
▁ xxmaj as thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st ! 
▁ i tell thee , xxup i , that thou hast marr'd her gown . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj your worship is deceiv'd ; the gown is made 
▁ xxmaj just as my master had direction . 
▁ xxmaj grumio gave order how it should be done . 
▁ xxup grumio . i gave him no order ; i gave him the stuff . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj but how did you desire it should be made ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj marry , sir , with needle and thread . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj but did you not request to have it cut ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj thou hast fac'd many things . 
▁ xxup tailor . i have . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj face not me . xxmaj thou hast brav'd many men ; brave not me . i 
▁ will neither be fac'd nor brav'd . i say unto thee , i bid thy 
▁ master cut out the gown ; but i did not bid him cut it to pieces . 
▁ xxmaj ergo , thou liest . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj why , here is the note of the fashion to testify . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj read it . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj the note lies in 's throat , if he say i said so . 
▁ xxup tailor . [ reads ] ' imprimis , a loose - bodied gown'- 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj master , if ever i said loose - bodied gown , sew me in the 
▁ skirts of it and beat me to death with a bottom of brown bread ; i 
▁ said a gown . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup tailor . [ reads ] ' with a small compass'd cape'- 
▁ xxup grumio . i confess the cape . 
▁ xxup tailor . [ reads ] ' with a trunk sleeve'- 
▁ xxup grumio . i confess two sleeves . 
▁ xxup tailor . [ reads ] ' the sleeves curiously cut . ' 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj ay , there 's the villainy . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj error i ' th ' bill , sir ; error i ' th ' bill ! i commanded the 
▁ sleeves should be cut out , and sew'd up again ; and that xxmaj i 'll 
▁ prove upon thee , though thy little finger be armed in a thimble . 
▁ xxup tailor . xxmaj this is true that i say ; an i had thee in place where , thou 
▁ shouldst know it . 
▁ xxup grumio . i am for thee straight ; take thou the bill , give me thy 
▁ meteyard , and spare not me . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj god - a - mercy , xxmaj grumio ! xxmaj then he shall have no odds . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj well , sir , in brief , the gown is not for me . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj you are i ' th ' right , sir ; ' tis for my mistress . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj go , take it up unto thy master 's use . 
▁ xxup grumio . xxmaj villain , not for thy life ! xxmaj take up my mistress ' gown for 
▁ thy master 's use ! 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , sir , what 's your conceit in that ? 
▁ xxup grumio . xxup o , sir , the conceit is deeper than you think for . 
▁ xxmaj take up my mistress ' gown to his master 's use ! 
▁ o fie , fie , fie ! 
▁ xxup petruchio . [ aside ] xxmaj hortensio , say thou wilt see the tailor paid.- 
▁ xxmaj go take it hence ; be gone , and say no more . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj tailor , xxmaj i 'll pay thee for thy gown to - morrow ; 
▁ xxmaj take no unkindness of his hasty words . 
▁ xxmaj away , i say ; commend me to thy master . xxmaj exit xxup tailor 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj well , come , my xxmaj kate ; we will unto your father 's 
▁ xxmaj even in these honest mean habiliments ; 
▁ xxmaj our purses shall be proud , our garments poor ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis the mind that makes the body rich ; 
▁ xxmaj and as the sun breaks through the darkest clouds , 
▁ xxmaj so honour peereth in the meanest habit . 
▁ xxmaj what , is the jay more precious than the lark 
▁ xxmaj because his feathers are more beautiful ? 
▁ xxmaj or is the adder better than the eel 
▁ xxmaj because his painted skin contents the eye ? 
▁ o no , good xxmaj kate ; neither art thou the worse 
▁ xxmaj for this poor furniture and mean array . 
▁ xxmaj if thou account'st it shame , lay it on me ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore frolic ; we will hence forthwith 
▁ xxmaj to feast and sport us at thy father 's house . 
▁ xxmaj go call my men , and let us straight to him ; 
▁ xxmaj and bring our horses unto xxmaj long - lane end ; 
▁ xxmaj there will we mount , and thither walk on foot . 
▁ xxmaj let 's see ; i think ' tis now some seven o'clock , 
▁ xxmaj and well we may come there by dinner - time . 
▁ xxup katherina . i dare assure you , sir , ' tis almost two , 
▁ xxmaj and ' twill be supper - time ere you come there . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj it shall be seven ere i go to horse . 
▁ xxmaj look what i speak , or do , or think to do , 
▁ xxmaj you are still crossing it . xxmaj sirs , let ' t alone ; 
▁ i will not go to - day ; and ere i do , 
▁ xxmaj it shall be what o'clock i say it is . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj why , so this gallant will command the sun . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj padua . xxmaj before xxup baptista 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup tranio as xxup lucentio , and the xxup pedant dressed like xxup vincentio 

▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj sir , this is the house ; please it you that i call ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj ay , what else ? xxmaj and , but i be deceived , 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista may remember me 
▁ xxmaj near twenty years ago in xxmaj genoa , 
▁ xxmaj where we were lodgers at the xxmaj pegasus . 
▁ xxup tranio . ' tis well ; and hold your own , in any case , 
▁ xxmaj with such austerity as longeth to a father . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup biondello 

▁ xxup pedant . i warrant you . xxmaj but , sir , here comes your boy ; 
▁ ' twere good he were school'd . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj fear you not him . xxmaj sirrah xxmaj biondello , 
▁ xxmaj now do your duty throughly , i advise you . 
▁ xxmaj imagine ' twere the right xxmaj vincentio . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj tut , fear not me . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj but hast thou done thy errand to xxmaj baptista ? 
▁ xxup biondello . i told him that your father was at xxmaj venice , 
▁ xxmaj and that you look'd for him this day in xxmaj padua . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj th'art a tall fellow ; hold thee that to drink . 
▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj baptista . xxmaj set your countenance , sir . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup baptista , and xxup lucentio as xxup cambio 

▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , you are happily met . 
▁ [ to xxmaj to the xxup pedant ] xxmaj sir , this is the gentleman i told you of ; 
▁ i pray you stand good father to me now ; 
▁ xxmaj give me xxmaj bianca for my patrimony . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj soft , son ! 
▁ xxmaj sir , by your leave : having come to xxmaj padua 
▁ xxmaj to gather in some debts , my son xxmaj lucentio 
▁ xxmaj made me acquainted with a weighty cause 
▁ xxmaj of love between your daughter and himself ; 
▁ xxmaj and- for the good report i hear of you , 
▁ xxmaj and for the love he beareth to your daughter , 
▁ xxmaj and she to him- to stay him not too long , 
▁ i am content , in a good father 's care , 
▁ xxmaj to have him match'd ; and , if you please to like 
▁ xxmaj no worse than xxup i , upon some agreement 
▁ xxmaj me shall you find ready and willing 
▁ xxmaj with one consent to have her so bestow'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for curious i can not be with you , 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , of whom i hear so well . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj sir , pardon me in what i have to say . 
▁ xxmaj your plainness and your shortness please me well . 
▁ xxmaj right true it is your son xxmaj lucentio here 
▁ xxmaj doth love my daughter , and she loveth him , 
▁ xxmaj or both dissemble deeply their affections ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore , if you say no more than this , 
▁ xxmaj that like a father you will deal with him , 
▁ xxmaj and pass my daughter a sufficient dower , 
▁ xxmaj the match is made , and all is done- 
▁ xxmaj your son shall have my daughter with consent . 
▁ xxup tranio . i thank you , sir . xxmaj where then do you know best 
▁ xxmaj we be affied , and such assurance ta'en 
▁ xxmaj as shall with either part 's agreement stand ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj not in my house , xxmaj lucentio , for you know 
▁ xxmaj pitchers have ears , and i have many servants ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , old xxmaj gremio is heark'ning still , 
▁ xxmaj and happily we might be interrupted . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj then at my lodging , an it like you . 
▁ xxmaj there doth my father lie ; and there this night 
▁ xxmaj we 'll pass the business privately and well . 
▁ xxmaj send for your daughter by your servant here ; 
▁ xxmaj my boy shall fetch the scrivener presently . 
▁ xxmaj the worst is this , that at so slender warning 
▁ xxmaj you are like to have a thin and slender pittance . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj it likes me well . xxmaj cambio , hie you home , 
▁ xxmaj and bid xxmaj bianca make her ready straight ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if you will , tell what hath happened- 
▁ xxmaj lucentio 's father is arriv'd in xxmaj padua , 
▁ xxmaj and how she 's like to be xxmaj lucentio 's wife . xxmaj exit xxup lucentio 
▁ xxup biondello . i pray the gods she may , with all my heart . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj dally not with the gods , but get thee gone . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup biondello 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , shall i lead the way ? 
▁ xxmaj welcome ! xxmaj one mess is like to be your cheer ; 
▁ xxmaj come , sir ; we will better it in xxmaj pisa . 
▁ xxup baptista . i follow you . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lucentio as xxup cambio , and xxup biondello 

▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj cambio . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj what say'st thou , xxmaj biondello ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj you saw my master wink and laugh upon you ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj biondello , what of that ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj faith , nothing ; but has left me here behind to expound 
▁ the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens . 
▁ xxup lucentio . i pray thee moralize them . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj then thus : xxmaj baptista is safe , talking with the deceiving 
▁ father of a deceitful son . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj and what of him ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj his daughter is to be brought by you to the supper . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj and then ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj the old priest at xxmaj saint xxmaj luke 's church is at your command 
▁ at all hours . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj and what of all this ? 
▁ xxup biondello . i can not tell , except they are busied about a 
▁ counterfeit assurance . xxmaj take your assurance of her , cum privilegio 
▁ ad imprimendum solum ; to th ' church take the priest , clerk , and 
▁ some sufficient honest witnesses . 
▁ xxmaj if this be not that you look for , i have more to say , 
▁ xxmaj but bid xxmaj bianca farewell for ever and a day . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj hear'st thou , xxmaj biondello ? 
▁ xxup biondello . i can not tarry . i knew a wench married in an afternoon 
▁ as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit ; and so 
▁ may you , sir ; and so adieu , sir . xxmaj my master hath appointed me to 
▁ go to xxmaj saint xxmaj luke 's to bid the priest be ready to come against you