xxbos come with your appendix . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lucentio . i may and will , if she be so contented . 
▁ xxmaj she will be pleas'd ; then wherefore should i doubt ? 
▁ xxmaj hap what hap may , xxmaj i 'll roundly go about her ; 
▁ xxmaj it shall go hard if xxmaj cambio go without her . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 a public road 

 xxmaj enter xxup petruchio , xxup katherina , xxup hortensio , and xxup servants 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj come on , a xxmaj god 's name ; once more toward our father 's . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj lord , how bright and goodly shines the moon ! 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj the moon ? xxmaj the sun ! xxmaj it is not moonlight now . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i say it is the moon that shines so bright . 
▁ xxup katherina . i know it is the sun that shines so bright . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj now by my mother 's son , and that 's myself , 
▁ xxmaj it shall be moon , or star , or what i list , 
▁ xxmaj or ere i journey to your father 's house . 
▁ xxmaj go on and fetch our horses back again . 
▁ xxmaj evermore cross'd and cross'd ; nothing but cross'd ! 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj say as he says , or we shall never go . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj forward , i pray , since we have come so far , 
▁ xxmaj and be it moon , or sun , or what you please ; 
▁ xxmaj and if you please to call it a rush - candle , 
▁ xxmaj henceforth i vow it shall be so for me . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i say it is the moon . 
▁ xxup katherina . i know it is the moon . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nay , then you lie ; it is the blessed sun . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj then , xxmaj god be bless'd , it is the blessed sun ; 
▁ xxmaj but sun it is not , when you say it is not ; 
▁ xxmaj and the moon changes even as your mind . 
▁ xxmaj what you will have it nam'd , even that it is , 
▁ xxmaj and so it shall be so for xxmaj katherine . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj petruchio , go thy ways , the field is won . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj well , forward , forward ! thus the bowl should run , 
▁ xxmaj and not unluckily against the bias . 
▁ xxmaj but , soft ! xxmaj company is coming here . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup vincentio 

▁ [ to xxup vincentio ] xxmaj good - morrow , gentle mistress ; where away?- 
▁ xxmaj tell me , sweet xxmaj kate , and tell me truly too , 
▁ xxmaj hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman ? 
▁ xxmaj such war of white and red within her cheeks ! 
▁ xxmaj what stars do spangle heaven with such beauty 
▁ xxmaj as those two eyes become that heavenly face ? 
▁ xxmaj fair lovely maid , once more good day to thee . 
▁ xxmaj sweet xxmaj kate , embrace her for her beauty 's sake . 
▁ xxup hortensio . ' a will make the man mad , to make a woman of him . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj young budding virgin , fair and fresh and sweet , 
▁ xxmaj whither away , or where is thy abode ? 
▁ xxmaj happy the parents of so fair a child ; 
▁ xxmaj happier the man whom favourable stars 
▁ xxmaj allots thee for his lovely bed - fellow . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj kate , i hope thou art not mad ! 
▁ xxmaj this is a man , old , wrinkled , faded , withered , 
▁ xxmaj and not a maiden , as thou sayst he is . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj pardon , old father , my mistaking eyes , 
▁ xxmaj that have been so bedazzled with the sun 
▁ xxmaj that everything i look on seemeth green ; 
▁ xxmaj now i perceive thou art a reverend father . 
▁ xxmaj pardon , i pray thee , for my mad mistaking . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj do , good old grandsire , and withal make known 
▁ xxmaj which way thou travellest- if along with us , 
▁ xxmaj we shall be joyful of thy company . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj fair sir , and you my merry mistress , 
▁ xxmaj that with your strange encounter much amaz'd me , 
▁ xxmaj my name is call'd xxmaj vincentio , my dwelling xxmaj pisa , 
▁ xxmaj and bound i am to xxmaj padua , there to visit 
▁ a son of mine , which long i have not seen . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj what is his name ? 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj lucentio , gentle sir . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj happily met ; the happier for thy son . 
▁ xxmaj and now by law , as well as reverend age , 
▁ i may entitle thee my loving father : 
▁ xxmaj the sister to my wife , this gentlewoman , 
▁ xxmaj thy son by this hath married . xxmaj wonder not , 
▁ xxmaj nor be not grieved- she is of good esteem , 
▁ xxmaj her dowry wealthy , and of worthy birth ; 
▁ xxmaj beside , so qualified as may beseem 
▁ xxmaj the spouse of any noble gentleman . 
▁ xxmaj let me embrace with old xxmaj vincentio ; 
▁ xxmaj and wander we to see thy honest son , 
▁ xxmaj who will of thy arrival be full joyous . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj but is this true ; or is it else your pleasure , 
▁ xxmaj like pleasant travellers , to break a jest 
▁ xxmaj upon the company you overtake ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . i do assure thee , father , so it is . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj come , go along , and see the truth hereof ; 
▁ xxmaj for our first merriment hath made thee jealous . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup hortensio 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj well , xxmaj petruchio , this has put me in heart . 
▁ xxmaj have to my widow ; and if she be froward , 
▁ xxmaj then hast thou taught xxmaj hortensio to be untoward . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj padua . xxmaj before xxup lucentio 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup biondello , xxup lucentio , and xxup bianca ; xxup gremio is out before 

▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj softly and swiftly , sir , for the priest is ready . 
▁ xxup lucentio . i fly , xxmaj biondello ; but they may chance to need the at 
▁ home , therefore leave us . 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj nay , faith , xxmaj i 'll see the church a your back , and then 
▁ come back to my master 's as soon as i can . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucentio , xxup bianca , and xxup biondello 
▁ xxup gremio . i marvel xxmaj cambio comes not all this while . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup petruchio , xxup katherina , xxup vincentio , xxup grumio , 
▁ and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj sir , here 's the door ; this is xxmaj lucentio 's house ; 
▁ xxmaj my father 's bears more toward the market - place ; 
▁ xxmaj thither must xxup i , and here i leave you , sir . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj you shall not choose but drink before you go ; 
▁ i think i shall command your welcome here , 
▁ xxmaj and by all likelihood some cheer is toward . [ knocks ] 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj they 're busy within ; you were best knock louder . 
▁ [ pedant looks out of the window ] 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj what 's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate ? 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj is xxmaj signior xxmaj lucentio within , sir ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj he 's within , sir , but not to be spoken withal . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj what if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make 
▁ merry withal ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj keep your hundred pounds to yourself ; he shall need none so 
▁ long as i live . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nay , i told you your son was well beloved in xxmaj padua . xxmaj do 
▁ you hear , sir ? xxmaj to leave frivolous circumstances , i pray you tell 
▁ xxmaj signior xxmaj lucentio that his father is come from xxmaj pisa , and is here 
▁ at the door to speak with him . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj thou liest : his father is come from xxmaj padua , and here looking 
▁ out at the window . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj art thou his father ? 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj ay , sir ; so his mother says , if i may believe her . 
▁ xxup petruchio . [ to xxup vincentio ] xxmaj why , how now , gentleman ! 
▁ xxmaj why , this is flat knavery to take upon you another man 's name . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj lay hands on the villain ; i believe ' a means to cozen 
▁ somebody in this city under my countenance . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup biondello 

▁ xxup biondello . i have seen them in the church together . xxmaj god send 'em 
▁ good shipping ! xxmaj but who is here ? xxmaj mine old master , xxmaj vicentio ! xxmaj now we 
▁ are undone and brought to nothing . 
▁ xxup vincentio . [ seeing xxup biondello ] xxmaj come hither , crack - hemp . 
▁ xxup biondello . i hope i may choose , sir . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj come hither , you rogue . xxmaj what , have you forgot me ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj forgot you ! xxmaj no , sir . i could not forget you , for i never 
▁ saw you before in all my life . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj what , you notorious villain , didst thou never see thy 
▁ master 's father , xxmaj vincentio ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj what , my old worshipful old master ? xxmaj yes , marry , sir ; see 
▁ where he looks out of the window . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj is't so , indeed ? [ he beats xxup biondello ] 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj help , help , help ! xxmaj here 's a madman will murder me . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj help , son ! help , xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista ! xxmaj exit from above 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj prithee , xxmaj kate , let 's stand aside and see the end of this 
▁ controversy . [ they stand aside ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pedant below ; xxup baptista , xxup tranio , and xxup servants 

▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj sir , what are you that offer to beat my servant ? 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj what am xxup i , sir ? xxmaj nay , what are you , sir ? o immortal gods ! 
▁ o fine villain ! a silken doublet , a velvet hose , a scarlet cloak , 
▁ and a copatain hat ! xxup o , i am undone ! i am undone ! xxmaj while i play the 
▁ good husband at home , my son and my servant spend all at the 
▁ university . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj how now ! what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj what , is the man lunatic ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj sir , you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit , but 
▁ your words show you a madman . xxmaj why , sir , what ' cerns it you if i 
▁ wear pearl and gold ? i thank my good father , i am able to 
▁ maintain it . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj thy father ! o villain ! he is a sailmaker in xxmaj bergamo . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj you mistake , sir ; you mistake , sir . xxmaj pray , what do you 
▁ think is his name ? 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj his name ! xxmaj as if i knew not his name ! i have brought him 
▁ up ever since he was three years old , and his name is xxmaj tranio . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj away , away , mad ass ! xxmaj his name is xxmaj lucentio ; and he is mine 
▁ only son , and heir to the lands of me , xxmaj signior xxmaj vicentio . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj lucentio ! xxup o , he hath murd'red his master ! xxmaj lay hold on 
▁ him , i charge you , in the xxmaj duke 's name . xxup o , my son , my son ! xxmaj tell 
▁ me , thou villain , where is my son , xxmaj lucentio ? 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj call forth an officer . 

▁ xxmaj enter one with an xxup officer 

▁ xxmaj carry this mad knave to the gaol . xxmaj father xxmaj baptista , i charge you 
▁ see that he be forthcoming . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj carry me to the gaol ! 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj stay , xxmaj officer ; he shall not go to prison . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj talk not , xxmaj signior xxmaj gremio ; i say he shall go to prison . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj take heed , xxmaj signior xxmaj baptista , lest you be cony - catch'd in 
▁ this business ; i dare swear this is the right xxmaj vincentio . 
▁ xxup pedant . xxmaj swear if thou dar'st . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj nay , i dare not swear it . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxmaj then thou wert best say that i am not xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj yes , i know thee to be xxmaj signior xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj away with the dotard ; to the gaol with him ! 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj thus strangers may be hal'd and abus'd . o monstrous 
▁ villain ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup biondello , with xxup lucentio and xxup bianca 

▁ xxup biondello . xxup o , we are spoil'd ; and yonder he is ! xxmaj deny him , forswear 
▁ him , or else we are all undone . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup biondello , xxup tranio , and xxup pedant , as fast as may be 
▁ xxup lucentio . [ kneeling ] xxmaj pardon , sweet father . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj lives my sweet son ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj pardon , dear father . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj how hast thou offended ? 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj lucentio ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj here 's xxmaj lucentio , 
▁ xxmaj right son to the right xxmaj vincentio , 
▁ xxmaj that have by marriage made thy daughter mine , 
▁ xxmaj while counterfeit supposes blear'd thine eyne . 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj here 's packing , with a witness , to deceive us all ! 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj where is that damned villain , xxmaj tranio , 
▁ xxmaj that fac'd and brav'd me in this matter so ? 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj why , tell me , is not this my xxmaj cambio ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj cambio is chang'd into xxmaj lucentio . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj love wrought these miracles . xxmaj bianca 's love 
▁ xxmaj made me exchange my state with xxmaj tranio , 
▁ xxmaj while he did bear my countenance in the town ; 
▁ xxmaj and happily i have arrived at the last 
▁ xxmaj unto the wished haven of my bliss . 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj tranio did , myself enforc'd him to ; 
▁ xxmaj then pardon him , sweet father , for my sake . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj i 'll slit the villain 's nose that would have sent me to 
▁ the gaol . 
▁ xxup baptista . [ to xxup lucentio ] xxmaj but do you hear , sir ? xxmaj have you married my 
▁ daughter without asking my good will ? 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj fear not , xxmaj baptista ; we will content you , go to ; but i 
▁ will in to be revenged for this villainy . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj and i to sound the depth of this knavery . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj look not pale , xxmaj bianca ; thy father will not frown . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucentio and xxup bianca 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj my cake is dough , but xxmaj i 'll in among the rest ; 
▁ xxmaj out of hope of all but my share of the feast . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj husband , let 's follow to see the end of this ado . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj first kiss me , xxmaj kate , and we will . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj what , in the midst of the street ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj what , art thou asham'd of me ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj no , sir ; xxmaj god forbid ; but asham'd to kiss . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , then , let 's home again . xxmaj come , sirrah , let 's away . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj nay , i will give thee a kiss ; now pray thee , love , stay . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj is not this well ? xxmaj come , my sweet xxmaj kate : 
▁ xxmaj better once than never , for never too late . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxup lucentio 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup baptista , xxup vincentio , xxup gremio , the xxup pedant , xxup lucentio , xxup bianca , 
 xxup petruchio , xxup katherina , xxup hortensio , and xxup widow . xxmaj the xxup servingmen with xxup tranio , 
 xxup biondello , and xxup grumio , bringing in a banquet 

▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj at last , though long , our jarring notes agree ; 
▁ xxmaj and time it is when raging war is done 
▁ xxmaj to smile at scapes and perils overblown . 
▁ xxmaj my fair xxmaj bianca , bid my father welcome , 
▁ xxmaj while i with self - same kindness welcome thine . 
▁ xxmaj brother xxmaj petruchio , sister xxmaj katherina , 
▁ xxmaj and thou , xxmaj hortensio , with thy loving widow , 
▁ xxmaj feast with the best , and welcome to my house . 
▁ xxmaj my banquet is to close our stomachs up 
▁ xxmaj after our great good cheer . xxmaj pray you , sit down ; 
▁ xxmaj for now we sit to chat as well as eat . [ they sit ] 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nothing but sit and sit , and eat and eat ! 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj padua affords this kindness , son xxmaj petruchio . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj padua affords nothing but what is kind . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj for both our sakes i would that word were true . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj now , for my life , xxmaj hortensio fears his widow . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj then never trust me if i be afeard . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxup you are very sensible , and yet you miss my sense : 
▁ i mean xxmaj hortensio is afeard of you . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj he that is giddy thinks the world turns round . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj roundly replied . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj mistress , how mean you that ? 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj thus i conceive by him . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj conceives by me ! xxmaj how likes xxmaj hortensio that ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj my widow says thus she conceives her tale . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj very well mended . xxmaj kiss him for that , good widow . 
▁ xxup katherina . ' he that is giddy thinks the world turns round . ' 
▁ i pray you tell me what you meant by that . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj your husband , being troubled with a shrew , 
▁ xxmaj measures my husband 's sorrow by his woe ; 
▁ xxmaj and now you know my meaning . 
▁ xxup katherina . a very mean meaning . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj right , i mean you . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj and i am mean , indeed , respecting you . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj to her , xxmaj kate ! 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj to her , widow ! 
▁ xxup petruchio . a hundred marks , my xxmaj kate does put her down . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj that 's my office . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj spoke like an officer- ha ' to thee , lad . 
▁ [ drinks to xxup hortensio ] 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj how likes xxmaj gremio these quick - witted folks ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj believe me , sir , they butt together well . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj head and butt ! xxmaj an hasty - witted body 
▁ xxmaj would say your head and butt were head and horn . 
▁ xxup vincentio . xxmaj ay , mistress bride , hath that awakened you ? 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj ay , but not frighted me ; therefore xxmaj i 'll sleep again . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nay , that you shall not ; since you have begun , 
▁ xxmaj have at you for a bitter jest or two . 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj am i your bird ? i mean to shift my bush , 
▁ xxmaj and then pursue me as you draw your bow . 
▁ xxmaj you are welcome all . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup bianca , xxup katherina , and xxup widow 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj she hath prevented me . xxmaj here , xxmaj signior xxmaj tranio , 
▁ xxmaj this bird you aim'd at , though you hit her not ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore a health to all that shot and miss'd . 
▁ xxup tranio . xxup o , sir , xxmaj lucentio slipp'd me like his greyhound , 
▁ xxmaj which runs himself , and catches for his master . 
▁ xxup petruchio . a good swift simile , but something currish . 
▁ xxup tranio . ' tis well , sir , that you hunted for yourself ; 
▁ ' tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxup o , xxup o , xxmaj petruchio ! xxmaj tranio hits you now . 
▁ xxup lucentio . i thank thee for that gird , good xxmaj tranio . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj confess , confess ; hath he not hit you here ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . ' a has a little gall'd me , i confess ; 
▁ xxmaj and , as the jest did glance away from me , 
▁ ' tis ten to one it maim'd you two outright . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj now , in good sadness , son xxmaj petruchio , 
▁ i think thou hast the veriest shrew of all . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj well , i say no ; and therefore , for assurance , 
▁ xxmaj let 's each one send unto his wife , 
▁ xxmaj and he whose wife is most obedient , 
▁ xxmaj to come at first when he doth send for her , 
▁ xxmaj shall win the wager which we will propose . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj content . xxmaj what 's the wager ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj twenty crowns . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj twenty crowns ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll venture so much of my hawk or hound , 
▁ xxmaj but twenty times so much upon my wife . 
▁ xxup lucentio . a hundred then . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj content . 
▁ xxup petruchio . a match ! ' tis done . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj who shall begin ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj that will xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj go , xxmaj biondello , bid your mistress come to me . 
▁ xxup biondello . i go . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj son , xxmaj i 'll be your half xxmaj bianca comes . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj i 'll have no halves ; xxmaj i 'll bear it all myself . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup biondello 

▁ xxmaj how now ! what news ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj sir , my mistress sends you word 
▁ xxmaj that she is busy and she can not come . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj how ! xxmaj she 's busy , and she can not come ! 
▁ xxmaj is that an answer ? 
▁ xxup gremio . xxmaj ay , and a kind one too . 
▁ xxmaj pray xxmaj god , sir , your wife send you not a worse . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i hope better . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj sirrah xxmaj biondello , go and entreat my wife 
▁ xxmaj to come to me forthwith . xxmaj exit xxup biondello 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxup o , ho ! entreat her ! 
▁ xxmaj nay , then she must needs come . 
▁ xxup hortensio . i am afraid , sir , 
▁ xxmaj do what you can , yours will not be entreated . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup biondello 

▁ xxmaj now , where 's my wife ? 
▁ xxup biondello . xxmaj she says you have some goodly jest in hand : 
▁ xxmaj she will not come ; she bids you come to her . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj worse and worse ; she will not come ! o vile , 
▁ xxmaj intolerable , not to be endur'd ! 
▁ xxmaj sirrah xxmaj grumio , go to your mistress ; 
▁ xxmaj say i command her come to me . xxmaj exit xxup grumio 
▁ xxup hortensio . i know her answer . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj she will not . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj the fouler fortune mine , and there an end . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup katherina 

▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj now , by my holidame , here comes xxmaj katherina ! 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj what is your sir , that you send for me ? 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj where is your sister , and xxmaj hortensio 's wife ? 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj they sit conferring by the parlour fire . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj go , fetch them hither ; if they deny to come . 
▁ xxmaj swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands . 
▁ xxmaj away , i say , and bring them hither straight . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup katherina 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj here is a wonder , if you talk of a wonder . 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj and so it is . i wonder what it bodes . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj marry , peace it bodes , and love , and quiet life , 
▁ xxmaj an awful rule , and right supremacy ; 
▁ xxmaj and , to be short , what not that 's sweet and happy . 
▁ xxup baptista . xxmaj now fair befall thee , good xxmaj petruchio ! 
▁ xxmaj the wager thou hast won ; and i will ad 
▁ xxmaj unto their losses twenty thousand crowns ; 
▁ xxmaj another dowry to another daughter , 
▁ xxmaj for she is chang'd , as she had never been . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj nay , i will win my wager better yet , 
▁ xxmaj and show more sign of her obedience , 
▁ xxmaj her new - built virtue and obedience . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup katherina with xxup bianca and xxup widow 

▁ xxmaj see where she comes , and brings your froward wives 
▁ xxmaj as prisoners to her womanly persuasion . 
▁ xxmaj katherine , that cap of yours becomes you not : 
▁ xxmaj off with that bauble , throw it underfoot . 
▁ [ katherina complies ] 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj lord , let me never have a cause to sigh 
▁ xxmaj till i be brought to such a silly pass ! 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj fie ! what a foolish duty call you this ? 
▁ xxup lucentio . i would your duty were as foolish too ; 
▁ xxmaj the wisdom of your duty , fair xxmaj bianca , 
▁ xxmaj hath cost me a hundred crowns since supper - time ! 
▁ xxup bianca . xxmaj the more fool you for laying on my duty . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj katherine , i charge thee , tell these headstrong women 
▁ xxmaj what duty they do owe their lords and husbands . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj come , come , you 're mocking ; we will have no telling . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj come on , i say ; and first begin with her . 
▁ xxup widow . xxmaj she shall not . 
▁ xxup petruchio . i say she shall . xxmaj and first begin with her . 
▁ xxup katherina . xxmaj fie , fie ! unknit that threatening unkind brow , 
▁ xxmaj and dart not scornful glances from those eyes 
▁ xxmaj to wound thy lord , thy king , thy governor . 
▁ xxmaj it blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads , 
▁ xxmaj confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds , 
▁ xxmaj and in no sense is meet or amiable . 
▁ a woman mov'd is like a fountain troubled- 
▁ xxmaj muddy , ill - seeming , thick , bereft of beauty ; 
▁ xxmaj and while it is so , none so dry or thirsty 
▁ xxmaj will deign to sip or touch one drop of it . 
▁ xxmaj thy husband is thy lord , thy life , thy keeper , 
▁ xxmaj thy head , thy sovereign ; one that cares for thee , 
▁ xxmaj and for thy maintenance commits his body 
▁ xxmaj to painful labour both by sea and land , 
▁ xxmaj to watch the night in storms , the day in cold , 
▁ xxmaj whilst thou liest warm at home , secure and safe ; 
▁ xxmaj and craves no other tribute at thy hands 
▁ xxmaj but love , fair looks , and true obedience- 
▁ xxmaj too little payment for so great a debt . 
▁ xxmaj such duty as the subject owes the prince , 
▁ xxmaj even such a woman oweth to her husband ; 
▁ xxmaj and when she is froward , peevish , sullen , sour , 
▁ xxmaj and not obedient to his honest will , 
▁ xxmaj what is she but a foul contending rebel 
▁ xxmaj and graceless traitor to her loving lord ? 
▁ i am asham'd that women are so simple 
▁ xxmaj to offer war where they should kneel for peace ; 
▁ xxmaj or seek for rule , supremacy , and sway , 
▁ xxmaj when they are bound to serve , love , and obey . 
▁ xxmaj why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth , 
▁ xxmaj unapt to toll and trouble in the world , 
▁ xxmaj but that our soft conditions and our hearts 
▁ xxmaj should well agree with our external parts ? 
▁ xxmaj come , come , you froward and unable worins ! 
▁ xxmaj my mind hath been as big as one of yours , 
▁ xxmaj my heart as great , my reason haply more , 
▁ xxmaj to bandy word for word and frown for frown ; 
▁ xxmaj but now i see our lances are but straws , 
▁ xxmaj our strength as weak , our weakness past compare , 
▁ xxmaj that seeming to be most which we indeed least are . 
▁ xxmaj then vail your stomachs , for it is no boot , 
▁ xxmaj and place your hands below your husband 's foot ; 
▁ xxmaj in token of which duty , if he please , 
▁ xxmaj my hand is ready , may it do him ease . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj why , there 's a wench ! xxmaj come on , and kiss me , xxmaj kate . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj well , go thy ways , old lad , for thou shalt ha't . 
▁ xxup vincentio . ' tis a good hearing when children are toward . 
▁ xxup lucentio . xxmaj but a harsh hearing when women are froward . 
▁ xxup petruchio . xxmaj come , xxmaj kate , we 'll to bed . 
▁ xxmaj we three are married , but you two are sped . 
▁ [ to xxup lucentio ] ' twas i won the wager , though you hit the white ; 
▁ xxmaj and being a winner , xxmaj god give you good night ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup petruchio and xxup katherina 
▁ xxup hortensio . xxmaj now go thy ways ; thou hast tam'd a curst shrow . 
▁ xxup lucentio . ' tis a wonder , by your leave , she will be tam'd so . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1612 

 xxup the xxup tempest 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup alonso , xxmaj king of xxmaj naples 
▁ xxup sebastian , his brother 
▁ xxup prospero , the right xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan 
▁ xxup antonio , his brother , the usurping xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan 
▁ xxup ferdinand , son to the xxmaj king of xxmaj naples 
▁ xxup gonzalo , an honest old counsellor 

▁ xxmaj lords 
▁ xxup adrian 
▁ xxup francisco 
▁ xxup caliban , a savage and deformed slave 
▁ xxup trinculo , a jester 
▁ xxup stephano , a drunken butler 
▁ xxup master xxup of a xxup ship 
▁ xxup boatswain 
▁ xxup mariners 

▁ xxup miranda , daughter to xxmaj prospero 

▁ xxup ariel , an airy spirit 

▁ xxmaj spirits 
▁ xxup iris 
▁ xxup ceres 
▁ xxup juno 
▁ xxup nymphs 
▁ xxup reapers 
▁ xxmaj other xxmaj spirits attending on xxmaj prospero 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 a ship at sea ; afterwards an uninhabited island 



 xxup the xxup tempest 
 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj on a ship at sea ; a tempestuous noise of thunder and lightning heard 

 xxmaj enter a xxup shipmaster and a xxup boatswain 

▁ xxup master . xxmaj boatswain ! 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj here , master ; what cheer ? 
▁ xxup master . xxmaj good ! xxmaj speak to th ' mariners ; fall to't yarely , or 
▁ we run ourselves aground ; bestir , bestir . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mariners 

▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj heigh , my hearts ! cheerly , cheerly , my hearts ! 
▁ yare , yare ! xxmaj take in the topsail . xxmaj tend to th ' master 's 
▁ whistle . xxmaj blow till thou burst thy wind , if room enough . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup alonso , xxup sebastian , xxup antonio , xxup ferdinand 
▁ xxup gonzalo , and xxup others 

▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj good boatswain , have care . xxmaj where 's the master ? 
▁ xxmaj play the men . 
▁ xxup boatswain . i pray now , keep below . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj where is the master , boson ? 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj do you not hear him ? xxmaj you mar our labour ; 
▁ keep your cabins ; you do assist the storm . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj nay , good , be patient . 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj when the sea is . xxmaj hence ! xxmaj what cares these 
▁ roarers for the name of king ? xxmaj to cabin ! silence ! xxmaj trouble 
▁ us not . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj good , yet remember whom thou hast aboard . 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj none that i more love than myself . xxmaj you are 
▁ counsellor ; if you can command these elements to 
▁ silence , and work the peace of the present , we will not 
▁ hand a rope more . xxmaj use your authority ; if you can not , give 
▁ thanks you have liv'd so long , and make yourself ready 
▁ in your cabin for the mischance of the hour , if it so 
▁ hap.-cheerly , good hearts!-out of our way , i say . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gonzalo . i have great comfort from this fellow . xxmaj methinks 
▁ he hath no drowning mark upon him ; his complexion is 
▁ perfect gallows . xxmaj stand fast , good xxmaj fate , to his hanging ; 
▁ make the rope of his destiny our cable , for our own doth 
▁ little advantage . xxmaj if he be not born to be hang'd , our 
▁ case is miserable . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup boatswain 

▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj down with the topmast . xxmaj yare , lower , lower ! 
▁ xxmaj bring her to try wi ' th ' maincourse . [ a cry within ] a 
▁ plague upon this howling ! xxmaj they are louder than the 
▁ weather or our office . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup sebastian , xxup antonio , and xxup gonzalo 

▁ xxmaj yet again ! xxmaj what do you here ? xxmaj shall we give o'er , and 
▁ drown ? xxmaj have you a mind to sink ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . a pox o ' your throat , you bawling , blasphemous , 
▁ incharitable dog ! 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj work you , then . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj hang , cur ; hang , you whoreson , insolent noisemaker ; 
▁ we are less afraid to be drown'd than thou art . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj i 'll warrant him for drowning , though the ship were 
▁ no stronger than a nutshell , and as leaky as an unstanched 
▁ wench . 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj lay her a - hold , a - hold ; set her two courses ; off 
▁ to sea again ; lay her off . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup mariners , xxmaj wet 
▁ xxup mariners . xxmaj all lost ! to prayers , to prayers ! all lost ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj what , must our mouths be cold ? 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj the xxmaj king and xxmaj prince at prayers ! 
▁ xxmaj let 's assist them , 
▁ xxmaj for our case is as theirs . 
▁ xxup sebastian . i am out of patience . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj we are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards . 
▁ xxmaj this wide - chopp'd rascal - would thou mightst lie drowning 
▁ xxmaj the washing of ten tides ! 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj he 'll be hang'd yet , 
▁ xxmaj though every drop of water swear against it , 
▁ xxmaj and gape at wid'st to glut him . 
▁ [ a confused noise within : xxmaj mercy on us ! 
▁ xxmaj we split , we split ! xxmaj farewell , my wife and children ! 
▁ xxmaj farewell , brother ! xxmaj we split , we split , we split ! ] 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj let 's all sink wi ' th ' xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj let 's take leave of him . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup antonio and xxup sebastian 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj now would i give a thousand furlongs of sea for 
▁ an acre of barren ground - long heath , brown furze , any 
▁ thing . xxmaj the wills above be done , but i would fain die 
▁ dry death . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj the xxmaj island . xxmaj before xxup prospero 's cell 

 xxmaj enter xxup prospero and xxup miranda 

▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj if by your art , my dearest father , you have 
▁ xxmaj put the wild waters in this roar , allay them . 
▁ xxmaj the sky , it seems , would pour down stinking pitch , 
▁ xxmaj but that the sea , mounting to th ' welkin 's cheek , 
▁ xxmaj dashes the fire out . xxup o , i have suffered 
▁ xxmaj with those that i saw suffer ! a brave vessel , 
▁ xxmaj who had no doubt some noble creature in her , 
▁ xxmaj dash'd all to pieces ! xxup o , the cry did knock 
▁ xxmaj against my very heart ! xxmaj poor souls , they perish'd . 
▁ xxmaj had i been any god of power , i would 
▁ xxmaj have sunk the sea within the earth or ere 
▁ xxmaj it should the good ship so have swallow'd and 
▁ xxmaj the fraughting souls within her . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj be conected ; 
▁ xxmaj no more amazement ; tell your piteous heart 
▁ xxmaj there 's no harm done . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxup o , woe the day ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj no harm . 
▁ i have done nothing but in care of thee , 
▁ xxmaj of thee , my dear one , thee , my daughter , who 
▁ xxmaj art ignorant of what thou art , nought knowing 
▁ xxmaj of whence i am , nor that i am more better 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj prospero , master of a full poor cell , 
▁ xxmaj and thy no greater father . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj more to know 
▁ xxmaj did never meddle with my thoughts . 
▁ xxup prospero . ' tis time 
▁ i should inform thee farther . xxmaj lend thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj and pluck my magic garment from me . xxmaj so , 
▁ [ lays down his mantle ] 
▁ xxmaj lie there my art . xxmaj wipe thou thine eyes ; have comfort . 
▁ xxmaj the direful spectacle of the wreck , which touch'd 
▁ xxmaj the very virtue of compassion in thee , 
▁ i have with such provision in mine art 
▁ xxmaj so safely ordered that there is no soul- 
▁ xxmaj no , not so much perdition as an hair 
▁ xxmaj betid to any creature in the vessel 
▁ xxmaj which thou heard'st cry , which thou saw'st sink . 
▁ xxmaj sit down , for thou must now know farther . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj you have often 
▁ xxmaj begun to tell me what i am ; but stopp'd , 
▁ xxmaj and left me to a bootless inquisition , 
▁ xxmaj concluding ' stay ; not yet . ' 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj the hour 's now come ; 
▁ xxmaj the very minute bids thee ope thine ear . 
▁ xxmaj obey , and be attentive . xxmaj canst thou remember 
▁ a time before we came unto this cell ? 
▁ i do not think thou canst ; for then thou wast not 
▁ xxmaj out three years old . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj certainly , sir , i can . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj by what ? xxmaj by any other house , or person ? 
▁ xxmaj of any thing the image , tell me , that 
▁ xxmaj hath kept with thy remembrance ? 
▁ xxup miranda . ' tis far off , 
▁ xxmaj and rather like a dream than an assurance 
▁ xxmaj that my remembrance warrants . xxmaj had i not 
▁ xxmaj four , or five , women once , that tended me ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou hadst , and more , xxmaj miranda . xxmaj but how is it 
▁ xxmaj that this lives in thy mind ? xxmaj what seest thou else 
▁ xxmaj in the dark backward and abysm of time ? 
▁ xxmaj if thou rememb'rest aught , ere thou cam'st here , 
▁ xxmaj how thou cam'st here thou mayst . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj but that i do not . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj twelve year since , xxmaj miranda , twelve year since , 
▁ xxmaj thy father was the xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan , and 
▁ a prince of power . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj sir , are not you my father ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thy mother was a piece of virtue , and 
▁ xxmaj she said thou wast my daughter ; and thy father 
▁ xxmaj was xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan , and his only heir 
▁ xxmaj and princess no worse issued . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxup o , the heavens ! 
▁ xxmaj what foul play had we that we came from thence ? 
▁ xxmaj or blessed was't we did ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj both , both , my girl . 
▁ xxmaj by foul play , as thou say'st , were we heav'd thence ; 
▁ xxmaj but blessedly holp hither . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxup o , my heart bleeds 
▁ xxmaj to think o ' th ' teen that i have turn'd you to , 
▁ xxmaj which is from my remembrance . xxmaj please you , farther . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj my brother and thy uncle , call'd xxmaj antonio- 
▁ i pray thee , mark me that a brother should 
▁ xxmaj be so perfidious . xxmaj he , whom next thyself 
▁ xxmaj of all the world i lov'd , and to him put 
▁ xxmaj the manage of my state ; as at that time 
▁ xxmaj through all the signories it was the first , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj prospero the prime duke , being so reputed 
▁ xxmaj in dignity , and for the liberal arts 
▁ xxmaj without a parallel , those being all my study- 
▁ xxmaj the government i cast upon my brother 
▁ xxmaj and to my state grew stranger , being transported 
▁ xxmaj and rapt in secret studies . xxmaj thy false uncle- 
▁ xxmaj dost thou attend me ? 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj sir , most heedfully . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj being once perfected how to grant suits , 
▁ xxmaj how to deny them , who t ' advance , and who 
▁ xxmaj to trash for over - topping , new created 
▁ xxmaj the creatures that were mine , i say , or chang'd 'em , 
▁ xxmaj or else new form'd 'em ; having both the key 
▁ xxmaj of officer and office , set all hearts i ' th ' state 
▁ xxmaj to what tune pleas'd his ear ; that now he was 
▁ xxmaj the ivy which had hid my princely trunk 
▁ xxmaj and suck'd my verdure out on't . xxmaj thou attend'st not . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxup o , good sir , i do ! 
▁ xxup prospero . i pray thee , mark me . 
▁ i thus neglecting worldly ends , all dedicated 
▁ xxmaj to closeness and the bettering of my mind 
▁ xxmaj with that which , but by being so retir'd , 
▁ xxmaj o'er - priz'd all popular rate , in my false brother 
▁ xxmaj awak'd an evil nature ; and my trust , 
▁ xxmaj like a good parent , did beget of him 
▁ a falsehood , in its contrary as great 
▁ xxmaj as my trust was ; which had indeed no limit , 
▁ a confidence sans bound . xxmaj he being thus lorded , 
▁ xxmaj not only with what my revenue yielded , 
▁ xxmaj but what my power might else exact , like one 
▁ xxmaj who having into truth , by telling of it , 
▁ xxmaj made such a sinner of his memory , 
▁ xxmaj to credit his own lie - he did believe 
▁ xxmaj he was indeed the xxmaj duke ; out o ' th ' substitution , 
▁ xxmaj and executing th ' outward face of royalty 
▁ xxmaj with all prerogative . xxmaj hence his ambition growing- 
▁ xxmaj dost thou hear ? 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj your tale , sir , would cure deafness . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj to have no screen between this part he play'd 
▁ xxmaj and him he play'd it for , he needs will be 
▁ xxmaj absolute xxmaj milan . xxmaj me , poor man - my library 
▁ xxmaj was dukedom large enough - of temporal royalties 
▁ xxmaj he thinks me now incapable ; confederates , 
▁ xxmaj so dry he was for sway , wi ' th ' xxmaj king of xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj to give him annual tribute , do him homage , 
▁ xxmaj subject his coronet to his crown , and bend 
▁ xxmaj the dukedom , yet unbow'd - alas , poor xxmaj milan!- 
▁ xxmaj to most ignoble stooping . 
▁ xxup miranda . o the heavens ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj mark his condition , and th ' event , then tell me 
▁ xxmaj if this might be a brother . 
▁ xxup miranda . i should sin 
▁ xxmaj to think but nobly of my grandmother : 
▁ xxmaj good wombs have borne bad sons . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj now the condition : 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj king of xxmaj naples , being an enemy 
▁ xxmaj to me inveterate , hearkens my brother 's suit ; 
▁ xxmaj which was , that he , in lieu o ' th ' premises , 
▁ xxmaj of homage , and i know not how much tribute , 
▁ xxmaj should presently extirpate me and mine 
▁ xxmaj out of the dukedom , and confer fair xxmaj milan 
▁ xxmaj with all the honours on my brother . xxmaj whereon , 
▁ a treacherous army levied , one midnight 
▁ xxmaj fated to th ' purpose , did xxmaj antonio open 
▁ xxmaj the gates of xxmaj milan ; and , i ' th ' dead of darkness , 
▁ xxmaj the ministers for th ' purpose hurried thence 
▁ xxmaj me and thy crying self . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj alack , for pity ! 
▁ xxup i , not rememb'ring how i cried out then , 
▁ xxmaj will cry it o'er again ; it is a hint 
▁ xxmaj that wrings mine eyes to't . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj hear a little further , 
▁ xxmaj and then xxmaj i 'll bring thee to the present busines 
▁ xxmaj which now 's upon 's ; without the which this story 
▁ xxmaj were most impertinent . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj wherefore did they not 
▁ xxmaj that hour destroy us ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj well demanded , wench ! 
▁ xxmaj my tale provokes that question . xxmaj dear , they durst not , 
▁ xxmaj so dear the love my people bore me ; nor set 
▁ a mark so bloody on the business ; but 
▁ xxmaj with colours fairer painted their foul ends . 
▁ xxmaj in few , they hurried us aboard a bark ; 
▁ xxmaj bore us some leagues to sea , where they prepared 
▁ a rotten carcass of a butt , not rigg'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor tackle , sail , nor mast ; the very rats 
▁ xxmaj instinctively have quit it . xxmaj there they hoist us , 
▁ xxmaj to cry to th ' sea , that roar'd to us ; to sigh 
▁ xxmaj to th ' winds , whose pity , sighing back again , 
▁ xxmaj did us but loving wrong . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj alack , what trouble 
▁ xxmaj was i then to you ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxup o , a cherubin 
▁ xxmaj thou wast that did preserve me ! xxmaj thou didst smile , 
▁ xxmaj infused with a fortitude from heaven , 
▁ xxmaj when i have deck'd the sea with drops full salt , 
▁ xxmaj under my burden groan'd ; which rais'd in me 
▁ xxmaj an undergoing stomach , to bear up 
▁ xxmaj against what should ensue . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj how came we ashore ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj by xxmaj providence divine . 
▁ xxmaj some food we had and some fresh water that 
▁ a noble xxmaj neapolitan , xxmaj gonzalo , 
▁ xxmaj out of his charity , who being then appointed 
▁ xxmaj master of this design , did give us , with 
▁ xxmaj rich garments , linens , stuffs , and necessaries , 
▁ xxmaj which since have steaded much ; so , of his gentleness , 
▁ xxmaj knowing i lov'd my books , he furnish'd me 
▁ xxmaj from mine own library with volumes that 
▁ i prize above my dukedom . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj would i might 
▁ xxmaj but ever see that man ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj now i arise . [ puts on his mantle ] 
▁ xxmaj sit still , and hear the last of our sea - sorrow . 
▁ xxmaj here in this island we arriv'd ; and here 
▁ xxmaj have xxup i , thy schoolmaster , made thee more profit 
▁ xxmaj than other princess ' can , that have more time 
▁ xxmaj for vainer hours , and tutors not so careful . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj heavens thank you for't ! xxmaj and now , i pray you , 
▁ sir , 
▁ xxmaj for still ' tis beating in my mind , your reason 
▁ xxmaj for raising this sea - storm ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj know thus far forth : 
▁ xxmaj by accident most strange , bountiful xxmaj fortune , 
▁ xxmaj now my dear lady , hath mine enemies 
▁ xxmaj brought to this shore ; and by my prescience 
▁ i find my zenith doth depend upon 
▁ a most auspicious star , whose influence 
▁ xxmaj if now i court not , but omit , my fortunes 
▁ xxmaj will ever after droop . xxmaj here cease more questions ; 
▁ xxmaj thou art inclin'd to sleep ; ' tis a good dullness , 
▁ xxmaj and give it way . i know thou canst not choose . 
▁ [ miranda sleeps ] 
▁ xxmaj come away , servant ; come ; i am ready now . 
▁ xxmaj approach , my xxmaj ariel . xxmaj come . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ariel 

▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj all hail , great master ! grave sir , hail ! i come 
▁ xxmaj to answer thy best pleasure ; be't to fly , 
▁ xxmaj to swim , to dive into the fire , to ride 
▁ xxmaj on the curl'd clouds . xxmaj to thy strong bidding task 
▁ xxmaj ariel and all his quality . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj hast thou , spirit , 
▁ xxmaj perform'd to point the tempest that i bade thee ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj to every article . 
▁ i boarded the xxmaj king 's ship ; now on the beak , 
▁ xxmaj now in the waist , the deck , in every cabin , 
▁ i flam'd amazement . xxmaj sometime xxmaj i 'd divide , 
▁ xxmaj and burn in many places ; on the topmast , 
▁ xxmaj the yards , and bowsprit , would i flame distinctly , 
▁ xxmaj then meet and join xxmaj jove 's lightning , the precursors 
▁ xxup o ' th ' dreadful thunder - claps , more momentary 
▁ xxmaj and sight - outrunning were not ; the fire and cracks 
▁ xxmaj of sulphurous roaring the most mighty xxmaj neptune 
▁ xxmaj seem to besiege , and make his bold waves tremble , 
▁ xxmaj yea , his dread trident shake . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj my brave spirit ! 
▁ xxmaj who was so firm , so constant , that this coil 
▁ xxmaj would not infect his reason ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj not a soul 
▁ xxmaj but felt a fever of the mad , and play'd 
▁ xxmaj some tricks of desperation . xxmaj all but mariners 
▁ xxmaj plung'd in the foaming brine , and quit the vessel , 
▁ xxmaj then all afire with me ; the xxmaj king 's son , xxmaj ferdinand , 
▁ xxmaj with hair up - staring - then like reeds , not hair- 
▁ xxmaj was the first man that leapt ; cried ' hell is empty , 
▁ xxmaj and all the devils are here . ' 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj why , that 's my spirit ! 
▁ xxmaj but was not this nigh shore ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj close by , my master . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj but are they , xxmaj ariel , safe ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj not a hair perish'd ; 
▁ xxmaj on their sustaining garments not a blemish , 
▁ xxmaj but fresher than before ; and , as thou bad'st me , 
▁ xxmaj in troops i have dispers'd them 'bout the isle . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's son have i landed by himself , 
▁ xxmaj whom i left cooling of the air with sighs 
▁ xxmaj in an odd angle of the isle , and sitting , 
▁ xxmaj his arms in this sad knot . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj of the xxmaj king 's ship , 
▁ xxmaj the mariners , say how thou hast dispos'd , 
▁ xxmaj and all the rest o ' th ' fleet ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj safely in harbour 
▁ xxmaj is the xxmaj king 's ship ; in the deep nook , where once 
▁ xxmaj thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew 
▁ xxmaj from the still - vex'd xxmaj bermoothes , there she 's hid ; 
▁ xxmaj the mariners all under hatches stowed , 
▁ xxmaj who , with a charm join'd to their suff'red labour , 
▁ i have left asleep ; and for the rest o ' th ' fleet , 
▁ xxmaj which i dispers'd , they all have met again , 
▁ xxmaj and are upon the xxmaj mediterranean flote 
▁ xxmaj bound sadly home for xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj supposing that they saw the xxmaj king 's ship wreck'd , 
▁ xxmaj and his great person perish . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj ariel , thy charge 
▁ xxmaj exactly is perform'd ; but there 's more work . 
▁ xxmaj what is the time o ' th ' day ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj past the mid season . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj at least two glasses . xxmaj the time ' twixt six and now 
▁ xxmaj must by us both be spent most preciously . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj is there more toil ? xxmaj since thou dost give me pains , 
▁ xxmaj let me remember thee what thou hast promis'd , 
▁ xxmaj which is not yet perform'd me . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj how now , moody ? 
▁ xxmaj what is't thou canst demand ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj my liberty . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj before the time be out ? xxmaj no more ! 
▁ xxup ariel . i prithee , 
▁ xxmaj remember i have done thee worthy service , 
▁ xxmaj told thee no lies , made thee no mistakings , serv'd 
▁ xxmaj without or grudge or grumblings . xxmaj thou didst promise 
▁ xxmaj to bate me a full year . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj dost thou forget 
▁ xxmaj from what a torment i did free thee ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou dost ; and think'st it much to tread the ooze 
▁ xxmaj of the salt deep , 
▁ xxmaj to run upon the sharp wind of the north , 
▁ xxmaj to do me business in the veins o ' th ' earth 
▁ xxmaj when it is bak'd with frost . 
▁ xxup ariel . i do not , sir . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou liest , malignant thing . xxmaj hast thou forgot 
▁ xxmaj the foul witch xxmaj sycorax , who with age and envy 
▁ xxmaj was grown into a hoop ? xxmaj hast thou forgot her ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj no , sir . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou hast . xxmaj where was she born ? 
▁ xxmaj speak ; tell me . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj sir , in xxmaj argier . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxup o , was she so ? i must 
▁ xxmaj once in a month recount what thou hast been , 
▁ xxmaj which thou forget'st . xxmaj this damn'd witch xxmaj sycorax , 
▁ xxmaj for mischiefs manifold , and sorceries terrible 
▁ xxmaj to enter human hearing , from xxmaj argier 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st was banish'd ; for one thing she did 
▁ xxmaj they would not take her life . xxmaj is not this true ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj ay , sir .