xxbos xxup prospero . xxmaj this blue - ey'd hag was hither brought with child , 
▁ xxmaj and here was left by th'sailors . xxmaj thou , my slave , 
▁ xxmaj as thou report'st thyself , wast then her servant ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for thou wast a spirit too delicate 
▁ xxmaj to act her earthy and abhorr'd commands , 
▁ xxmaj refusing her grand hests , she did confine thee , 
▁ xxmaj by help of her more potent ministers , 
▁ xxmaj and in her most unmitigable rage , 
▁ xxmaj into a cloven pine ; within which rift 
▁ xxmaj imprison'd thou didst painfully remain 
▁ a dozen years ; within which space she died , 
▁ xxmaj and left thee there , where thou didst vent thy groans 
▁ xxmaj as fast as mill - wheels strike . xxmaj then was this island- 
▁ xxmaj save for the son that she did litter here , 
▁ a freckl'd whelp , hag - born - not honour'd with 
▁ a human shape . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj yes , xxmaj caliban her son . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj dull thing , i say so ; he , that xxmaj caliban 
▁ xxmaj whom now i keep in service . xxmaj thou best know'st 
▁ xxmaj what torment i did find thee in ; thy groans 
▁ xxmaj did make wolves howl , and penetrate the breasts 
▁ xxmaj of ever - angry bears ; it was a torment 
▁ xxmaj to lay upon the damn'd , which xxmaj sycorax 
▁ xxmaj could not again undo . xxmaj it was mine art , 
▁ xxmaj when i arriv'd and heard thee , that made gape 
▁ xxmaj the pine , and let thee out . 
▁ xxup ariel . i thank thee , master . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj if thou more murmur'st , i will rend an oak 
▁ xxmaj and peg thee in his knotty entrails , till 
▁ xxmaj thou hast howl'd away twelve winters . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj pardon , master ; 
▁ i will be correspondent to command , 
▁ xxmaj and do my spriting gently . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj do so ; and after two days 
▁ i will discharge thee . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj that 's my noble master ! 
▁ xxmaj what shall i do ? xxmaj say what . xxmaj what shall i do ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj go make thyself like a nymph o ' th ' sea ; be subject 
▁ xxmaj to no sight but thine and mine , invisible 
▁ xxmaj to every eyeball else . xxmaj go take this shape , 
▁ xxmaj and hither come in ' t. xxmaj go , hence with diligence ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup ariel 
▁ xxmaj awake , dear heart , awake ; thou hast slept well ; 
▁ xxmaj awake . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj the strangeness of your story put 
▁ xxmaj heaviness in me . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj shake it off . xxmaj come on , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll visit xxmaj caliban , my slave , who never 
▁ xxmaj yields us kind answer . 
▁ xxup miranda . ' tis a villain , sir , 
▁ i do not love to look on . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj but as ' tis , 
▁ xxmaj we can not miss him : he does make our fire , 
▁ xxmaj fetch in our wood , and serves in offices 
▁ xxmaj that profit us . xxmaj what ho ! slave ! xxmaj caliban ! 
▁ xxmaj thou earth , thou ! xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxup caliban . [ xxmaj within ] xxmaj there 's wood enough within . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj come forth , i say ; there 's other business for thee . 
▁ xxmaj come , thou tortoise ! when ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ariel like a water - nymph 

▁ xxmaj fine apparition ! xxmaj my quaint xxmaj ariel , 
▁ xxmaj hark in thine ear . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj my lord , it shall be done . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou poisonous slave , got by the devil himself 
▁ xxmaj upon thy wicked dam , come forth ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caliban 

▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj as wicked dew as e'er my mother brush'd 
▁ xxmaj with raven 's feather from unwholesome fen 
▁ xxmaj drop on you both ! a south - west blow on ye 
▁ xxmaj and blister you all o'er ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj for this , be sure , to - night thou shalt have cramps , 
▁ xxmaj side - stitches that shall pen thy breath up ; urchins 
▁ xxmaj shall , for that vast of night that they may work , 
▁ xxmaj all exercise on thee ; thou shalt be pinch'd 
▁ xxmaj as thick as honeycomb , each pinch more stinging 
▁ xxmaj than bees that made 'em . 
▁ xxup caliban . i must eat my dinner . 
▁ xxmaj this island 's mine , by xxmaj sycorax my mother , 
▁ xxmaj which thou tak'st from me . xxmaj when thou cam'st first , 
▁ xxmaj thou strok'st me and made much of me , wouldst give me 
▁ xxmaj water with berries in't , and teach me how 
▁ xxmaj to name the bigger light , and how the less , 
▁ xxmaj that burn by day and night ; and then i lov'd thee , 
▁ xxmaj and show'd thee all the qualities o ' th ' isle , 
▁ xxmaj the fresh springs , brine - pits , barren place and fertile . 
▁ xxmaj curs'd be i that did so ! xxmaj all the charms 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj sycorax , toads , beetles , bats , light on you ! 
▁ xxmaj for i am all the subjects that you have , 
▁ xxmaj which first was mine own king ; and here you sty me 
▁ xxmaj in this hard rock , whiles you do keep from me 
▁ xxmaj the rest o ' th ' island . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou most lying slave , 
▁ xxmaj whom stripes may move , not kindness ! i have us'd thee , 
▁ xxmaj filth as thou art , with human care , and lodg'd thee 
▁ xxmaj in mine own cell , till thou didst seek to violate 
▁ xxmaj the honour of my child . 
▁ xxup caliban . o ho , o ho ! xxmaj would't had been done . 
▁ xxmaj thou didst prevent me ; i had peopl'd else 
▁ xxmaj this isle with xxmaj calibans . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj abhorred slave , 
▁ xxmaj which any print of goodness wilt not take , 
▁ xxmaj being capable of all ill ! i pitied thee , 
▁ xxmaj took pains to make thee speak , taught thee each hour 
▁ xxmaj one thing or other . xxmaj when thou didst not , savage , 
▁ xxmaj know thine own meaning , but wouldst gabble like 
▁ a thing most brutish , i endow'd thy purposes 
▁ xxmaj with words that made them known . xxmaj but thy vile race , 
▁ xxmaj though thou didst learn , had that in't which good natures 
▁ xxmaj could not abide to be with ; therefore wast thou 
▁ xxmaj deservedly confin'd into this rock , who hadst 
▁ xxmaj deserv'd more than a prison . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj you taught me language , and my profit on't 
▁ xxmaj is , i know how to curse . xxmaj the red plague rid you 
▁ xxmaj for learning me your language ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj hag - seed , hence ! 
▁ xxmaj fetch us in fuel . xxmaj and be quick , thou ' rt best , 
▁ xxmaj to answer other business . xxmaj shrug'st thou , malice ? 
▁ xxmaj if thou neglect'st , or dost unwillingly 
▁ xxmaj what i command , xxmaj i 'll rack thee with old cramps , 
▁ xxmaj fill all thy bones with aches , make thee roar , 
▁ xxmaj that beasts shall tremble at thy din . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj no , pray thee . 
▁ [ aside ] i must obey . xxmaj his art is of such pow'r , 
▁ xxmaj it would control my dam 's god , xxmaj setebos , 
▁ xxmaj and make a vassal of him . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj so , slave ; hence ! xxmaj exit xxup caliban 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ariel invisible , playing ad singing ; 
▁ xxup ferdinand following 
▁
▁ xxup ariel 's xxup song . 
▁ xxmaj come unto these yellow sands , 
▁ xxmaj and then take hands ; 
▁ xxmaj curtsied when you have and kiss'd , 
▁ xxmaj the wild waves whist , 
▁ xxmaj foot it featly here and there , 
▁ xxmaj and , sweet sprites , the burden bear . 
▁ xxmaj hark , hark ! 
▁ [ burden dispersedly : xxmaj bow - wow . ] 
▁ xxmaj the watch dogs bark . 
▁ [ burden dispersedly : xxmaj bow - wow . ] 
▁ xxmaj hark , hark ! i hear 
▁ xxmaj the strain of strutting chanticleer 
▁ xxmaj cry , xxmaj cock - a - diddle - dow . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj where should this music be ? xxup i ' th ' air or th ' 
▁ earth ? 
▁ xxmaj it sounds no more ; and sure it waits upon 
▁ xxmaj some god o ' th ' island . xxmaj sitting on a bank , 
▁ xxmaj weeping again the xxmaj king my father 's wreck , 
▁ xxmaj this music crept by me upon the waters , 
▁ xxmaj allaying both their fury and my passion 
▁ xxmaj with its sweet air ; thence i have follow'd it , 
▁ xxmaj or it hath drawn me rather . xxmaj but ' tis gone . 
▁ xxmaj no , it begins again . 

▁ xxup ariel 's xxup song 
▁ xxmaj full fathom five thy father lies ; 
▁ xxmaj of his bones are coral made ; 
▁ xxmaj those are pearls that were his eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj nothing of him that doth fade 
▁ xxmaj but doth suffer a sea - change 
▁ xxmaj into something rich and strange . 
▁ xxmaj sea - nymphs hourly ring his knell : 
▁ [ burden : xxmaj ding - dong . ] 
▁ xxmaj hark ! now i hear them - ding - dong bell . 

▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj the ditty does remember my drown'd father . 
▁ xxmaj this is no mortal business , nor no sound 
▁ xxmaj that the earth owes . i hear it now above me . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj the fringed curtains of thine eye advance , 
▁ xxmaj and say what thou seest yond . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj what is't ? a spirit ? 
▁ xxmaj lord , how it looks about ! xxmaj believe me , sir , 
▁ xxmaj it carries a brave form . xxmaj but ' tis a spirit . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj no , wench ; it eats and sleeps and hath such senses 
▁ xxmaj as we have , such . xxmaj this gallant which thou seest 
▁ xxmaj was in the wreck ; and but he 's something stain'd 
▁ xxmaj with grief , that 's beauty 's canker , thou mightst call him 
▁ a goodly person . xxmaj he hath lost his fellows , 
▁ xxmaj and strays about to find 'em . 
▁ xxup miranda . i might call him 
▁ a thing divine ; for nothing natural 
▁ i ever saw so noble . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj it goes on , i see , 
▁ xxmaj as my soul prompts it . xxmaj spirit , fine spirit ! xxmaj i 'll free thee 
▁ xxmaj within two days for this . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj most sure , the goddess 
▁ xxmaj on whom these airs attend ! xxmaj vouchsafe my pray'r 
▁ xxmaj may know if you remain upon this island ; 
▁ xxmaj and that you will some good instruction give 
▁ xxmaj how i may bear me here . xxmaj my prime request , 
▁ xxmaj which i do last pronounce , is , o you wonder ! 
▁ xxmaj if you be maid or no ? 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj no wonder , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj but certainly a maid . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj my language ? xxmaj heavens ! 
▁ i am the best of them that speak this speech , 
▁ xxmaj were i but where ' tis spoken . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj how ? the best ? 
▁ xxmaj what wert thou , if the xxmaj king of xxmaj naples heard thee ? 
▁ xxup ferdinand . a single thing , as i am now , that wonders 
▁ xxmaj to hear thee speak of xxmaj naples . xxmaj he does hear me ; 
▁ xxmaj and that he does i weep . xxmaj myself am xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj who with mine eyes , never since at ebb , beheld 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king my father wreck'd . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj alack , for mercy ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj yes , faith , and all his lords , the xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan 
▁ xxmaj and his brave son being twain . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj the xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan 
▁ xxmaj and his more braver daughter could control thee , 
▁ xxmaj if now ' twere fit to do't . xxmaj at the first sight 
▁ xxmaj they have chang'd eyes . xxmaj delicate xxmaj ariel , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll set thee free for this . [ to xxup ferdinand ] a word , good 
▁ sir ; 
▁ i fear you have done yourself some wrong ; a word . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj why speaks my father so ungently ? xxmaj this 
▁ xxmaj is the third man that e'er i saw ; the first 
▁ xxmaj that e'er i sigh'd for . xxmaj pity move my father 
▁ xxmaj to be inclin'd my way ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxup o , if a virgin , 
▁ xxmaj and your affection not gone forth , xxmaj i 'll make you 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen of xxmaj naples . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj soft , xxmaj sir ! one word more . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj they are both in either 's pow'rs ; but this swift 
▁ busines 
▁ i must uneasy make , lest too light winning 
▁ xxmaj make the prize light . [ to xxup ferdinand ] xxmaj one word more ; i 
▁ charge thee 
▁ xxmaj that thou attend me ; thou dost here usurp 
▁ xxmaj the name thou ow'st not ; and hast put thyself 
▁ xxmaj upon this island as a spy , to win it 
▁ xxmaj from me , the lord on't . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj no , as i am a man . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj there 's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple . 
▁ xxmaj if the ill spirit have so fair a house , 
▁ xxmaj good things will strive to dwell with't . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj follow me . 
▁ xxmaj speak not you for him ; he 's a traitor . xxmaj come ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll manacle thy neck and feet together . 
▁ xxmaj sea - water shalt thou drink ; thy food shall be 
▁ xxmaj the fresh - brook mussels , wither'd roots , and husks 
▁ xxmaj wherein the acorn cradled . xxmaj follow . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj no ; 
▁ i will resist such entertainment till 
▁ xxmaj mine enemy has more power . 
▁ [ he draws , and is charmed from moving ] 
▁ xxup miranda . o dear father , 
▁ xxmaj make not too rash a trial of him , for 
▁ xxmaj he 's gentle , and not fearful . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj what , i say , 
▁ xxmaj my foot my tutor ? xxmaj put thy sword up , traitor ; 
▁ xxmaj who mak'st a show but dar'st not strike , thy conscience 
▁ xxmaj is so possess'd with guilt . xxmaj come from thy ward ; 
▁ xxmaj for i can here disarm thee with this stick 
▁ xxmaj and make thy weapon drop . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj beseech you , father ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj hence ! xxmaj hang not on my garments . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj sir , have pity ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be his surety . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj silence ! xxmaj one word more 
▁ xxmaj shall make me chide thee , if not hate thee . xxmaj what ! 
▁ xxmaj an advocate for an impostor ! hush ! 
▁ xxmaj thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he , 
▁ xxmaj having seen but him and xxmaj caliban . xxmaj foolish wench ! 
▁ xxmaj to th ' most of men this is a xxmaj caliban , 
▁ xxmaj and they to him are angels . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj my affections 
▁ xxmaj are then most humble ; i have no ambition 
▁ xxmaj to see a goodlier man . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj come on ; obey . 
▁ xxmaj thy nerves are in their infancy again , 
▁ xxmaj and have no vigour in them . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj so they are ; 
▁ xxmaj my spirits , as in a dream , are all bound up . 
▁ xxmaj my father 's loss , the weakness which i feel , 
▁ xxmaj the wreck of all my friends , nor this man 's threats 
▁ xxmaj to whom i am subdu'd , are but light to me , 
▁ xxmaj might i but through my prison once a day 
▁ xxmaj behold this maid . xxmaj all corners else o ' th ' earth 
▁ xxmaj let liberty make use of ; space enough 
▁ xxmaj have i in such a prison . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj it works . [ to xxup ferdinand ] xxmaj come on.- 
▁ xxmaj thou hast done well , fine xxmaj ariel ! [ to xxup ferdinand ] xxmaj follow 
▁ me . 
▁ [ to xxup ariel ] xxmaj hark what thou else shalt do me . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj be of comfort ; 
▁ xxmaj my father 's of a better nature , sir , 
▁ xxmaj than he appears by speech ; this is unwonted 
▁ xxmaj which now came from him . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ to xxup ariel ] xxmaj thou shalt be as free 
▁ xxmaj as mountain winds ; but then exactly do 
▁ xxmaj all points of my command . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj to th ' syllable . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ to xxup ferdinand ] xxmaj come , follow . [ to xxup miranda ] 
▁ xxmaj speak not for him . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj another part of the island 

 xxmaj enter xxup alonso , xxup sebastian , xxup antonio , xxup gonzalo , xxup adrian , xxup francisco , and xxup others 

▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj beseech you , sir , be merry ; you have cause , 
▁ xxmaj so have we all , of joy ; for our escape 
▁ xxmaj is much beyond our loss . xxmaj our hint of woe 
▁ xxmaj is common ; every day , some sailor 's wife , 
▁ xxmaj the masters of some merchant , and the merchant , 
▁ xxmaj have just our theme of woe ; but for the miracle , 
▁ i mean our preservation , few in millions 
▁ xxmaj can speak like us . xxmaj then wisely , good sir , weigh 
▁ xxmaj our sorrow with our comfort . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj prithee , peace . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj he receives comfort like cold porridge . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj the visitor will not give him o'er so . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj look , he 's winding up the watch of his wit ; by 
▁ and by it will strike . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj sir- 
▁ xxup sebastian . one - tell . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj when every grief is entertain'd that 's offer'd , 
▁ xxmaj comes to th ' entertainer- 
▁ xxup sebastian . a dollar . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj dolour comes to him , indeed ; you have spoken 
▁ truer than you purpos'd . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj you have taken it wiselier than i meant you 
▁ should . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj therefore , my lord- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj fie , what a spendthrift is he of his tongue ! 
▁ xxup alonso . i prithee , spare . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj well , i have done ; but yet- 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj he will be talking . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj which , of he or xxmaj adrian , for a good wager , first 
▁ begins to crow ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj the old cock . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj the cock'rel . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj done . xxmaj the wager ? 
▁ xxup antonio . a laughter . 
▁ xxup sebastian . a match ! 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj though this island seem to be desert- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj so , you 're paid . 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj uninhabitable , and almost inaccessible- 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj yet- 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj yet- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj he could not miss't . 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj it must needs be of subtle , tender , and delicate 
▁ temperance . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj temperance was a delicate wench . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj ay , and a subtle ; as he most learnedly 
▁ deliver'd . 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj the air breathes upon us here most sweetly . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj as if it had lungs , and rotten ones . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj or , as ' twere perfum'd by a fen . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj here is everything advantageous to life . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj true ; save means to live . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj of that there 's none , or little . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj how lush and lusty the grass looks ! how green ! 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj the ground indeed is tawny . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj with an eye of green in't . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj he misses not much . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj no ; he doth but mistake the truth totally . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj but the rarity of it is , which is indeed almost 
▁ beyond credit- 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj as many vouch'd rarities are . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj that our garments , being , as they were , drench'd 
▁ in the sea , hold , notwithstanding , their freshness and 
▁ glosses , being rather new - dy'd , than stain'd with salt 
▁ water . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj if but one of his pockets could speak , would it 
▁ not say he lies ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj ay , or very falsely pocket up his report . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj methinks our garments are now as fresh as when 
▁ we put them on first in xxmaj afric , at the marriage of the 
▁ xxmaj king 's fair daughter xxmaj claribel to the xxmaj king of xxmaj tunis . 
▁ xxup sebastian . ' twas a sweet marriage , and we prosper well in 
▁ our return . 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj tunis was never grac'd before with such a paragon 
▁ to their queen . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj not since widow xxmaj dido 's time . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj widow ! a pox o ' that ! xxmaj how came that ' widow ' 
▁ in ? xxmaj widow xxmaj dido ! 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj what if he had said ' widower xxmaj aeneas ' too ? 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj lord , how you take it ! 
▁ xxup adrian . ' widow xxmaj dido ' said you ? xxmaj you make me study of 
▁ that . xxmaj she was of xxmaj carthage , not of xxmaj tunis . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj this xxmaj tunis , sir , was xxmaj carthage . 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj carthage ? 
▁ xxup gonzalo . i assure you , xxmaj carthage . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj his word is more than the miraculous harp . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj he hath rais'd the wall , and houses too . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj what impossible matter will he make easy next ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . i think he will carry this island home in his 
▁ pocket , and give it his son for an apple . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and , sowing the kernels of it in the sea , bring 
▁ forth more islands . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj why , in good time . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj sir , we were talking that our garments seem now 
▁ as fresh as when we were at xxmaj tunis at the marriage of 
▁ your daughter , who is now xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and the rarest that e'er came there . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj bate , i beseech you , widow xxmaj dido . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxup o , widow xxmaj dido ! xxmaj ay , widow xxmaj dido . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj is not , sir , my doublet as fresh as the first day i 
▁ wore it ? i mean , in a sort . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj that ' sort ' was well fish'd for . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj when i wore it at your daughter 's marriage ? 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj you cram these words into mine ears against 
▁ xxmaj the stomach of my sense . xxmaj would i had never 
▁ xxmaj married my daughter there ; for , coming thence , 
▁ xxmaj my son is lost ; and , in my rate , she too , 
▁ xxmaj who is so far from xxmaj italy removed 
▁ i ne'er again shall see her . o thou mine heir 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj naples and of xxmaj milan , what strange fish 
▁ xxmaj hath made his meal on thee ? 
▁ xxup francisco . xxmaj sir , he may live ; 
▁ i saw him beat the surges under him , 
▁ xxmaj and ride upon their backs ; he trod the water , 
▁ xxmaj whose enmity he flung aside , and breasted 
▁ xxmaj the surge most swoln that met him ; his bold head 
▁ ' bove the contentious waves he kept , and oared 
▁ xxmaj himself with his good arms in lusty stroke 
▁ xxmaj to th ' shore , that o'er his wave - worn basis bowed , 
▁ xxmaj as stooping to relieve him . i not doubt 
▁ xxmaj he came alive to land . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj no , no , he 's gone . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj sir , you may thank yourself for this great loss , 
▁ xxmaj that would not bless our xxmaj europe with your daughter , 
▁ xxmaj but rather lose her to an xxmaj african ; 
▁ xxmaj where she , at least , is banish'd from your eye , 
▁ xxmaj who hath cause to wet the grief on't . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj prithee , peace . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj you were kneel'd to , and importun'd otherwise 
▁ xxmaj by all of us ; and the fair soul herself 
▁ xxmaj weigh'd between loathness and obedience at 
▁ xxmaj which end o ' th ' beam should bow . xxmaj we have lost your son , 
▁ i fear , for ever . xxmaj milan and xxmaj naples have 
▁ xxmaj moe widows in them of this business ' making , 
▁ xxmaj than we bring men to comfort them ; 
▁ xxmaj the fault 's your own . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj so is the dear'st o ' th ' loss . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj my lord xxmaj sebastian , 
▁ xxmaj the truth you speak doth lack some gentleness , 
▁ xxmaj and time to speak it in ; you rub the sore , 
▁ xxmaj when you should bring the plaster . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj very well . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and most chirurgeonly . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj it is foul weather in us all , good sir , 
▁ xxmaj when you are cloudy . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj foul weather ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj very foul . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj had i plantation of this isle , my lord- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj he 'd sow ' t with nettle - seed . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj or docks , or mallows . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj and were the king on't , what would i do ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj scape being drunk for want of wine . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxup i ' th ' commonwealth i would by contraries 
▁ xxmaj execute all things ; for no kind of traffic 
▁ xxmaj would i admit ; no name of magistrate ; 
▁ xxmaj letters should not be known ; riches , poverty , 
▁ xxmaj and use of service , none ; contract , succession , 
▁ xxmaj bourn , bound of land , tilth , vineyard , none ; 
▁ xxmaj no use of metal , corn , or wine , or oil ; 
▁ xxmaj no occupation ; all men idle , all ; 
▁ xxmaj and women too , but innocent and pure ; 
▁ xxmaj no sovereignty- 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj yet he would be king on't . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj the latter end of his commonwealth forgets the 
▁ beginning . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj all things in common nature should produce 
▁ xxmaj without sweat or endeavour . xxmaj treason , felony , 
▁ xxmaj sword , pike , knife , gun , or need of any engine , 
▁ xxmaj would i not have ; but nature should bring forth , 
▁ xxmaj of it own kind , all foison , all abundance , 
▁ xxmaj to feed my innocent people . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj no marrying ' mong his subjects ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj none , man ; all idle ; whores and knaves . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . i would with such perfection govern , sir , 
▁ xxup t ' excel the golden age . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj save his xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj long live xxmaj gonzalo ! 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj and - do you mark me , sir ? 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj prithee , no more ; thou dost talk nothing to me . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . i do well believe your xxmaj highness ; and did it to 
▁ minister occasion to these gentlemen , who are of such 
▁ sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh 
▁ at nothing . 
▁ xxup antonio . ' twas you we laugh'd at . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to 
▁ you ; so you may continue , and laugh at nothing still . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj what a blow was there given ! 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj an it had not fall'n flat - long . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj you are gentlemen of brave mettle ; you would 
▁ lift the moon out of her sphere , if she would continue 
▁ in it five weeks without changing . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ariel , invisible , playing solemn music 

▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj we would so , and then go a - bat - fowling . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj nay , good my lord , be not angry . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj no , i warrant you ; i will not adventure my 
▁ discretion so weakly . xxmaj will you laugh me asleep , for i am 
▁ very heavy ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj go sleep , and hear us . 
▁ [ all sleep but xxup alonso , xxup sebastian and xxup antonio ] 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj what , all so soon asleep ! i wish mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj would , with themselves , shut up my thoughts ; i find 
▁ xxmaj they are inclin'd to do so . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj please you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj do not omit the heavy offer of it : 
▁ xxmaj it seldom visits sorrow ; when it doth , 
▁ xxmaj it is a comforter . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj we two , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj will guard your person while you take your rest , 
▁ xxmaj and watch your safety . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj thank you - wondrous heavy ! 
▁ [ alonso sleeps . xxmaj exit xxup ariel ] 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj what a strange drowsiness possesses them ! 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj it is the quality o ' th ' climate . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj why 
▁ xxmaj doth it not then our eyelids sink ? i find not 
▁ xxmaj myself dispos'd to sleep . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj nor xxup i ; my spirits are nimble . 
▁ xxmaj they fell together all , as by consent ; 
▁ xxmaj they dropp'd , as by a thunder - stroke . xxmaj what might , 
▁ xxmaj worthy xxmaj sebastian ? xxup o , what might ! xxmaj no more ! 
▁ xxmaj and yet methinks i see it in thy face , 
▁ xxmaj what thou shouldst be ; th ' occasion speaks thee ; and 
▁ xxmaj my strong imagination sees a crown 
▁ xxmaj dropping upon thy head . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj what , art thou waking ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj do you not hear me speak ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . i do ; and surely 
▁ xxmaj it is a sleepy language , and thou speak'st 
▁ xxmaj out of thy sleep . xxmaj what is it thou didst say ? 
▁ xxmaj this is a strange repose , to be asleep 
▁ xxmaj with eyes wide open ; standing , speaking , moving , 
▁ xxmaj and yet so fast asleep . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj noble xxmaj sebastian , 
▁ xxmaj thou let'st thy fortune sleep - die rather ; wink'st 
▁ xxmaj whiles thou art waking . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj thou dost snore distinctly ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's meaning in thy snores . 
▁ xxup antonio . i am more serious than my custom ; you 
▁ xxmaj must be so too , if heed me ; which to do 
▁ xxmaj trebles thee o'er . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj well , i am standing water . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj i 'll teach you how to flow . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj do so : to ebb , 
▁ xxmaj hereditary sloth instructs me . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxup o , 
▁ xxmaj if you but knew how you the purpose cherish , 
▁ xxmaj whiles thus you mock it ! how , in stripping it , 
▁ xxmaj you more invest it ! xxmaj ebbing men indeed , 
▁ xxmaj most often , do so near the bottom run 
▁ xxmaj by their own fear or sloth . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj prithee say on . 
▁ xxmaj the setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim 
▁ a matter from thee ; and a birth , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj which throes thee much to yield . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj thus , sir : 
▁ xxmaj although this lord of weak remembrance , this 
▁ xxmaj who shall be of as little memory 
▁ xxmaj when he is earth'd , hath here almost persuaded- 
▁ xxmaj for he 's a spirit of persuasion , only 
▁ xxmaj professes to persuade - the xxmaj king his son 's alive , 
▁ ' tis as impossible that he 's undrown'd 
▁ xxmaj as he that sleeps here swims . 
▁ xxup sebastian . i have no hope 
▁ xxmaj that he 's undrown'd . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxup o , out of that ' no hope ' 
▁ xxmaj what great hope have you ! xxmaj no hope that way is 
▁ xxmaj another way so high a hope , that even 
▁ xxmaj ambition can not pierce a wink beyond , 
▁ xxmaj but doubt discovery there . xxmaj will you grant with me 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj ferdinand is drown'd ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj he 's gone . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj then tell me , 
▁ xxmaj who 's the next heir of xxmaj naples ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj claribel . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj she that is xxmaj queen of xxmaj tunis ; she that dwells 
▁ xxmaj ten leagues beyond man 's life ; she that from xxmaj naples 
▁ xxmaj can have no note , unless the sun were post , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj man i ' th ' xxmaj moon 's too slow , till newborn chins 
▁ xxmaj be rough and razorable ; she that from whom 
▁ xxmaj we all were sea - swallow'd , though some cast again , 
▁ xxmaj and by that destiny , to perform an act 
▁ xxmaj whereof what 's past is prologue , what to come 
▁ xxmaj in yours and my discharge . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj what stuff is this ! xxmaj how say you ? 
▁ ' tis true , my brother 's daughter 's xxmaj queen of xxmaj tunis ; 
▁ xxmaj so is she heir of xxmaj naples ; ' twixt which regions 
▁ xxmaj there is some space . 
▁ xxup antonio . a space whose ev'ry cubit 
▁ xxmaj seems to cry out ' how shall that xxmaj claribel 
▁ xxmaj measure us back to xxmaj naples ? xxmaj keep in xxmaj tunis , 
▁ xxmaj and let xxmaj sebastian wake . ' xxmaj say this were death 
▁ xxmaj that now hath seiz'd them ; why , they were no worse 
▁ xxmaj than now they are . xxmaj there be that can rule xxmaj naples 
▁ xxmaj as well as he that sleeps ; lords that can prate 
▁ xxmaj as amply and unnecessarily 
▁ xxmaj as this xxmaj gonzalo ; i myself could make 
▁ a chough of as deep chat . xxup o , that you bore 
▁ xxmaj the mind that i do ! xxmaj what a sleep were this 
▁ xxmaj for your advancement ! xxmaj do you understand me ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj methinks i do . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and how does your content 
▁ xxmaj tender your own good fortune ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . i remember 
▁ xxmaj you did supplant your brother xxmaj prospero . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj true . 
▁ xxmaj and look how well my garments sit upon me , 
▁ xxmaj much feater than before . xxmaj my brother 's servants 
▁ xxmaj were then my fellows ; now they are my men . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj but , for your conscience- 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj ay , sir ; where lies that ? xxmaj if ' twere a kibe , 
▁ ' twould put me to my slipper ; but i feel not 
▁ xxmaj this deity in my bosom ; twenty consciences 
▁ xxmaj that stand ' twixt me and xxmaj milan , candied be they 
▁ xxmaj and melt , ere they molest ! xxmaj here lies your brother , 
▁ xxmaj no better than the earth he lies upon , 
▁ xxmaj if he were that which now he 's like - that 's dead ; 
▁ xxmaj whom i with this obedient steel , three inches of it , 
▁ xxmaj can lay to bed for ever ; whiles you , doing thus , 
▁ xxmaj to the perpetual wink for aye might put 
▁ xxmaj this ancient morsel , this xxmaj sir xxmaj prudence , who 
▁ xxmaj should not upbraid our course . xxmaj for all the rest , 
▁ xxmaj they 'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk ; 
▁ xxmaj they 'll tell the clock to any business that 
▁ xxmaj we say befits the hour . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj thy case , dear friend , 
▁ xxmaj shall be my precedent ; as thou got'st xxmaj milan , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll come by xxmaj naples . xxmaj draw thy sword . xxmaj one stroke 
▁ xxmaj shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest ; 
▁ xxmaj and i the xxmaj king shall love thee . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj draw together ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i rear my hand , do you the like , 
▁ xxmaj to fall it on xxmaj gonzalo . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxup o , but one word . [ they talk apart ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ariel , invisible , with music and song 

▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj my master through his art foresees the danger 
▁ xxmaj that you , his friend , are in ; and sends me forth- 
▁ xxmaj for else his project dies - to keep them living . 
▁ [ sings in xxup gonzalo 's ear ] 
▁ xxmaj while you here do snoring lie , 
▁ xxmaj open - ey'd conspiracy 
▁ xxmaj his time doth take . 
▁ xxmaj if of life you keep a care , 
▁ xxmaj shake off slumber , and beware . 
▁ xxmaj awake , awake ! 

▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj then let us both be sudden . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj now , good angels 
▁ xxmaj preserve the xxmaj king ! [ they wake ] 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj why , how now?-ho , awake!-why are you drawn ? 
▁ xxmaj wherefore this ghastly looking ? 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj whiles we stood here securing your repose , 
▁ xxmaj even now , we heard a hollow burst of bellowing 
▁ xxmaj like bulls , or rather lions ; did't not wake you ? 
▁ xxmaj it struck mine ear most terribly . 
▁ xxup alonso . i heard nothing . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxup o , ' twas a din to fright a monster 's ear , 
▁ xxmaj to make an earthquake ! xxmaj sure it was the roar 
▁ xxmaj of a whole herd of lions . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj heard you this , xxmaj gonzalo ? 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj upon mine honour , sir , i heard a humming , 
▁ xxmaj and that a strange one too , which did awake me ; 
▁ i shak'd you , sir , and cried ; as mine eyes open'd , 
▁ i saw their weapons drawn - there was a noise , 
▁ xxmaj that 's verily . ' tis best we stand upon our guard , 
▁ xxmaj or that we quit this place . xxmaj let 's draw our weapons . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj lead off this ground ; and let 's make further 
▁ search 
▁ xxmaj for my poor son . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj heavens keep him from these beasts ! 
▁ xxmaj for he is , sure , i ' th ' island . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj lead away . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj prospero my lord shall know what i have done ; 
▁ xxmaj so , xxmaj king , go safely on to seek thy son . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj another part of the island 

 xxmaj enter xxup caliban , with a burden of wood . a noise of thunder heard 

▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj all the infections that the sun sucks up 
▁ xxmaj from bogs , fens , flats , on xxmaj prosper fall , and make him 
▁ xxmaj by inch - meal a disease ! xxmaj his spirits hear me , 
▁ xxmaj and yet i needs must curse . xxmaj but they 'll nor pinch , 
▁ xxmaj fright me with urchin - shows , pitch me i ' th ' mire , 
▁ xxmaj nor lead me , like a firebrand , in the dark 
▁ xxmaj out of my way , unless he bid 'em ; but 
▁ xxmaj for every trifle are they set upon me ; 
▁ xxmaj sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me , 
▁ xxmaj and after bite me ; then like hedgehogs which 
▁ xxmaj lie tumbling in my barefoot way , and mount 
▁ xxmaj their pricks at my footfall ; sometime am i 
▁ xxmaj all wound with adders , who with cloven tongues 
▁ xxmaj do hiss me into madness . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup trinculo 

▁ xxmaj lo , now , lo ! 
▁ xxmaj here comes a spirit of his , and to torment me 
▁ xxmaj for bringing wood in slowly . xxmaj i 'll fall flat ; 
▁ xxmaj perchance he will not mind me . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj here 's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any 
▁ weather at all , and another storm brewing ; i hear it 
▁ sing i ' th ' wind . xxmaj yond same black cloud , yond huge one , 
▁ looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor . xxmaj if 
▁ it should thunder as it did before , i know not where to 
▁ hide my head . xxmaj yond same cloud can not choose but fall by 
▁ pailfuls . xxmaj what have we here ? a man or a fish ? dead or 
▁ alive ? a fish : he smells like a fish ; a very ancient and 
▁ fish - like smell ; kind of not - of - the - newest poor - john . a 
▁ strange fish ! xxmaj were i in xxmaj england now , as once i was , and 
▁ had but this fish painted , not a holiday fool there but 
▁ would give a piece of silver . xxmaj there would this monster 
▁ make a man ; any strange beast there makes a man ; when 
▁ they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar , they 
▁ will lay out ten to see a dead xxmaj indian . xxmaj legg'd like a 
▁ man , and his fins like arms ! xxmaj warm , o ' my troth ! i do now 
▁ let loose my opinion ; hold it no longer : this is no 
▁ fish , but an islander , that hath lately suffered by 
▁ thunderbolt . [ thunder ] xxmaj alas , the storm is come again ! xxmaj my 
▁ best way is to creep under his gaberdine ; there is no 
▁ other shelter hereabout . xxmaj misery acquaints a man with 
▁ strange bed - fellows . i will here shroud till the dregs 
▁ of the storm be past . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup stephano singing ; a bottle in his hand 

▁ xxup stephano . i shall no more to sea , to sea , 
▁ xxmaj here shall i die ashore- 
▁ xxmaj this is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man 's funeral ; 
▁ well , here 's my comfort . [ drinks ] 

▁ xxmaj the master , the swabber , the boatswain , and xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj the gunner , and his mate , 
▁ xxmaj lov'd xxmaj mall , xxmaj meg , and xxmaj marian , and xxmaj margery , 
▁ xxmaj but none of us car'd for xxmaj kate ; 
▁ xxmaj for she had a tongue with a tang , 
▁ xxmaj would cry to a sailor ' go hang ! ' 
▁ xxmaj she lov'd not the savour of tar nor of pitch , 
▁ xxmaj yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch . 
▁ xxmaj then to sea , boys , and let her go hang ! 

▁ xxmaj this is a scurvy tune too ; but here 's my comfort . 
▁ [ drinks ] 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj do not torment me . xxup o ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj have we devils here ? xxmaj do you 
▁ put tricks upon 's with savages and men of xxmaj ind ? xxmaj ha ! i 
▁ have not scap'd drowning to be afeard now of your four 
▁ legs ; for it hath been said : xxmaj as proper a man as ever 
▁ went on four legs can not make him give ground ; and it 
▁ shall be said so again , while xxmaj stephano breathes at 
▁ nostrils . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj the spirit torments me . xxup o ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj this is some monster of the isle with four legs , 
▁ who hath got , as i take it , an ague . xxmaj where the devil 
▁ should he learn our language ? i will give him some 
▁ relief , if it be but for that . xxmaj if i can recover him , and 
▁ keep him tame , and get to xxmaj naples with him , he 's a 
▁ present for any emperor that ever trod on neat 's 
▁ leather . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj do not torment me , prithee ; xxmaj i 'll bring my wood 
▁ home faster . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj he 's in his fit now , and does not talk after the 
▁ wisest . xxmaj he shall taste of my bottle ; if he have never 
▁ drunk wine afore , it will go near to remove his fit . xxmaj if 
▁ i can recover him , and keep him tame , i will not take 
▁ too much for him ; he shall pay for him that hath him , 
▁ and that soundly . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj thou dost me yet but little hurt ; thou wilt anon , 
▁ i know it by thy trembling ; now xxmaj prosper works upon thee . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj come on your ways ; open your mouth ; here is 
▁ that which will give language to you , cat . xxmaj open your 
▁ mouth ; this will shake your shaking , i can tell you , and 
▁ that soundly ; you can not tell who 's your friend . xxmaj open 
▁ your chaps again . 
▁ xxup trinculo . i should know that voice ; it should be - but he is 
▁ drown'd ; and these are devils . xxup o , defend me ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj four legs and two voices ; a most delicate monster ! 
▁ xxmaj his forward voice , now , is to speak well of his 
▁ friend ; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches and 
▁ to detract . xxmaj if all the wine in my bottle will recover 
▁ him , i will help his ague . come - amen ! i will pour some 
▁ in thy other mouth . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj stephano ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj doth thy other mouth call me ? xxmaj mercy , mercy ! 
▁ xxmaj this is a devil , and no monster ; i will leave him ; i 
▁ have no long spoon . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj stephano ! xxmaj if thou beest xxmaj stephano , touch me , and 
▁ speak to me ; for i am xxmaj trinculo - be not afeard - thy good 
▁ friend xxmaj trinculo . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj if thou beest xxmaj trinculo , come forth ; xxmaj i 'll pull 
▁ the by the lesser legs ; if any be xxmaj trinculo 's legs , these 
▁ are they . xxmaj thou art very xxmaj trinculo indeed ! xxmaj how cam'st thou 
▁ to be the siege of this moon - calf ? xxmaj can he vent 
▁ xxmaj trinculos ? 
▁ xxup trinculo . i took him to be kill'd with a thunderstroke . 
▁ xxmaj but art thou not drown'd , xxmaj stephano ? i hope now thou are 
▁ not drown'd . xxmaj is the storm overblown ? i hid me under the 
▁ dead moon - calf 's gaberdine for fear of the storm . xxmaj and 
▁ art thou living , xxmaj stephano ? o xxmaj stephano , two xxmaj neapolitans 
▁ scap'd ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj prithee , do not turn me about ; my stomach is not 
▁ constant . 
▁ xxup caliban . [ aside ] xxmaj these be fine things , an if they be not 
▁ sprites . 
▁ xxmaj that 's a brave god , and bears celestial liquor . 
▁ i will kneel to him . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj how didst thou scape ? xxmaj how cam'st thou hither ? 
▁ xxmaj swear by this bottle how thou cam'st hither - i escap'd 
▁ upon a butt of sack , which the sailors heaved o'erboard- 
▁ by this bottle , which i made of the bark of a tree , with 
▁ mine own hands , since i was cast ashore . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj i 'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true 
▁ subject , for the liquor is not earthly . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj here ; swear then how thou escap'dst . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj swum ashore , man , like a duck ; i can swim like 
▁ a duck , xxmaj i 'll be sworn . 
▁ xxup stephano . [ passing the bottle ] xxmaj here , kiss the book . xxmaj though 
▁ thou canst swim like a duck , thou art made like a 
▁ goose . 
▁ xxup trinculo . o xxmaj stephano , hast any more of this ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj the whole butt , man ; my cellar is in a rock by 
▁ th ' seaside , where my wine is hid . xxmaj how now , moon - calf ! 
▁ xxmaj how does thine ague ? 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj hast thou not dropp'd from heaven ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj out o ' th ' moon , i do assure thee ; i was the xxmaj man 
▁ i ' th ' xxmaj moon , when time was . 
▁ xxup caliban . i have seen thee in her , and i do adore thee . xxmaj my 
▁ mistress show'd me thee , and thy dog and thy bush . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj come , swear to that ; kiss the book . i will 
▁ furnish it anon with new contents . xxmaj swear . 
▁ [ caliban drinks ] 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj by this good light , this is a very shallow 
▁ monster ! 
▁ i afeard of him ! a very weak monster ! xxmaj the xxmaj man i ' th ' 
▁ xxmaj moon ! a most poor credulous monster ! xxmaj well drawn , 
▁ monster , in good sooth ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj i 'll show thee every fertile inch o ' th ' island ; 
▁ and will kiss thy foot . i prithee be my god . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj by this light , a most perfidious and drunken 
▁ monster ! xxmaj when 's god 's asleep he 'll rob his bottle . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj i 'll kiss thy foot ; xxmaj i 'll swear myself thy 
▁ subject . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj come on , then ; down , and swear . 
▁ xxup trinculo . i shall laugh myself to death at this puppy- 
▁ headed monster . a most scurvy monster ! i could find in 
▁ my heart to beat him- 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj come , kiss . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj but that the poor monster 's in drink . xxmaj an 
▁ abominable monster ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj i 'll show thee the best springs ; xxmaj i 'll pluck thee 
▁ berries ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fish for thee , and get thee wood enough . 
▁ a plague upon the tyrant that i serve ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bear him no more sticks , but follow thee , 
▁ xxmaj thou wondrous man . 
▁ xxup trinculo . a most ridiculous monster , to make a wonder of 
▁ a poor drunkard ! 
▁ xxup caliban . i prithee let me bring thee where crabs grow ; 
▁ xxmaj and i with my long nails will dig thee pig - nuts ; 
▁ xxmaj show thee a jay 's nest , and instruct thee how 
▁ xxmaj to snare the nimble marmoset ; xxmaj i 'll bring thee 
▁ xxmaj to clust'ring filberts , and sometimes xxmaj i 'll get thee 
▁ xxmaj young scamels from the rock . xxmaj wilt thou go with me ? 
▁ xxup stephano . i prithee now , lead the way without any more 
▁ talking . xxmaj trinculo , the xxmaj king and all our company else 
▁ being drown'd , we will inherit here . xxmaj here , bear my bottle . 
▁ xxmaj fellow xxmaj trinculo , we 'll fill him by and by again . 
▁ xxup caliban . [ sings drunkenly ] xxmaj farewell , master ; farewell , 
▁ farewell ! 
▁ xxup trinculo . a howling monster ; a drunken monster ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj no more dams xxmaj i 'll make for fish ; 
▁ xxmaj nor fetch in firing 
▁ xxmaj at requiring , 
▁ xxmaj nor scrape trenchering , nor wash dish . 
▁ ' ban ' ban , ca - caliban , 
▁ xxmaj has a new master - get a new man . 
▁ xxmaj freedom , high - day ! high - day , freedom ! freedom , high- 
▁ day , freedom ! 
▁ xxup stephano . o brave monster ! xxmaj lead the way . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj before xxup prospero 's cell 

 xxmaj enter xxup ferdinand , hearing a log 

▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj there be some sports are painful , and their 
▁ labour 
▁ xxmaj delight in them sets off ; some kinds of baseness 
▁ xxmaj are nobly undergone , and most poor matters 
▁ xxmaj point to rich ends . xxmaj this my mean task 
▁ xxmaj would be as heavy to me as odious , but 
▁ xxmaj the mistress which i serve quickens what 's dead , 
▁ xxmaj and makes my labours pleasures . xxup o , she is 
▁ xxmaj ten times more gentle than her father 's crabbed ; 
▁ xxmaj and he 's compos'd of harshness . i must remove 
▁ xxmaj some thousands of these logs , and pile them up , 
▁ xxmaj upon a sore injunction ; my sweet mistress 
▁ xxmaj weeps when she sees me work , and says such baseness 
▁ xxmaj had never like executor . i forget ; 
▁ xxmaj but these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours , 
▁ xxmaj most busy , least when i do it . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup miranda ; and xxup prospero at a distance , unseen 

▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj alas , now ; pray you , 
▁ xxmaj work not so hard ; i would the lightning had 
▁ xxmaj burnt up those logs that you are enjoin'd to pile . 
▁ xxmaj pray , set it down and rest you ; when this burns , 
▁ ' twill weep for having wearied you . xxmaj my father 
▁ xxmaj is hard at study ; pray , now , rest yourself ; 
▁ xxmaj he 's safe for these three hours . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . o most dear mistress , 
▁ xxmaj the sun will set before i shall discharge 
▁ xxmaj what i must strive to do . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj if you 'll sit down , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bear your logs the while ; pray give me that ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll carry it to the pile . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj no , precious creature ; 
▁ i had rather crack my sinews , break my back , 
▁ xxmaj than you should such dishonour undergo , 
▁ xxmaj while i sit lazy by . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj it would become me 
▁ xxmaj as well as it does you ; and i should do it 
▁ xxmaj with much more ease ; for my good will is to it , 
▁ xxmaj and yours it is against . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj poor worm , thou art infected ! 
▁ xxmaj this visitation shows it . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj you look wearily . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj no , noble mistress ; ' tis fresh morning with me 
▁ xxmaj when you are by at night . i do beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj chiefly that i might set it in my prayers , 
▁ xxmaj what is your name ? 
▁ xxup miranda . miranda - o my father , 
▁ i have broke your hest to say so ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj admir'd xxmaj miranda ! 
▁ xxmaj what 's dearest to the world ! xxmaj full many a lady 
▁ i have ey'd with best regard ; and many a time 
▁ xxmaj th ' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage 
▁ xxmaj brought my too diligent ear ; for several virtues 
▁ xxmaj have i lik'd several women , never any 
▁ xxmaj with so full soul , but some defect in her 
▁ xxmaj did quarrel with the noblest grace she ow'd , 
▁ xxmaj and put it to the foil ; but you , o you , 
▁ xxmaj so perfect and so peerless , are created 
▁ xxmaj of every creature 's best ! 
▁ xxup miranda . i do not know 
▁ xxmaj one of my sex ; no woman 's face remember , 
▁ xxmaj save , from my glass , mine own ; nor have i seen 
▁ xxmaj more that i may call men than you , good friend , 
▁ xxmaj and my dear father . xxmaj how features are abroad , 
▁ i am skilless of ; but , by my modesty , 
▁ xxmaj the jewel in my dower , i would not wish 
▁ xxmaj any companion in the world but you ; 
▁ xxmaj nor can imagination form a shape , 
▁ xxmaj besides yourself , to like of . xxmaj but i prattle