xxbos xxmaj something too wildly , and my father 's precepts 
▁ i therein do forget . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . i am , in my condition , 
▁ a prince , xxmaj miranda ; i do think , a king- 
▁ i would not so!-and would no more endure 
▁ xxmaj this wooden slavery than to suffer 
▁ xxmaj the flesh - fly blow my mouth . xxmaj hear my soul speak : 
▁ xxmaj the very instant that i saw you , did 
▁ xxmaj my heart fly to your service ; there resides 
▁ xxmaj to make me slave to it ; and for your sake 
▁ xxmaj am i this patient log - man . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj do you love me ? 
▁ xxup ferdinand . o heaven , o earth , bear witness to this sound , 
▁ xxmaj and crown what i profess with kind event , 
▁ xxmaj if i speak true ! xxmaj if hollowly , invert 
▁ xxmaj what best is boded me to mischief ! xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj beyond all limit of what else i ' th ' world , 
▁ xxmaj do love , prize , honour you . 
▁ xxup miranda . i am a fool 
▁ xxmaj to weep at what i am glad of . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj fair encounter 
▁ xxmaj of two most rare affections ! xxmaj heavens rain grace 
▁ xxmaj on that which breeds between 'em ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj wherefore weep you ? 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj at mine unworthiness , that dare not offer 
▁ xxmaj what i desire to give , and much less take 
▁ xxmaj what i shall die to want . xxmaj but this is trifling ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the more it seeks to hide itself , 
▁ xxmaj the bigger bulk it shows . xxmaj hence , bashful cunning ! 
▁ xxmaj and prompt me , plain and holy innocence ! 
▁ i am your wife , if you will marry me ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , xxmaj i 'll die your maid . xxmaj to be your fellow 
▁ xxmaj you may deny me ; but xxmaj i 'll be your servant , 
▁ xxmaj whether you will or no . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj my mistress , dearest ; 
▁ xxmaj and i thus humble ever . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj my husband , then ? 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj ay , with a heart as willing 
▁ xxmaj as bondage e'er of freedom . xxmaj here 's my hand . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj and mine , with my heart in't . xxmaj and now farewell 
▁ xxmaj till half an hour hence . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . a thousand thousand ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup ferdinand and xxup miranda severally 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj so glad of this as they i can not be , 
▁ xxmaj who are surpris'd withal ; but my rejoicing 
▁ xxmaj at nothing can be more . xxmaj i 'll to my book ; 
▁ xxmaj for yet ere supper time must i perform 
▁ xxmaj much business appertaining . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene 2 

 xxmaj another part of the island 

 xxmaj enter xxup caliban , xxup stephano , and xxup trinculo 

▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj tell not me - when the butt is out we will drink 
▁ water , not a drop before ; therefore bear up , and board 
▁ 'em . xxmaj servant - monster , drink to me . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj servant - monster ! xxmaj the folly of this island ! xxmaj they 
▁ say there 's but five upon this isle : we are three of 
▁ them ; if th ' other two be brain'd like us , the state 
▁ totters . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj drink , servant - monster , when i bid thee ; thy 
▁ eyes are almost set in thy head . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj where should they be set else ? xxmaj he were a brave 
▁ monster indeed , if they were set in his tail . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj my man - monster hath drown'd his tongue in 
▁ sack . xxmaj for my part , the sea can not drown me ; i swam , ere 
▁ i could recover the shore , five and thirty leagues , off 
▁ and on . xxmaj by this light , thou shalt be my lieutenant , 
▁ monster , or my standard . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj your lieutenant , if you list ; he 's no standard . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj we 'll not run , xxmaj monsieur xxmaj monster . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj nor go neither ; but you 'll lie like dogs , and 
▁ yet say nothing neither . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj moon - calf , speak once in thy life , if thou beest 
▁ a good moon - calf . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj how does thy honour ? xxmaj let me lick thy shoe . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not serve him ; he is not valiant . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj thou liest , most ignorant monster : i am in case 
▁ to justle a constable . xxmaj why , thou debosh'd fish , thou , 
▁ was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack 
▁ as i to - day ? xxmaj wilt thou tell a monstrous lie , being but 
▁ half fish and half a monster ? 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj lo , how he mocks me ! xxmaj wilt thou let him , my 
▁ lord ? 
▁ xxup trinculo . ' lord ' quoth he ! xxmaj that a monster should be such 
▁ a natural ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj lo , lo again ! xxmaj bite him to death , i prithee . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj trinculo , keep a good tongue in your head ; if 
▁ you prove a mutineer - the next tree ! xxmaj the poor monster 's 
▁ my subject , and he shall not suffer indignity . 
▁ xxup caliban . i thank my noble lord . xxmaj wilt thou be pleas'd to 
▁ hearken once again to the suit i made to thee ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj marry will xxup i ; kneel and repeat it ; i will stand , 
▁ and so shall xxmaj trinculo . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ariel , invisible 

▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj as i told thee before , i am subject to a tyrant , 
▁ sorcerer , that by his cunning hath cheated me of the 
▁ island . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj thou liest . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj thou liest , thou jesting monkey , thou ; 
▁ i would my valiant master would destroy thee . 
▁ i do not lie . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj trinculo , if you trouble him any more in 's tale , 
▁ by this hand , i will supplant some of your teeth . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj why , i said nothing . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj mum , then , and no more . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxup caliban . i say , by sorcery he got this isle ; 
▁ xxmaj from me he got it . xxmaj if thy greatness will 
▁ xxmaj revenge it on him - for i know thou dar'st , 
▁ xxmaj but this thing dare not- 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj that 's most certain . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj thou shalt be lord of it , and xxmaj i 'll serve thee . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj how now shall this be compass'd ? xxmaj canst thou 
▁ bring me to the party ? 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj yea , yea , my lord ; xxmaj i 'll yield him thee asleep , 
▁ xxmaj where thou mayst knock a nail into his head . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj thou liest ; thou canst not . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj what a pied ninny 's this ! xxmaj thou scurvy patch ! 
▁ i do beseech thy greatness , give him blows , 
▁ xxmaj and take his bottle from him . xxmaj when that 's gone 
▁ xxmaj he shall drink nought but brine ; for xxmaj i 'll not show him 
▁ xxmaj where the quick freshes are . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj trinculo , run into no further danger ; interrupt 
▁ the monster one word further and , by this hand , xxmaj i 'll turn 
▁ my mercy out o ' doors , and make a stock - fish of thee . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj why , what did xxup i ? i did nothing . xxmaj i 'll go farther 
▁ off . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj didst thou not say he lied ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj thou liest . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj do i so ? xxmaj take thou that . [ beats him ] xxmaj as you like 
▁ this , give me the lie another time . 
▁ xxup trinculo . i did not give the lie . xxmaj out o ' your wits and 
▁ hearing too ? a pox o ' your bottle ! xxmaj this can sack and 
▁ drinking do . a murrain on your monster , and the devil 
▁ take your fingers ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj now , forward with your tale.-prithee stand 
▁ further off . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj beat him enough ; after a little time , xxmaj i 'll beat 
▁ him too . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj stand farther . xxmaj come , proceed . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj why , as i told thee , ' tis a custom with him 
▁ xxup i ' th ' afternoon to sleep ; there thou mayst brain him , 
▁ xxmaj having first seiz'd his books ; or with a log 
▁ xxmaj batter his skull , or paunch him with a stake , 
▁ xxmaj or cut his wezand with thy knife . xxmaj remember 
▁ xxmaj first to possess his books ; for without them 
▁ xxmaj he 's but a sot , as i am , nor hath not 
▁ xxmaj one spirit to command ; they all do hate him 
▁ xxmaj as rootedly as xxup i. xxmaj burn but his books . 
▁ xxmaj he has brave utensils - for so he calls them- 
▁ xxmaj which , when he has a house , he 'll deck withal . 
▁ xxmaj and that most deeply to consider is 
▁ xxmaj the beauty of his daughter ; he himself 
▁ xxmaj calls her a nonpareil . i never saw a woman 
▁ xxmaj but only xxmaj sycorax my dam and she ; 
▁ xxmaj but she as far surpasseth xxmaj sycorax 
▁ xxmaj as great'st does least . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj is it so brave a lass ? 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj ay , lord ; she will become thy bed , i warrant , 
▁ xxmaj and bring thee forth brave brood . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj monster , i will kill this man ; his daughter and i 
▁ will be xxmaj king and xxmaj queen - save our xxmaj graces!-and xxmaj trinculo 
▁ and thyself shall be viceroys . xxmaj dost thou like the plot , 
▁ xxmaj trinculo ? 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj excellent . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj give me thy hand ; i am sorry i beat thee ; but 
▁ while thou liv'st , keep a good tongue in thy head . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj within this half hour will he be asleep . 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou destroy him then ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj ay , on mine honour . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj this will i tell my master . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj thou mak'st me merry ; i am full of pleasure . 
▁ xxmaj let us be jocund ; will you troll the catch 
▁ xxmaj you taught me but while - ere ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj at thy request , monster , i will do reason , any 
▁ reason . xxmaj come on , xxmaj trinculo , let us sing . [ sings ] 

▁ xxmaj flout 'em and scout 'em , 
▁ xxmaj and scout 'em and flout 'em ; 
▁ xxmaj thought is free . 

▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj that 's not the tune . 
▁ [ ariel plays the tune on a tabor and pipe ] 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj what is this same ? 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj this is the tune of our catch , play'd by the 
▁ picture of xxmaj nobody . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj if thou beest a man , show thyself in thy 
▁ likeness ; if thou beest a devil , take't as thou list . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxup o , forgive me my sins ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj he that dies pays all debts . i defy thee . xxmaj mercy 
▁ upon us ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj art thou afeard ? 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj no , monster , not xxup i. 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj be not afeard . xxmaj the isle is full of noises , 
▁ xxmaj sounds , and sweet airs , that give delight , and hurt not . 
▁ xxmaj sometimes a thousand twangling instruments 
▁ xxmaj will hum about mine ears ; and sometimes voices , 
▁ xxmaj that , if i then had wak'd after long sleep , 
▁ xxmaj will make me sleep again ; and then , in dreaming , 
▁ xxmaj the clouds methought would open and show riches 
▁ xxmaj ready to drop upon me , that , when i wak'd , 
▁ i cried to dream again . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj this will prove a brave kingdom to me , where i 
▁ shall have my music for nothing . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj when xxmaj prospero is destroy'd . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj that shall be by and by ; i remember the story . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj the sound is going away ; let 's follow it , and 
▁ after do our work . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj lead , monster ; we 'll follow . i would i could see 
▁ this taborer ; he lays it on . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj wilt come ? xxmaj i 'll follow , xxmaj stephano . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene 3 

 xxmaj another part of the island 

 xxmaj enter xxup alonso , xxup sebastian , xxup antonio , xxup gonzalo , xxup adrian , xxup francisco , and xxup others 

▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj by'r lakin , i can go no further , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj my old bones ache . xxmaj here 's a maze trod , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj through forth - rights and meanders ! xxmaj by your patience , 
▁ i needs must rest me . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj old lord , i can not blame thee , 
▁ xxmaj who am myself attach'd with weariness 
▁ xxmaj to th ' dulling of my spirits ; sit down and rest . 
▁ xxmaj even here i will put off my hope , and keep it 
▁ xxmaj no longer for my flatterer ; he is drown'd 
▁ xxmaj whom thus we stray to find , and the sea mocks 
▁ xxmaj our frustrate search on land . xxmaj well , let him go . 
▁ xxup antonio . [ aside to xxup sebastian ] i am right glad that he 's 
▁ so out of hope . 
▁ xxmaj do not , for one repulse , forgo the purpose 
▁ xxmaj that you resolv'd t ' effect . 
▁ xxup sebastian . [ aside to xxup antonio ] xxmaj the next advantage 
▁ xxmaj will we take throughly . 
▁ xxup antonio . [ aside to xxup sebastian ] xxmaj let it be to - night ; 
▁ xxmaj for , now they are oppress'd with travel , they 
▁ xxmaj will not , nor can not , use such vigilance 
▁ xxmaj as when they are fresh . 
▁ xxup sebastian . [ aside to xxup antonio ] i say , to - night ; no more . 

▁ xxmaj solemn and strange music ; and xxup prospero on the 
▁ top , invisible . xxmaj enter several strange xxup shapes , 
▁ bringing in a banquet ; and dance about it with 
▁ gentle actions of salutations ; and inviting the 
▁ xxup king , etc . , to eat , they depart 

▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj what harmony is this ? xxmaj my good friends , hark ! 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj marvellous sweet music ! 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj give us kind keepers , heavens ! xxmaj what were these ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . a living drollery . xxmaj now i will believe 
▁ xxmaj that there are unicorns ; that in xxmaj arabia 
▁ xxmaj there is one tree , the phoenix ' throne , one phoenix 
▁ xxmaj at this hour reigning - there . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj i 'll believe both ; 
▁ xxmaj and what does else want credit , come to me , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be sworn ' tis true ; travellers ne'er did lie , 
▁ xxmaj though fools at home condemn 'em . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj if in xxmaj naples 
▁ i should report this now , would they believe me ? 
▁ xxmaj if i should say , i saw such islanders , 
▁ xxmaj for certes these are people of the island , 
▁ xxmaj who though they are of monstrous shape yet , note , 
▁ xxmaj their manners are more gentle - kind than of 
▁ xxmaj our human generation you shall find 
▁ xxmaj many , nay , almost any . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj honest lord , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast said well ; for some of you there present 
▁ xxmaj are worse than devils . 
▁ xxup alonso . i can not too much muse 
▁ xxmaj such shapes , such gesture , and such sound , expressing , 
▁ xxmaj although they want the use of tongue , a kind 
▁ xxmaj of excellent dumb discourse . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] xxmaj praise in departing . 
▁ xxup francisco . xxmaj they vanish'd strangely . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj no matter , since 
▁ xxmaj they have left their viands behind ; for we have stomachs . 
▁ xxmaj will't please you taste of what is here ? 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj faith , sir , you need not fear . xxmaj when we were boys , 
▁ xxmaj who would believe that there were mountaineers , 
▁ xxmaj dewlapp'd like bulls , whose throats had hanging at 'em 
▁ xxmaj wallets of flesh ? or that there were such men 
▁ xxmaj whose heads stood in their breasts ? which now we find 
▁ xxmaj each putter - out of five for one will bring us 
▁ xxmaj good warrant of . 
▁ xxup alonso . i will stand to , and feed , 
▁ xxmaj although my last ; no matter , since i feel 
▁ xxmaj the best is past . xxmaj brother , my lord the xxmaj duke , 
▁ xxmaj stand to , and do as we . 

▁ xxmaj thunder and lightning . xxmaj enter xxup ariel , like a harpy ; 
▁ claps his wings upon the table ; and , with a quaint 
▁ device , the banquet vanishes 

▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj you are three men of sin , whom xxmaj destiny , 
▁ xxmaj that hath to instrument this lower world 
▁ xxmaj and what is in't , the never - surfeited sea 
▁ xxmaj hath caus'd to belch up you ; and on this island 
▁ xxmaj where man doth not inhabit - you ' mongst men 
▁ xxmaj being most unfit to live . i have made you mad ; 
▁ xxmaj and even with such - like valour men hang and drown 
▁ xxmaj their proper selves . 
▁ [ alonso , xxup sebastian etc . , draw their swords ] 
▁ xxmaj you fools ! i and my fellows 
▁ xxmaj are ministers of xxmaj fate ; the elements 
▁ xxmaj of whom your swords are temper'd may as well 
▁ xxmaj wound the loud winds , or with bemock'd - at stabs 
▁ xxmaj kill the still - closing waters , as diminish 
▁ xxmaj one dowle that 's in my plume ; my fellow - ministers 
▁ xxmaj are like invulnerable . xxmaj if you could hurt , 
▁ xxmaj your swords are now too massy for your strengths 
▁ xxmaj and will not be uplifted . xxmaj but remember- 
▁ xxmaj for that 's my business to you - that you three 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj milan did supplant good xxmaj prospero ; 
▁ xxmaj expos'd unto the sea , which hath requit it , 
▁ xxmaj him , and his innocent child ; for which foul deed 
▁ xxmaj the pow'rs , delaying , not forgetting , have 
▁ xxmaj incens'd the seas and shores , yea , all the creatures , 
▁ xxmaj against your peace . xxmaj thee of thy son , xxmaj alonso , 
▁ xxmaj they have bereft ; and do pronounce by me 
▁ xxmaj ling'ring perdition , worse than any death 
▁ xxmaj can be at once , shall step by step attend 
▁ xxmaj you and your ways ; whose wraths to guard you from- 
▁ xxmaj which here , in this most desolate isle , else falls 
▁ xxmaj upon your heads - is nothing but heart 's sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj and a clear life ensuing . 

▁ xxmaj he vanishes in thunder ; then , to soft music , enter 
▁ the xxup shapes again , and dance , with mocks and mows , 
▁ and carrying out the table 

▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou 
▁ xxmaj perform'd , my xxmaj ariel ; a grace it had , devouring . 
▁ xxmaj of my instruction hast thou nothing bated 
▁ xxmaj in what thou hadst to say ; so , with good life 
▁ xxmaj and observation strange , my meaner ministers 
▁ xxmaj their several kinds have done . xxmaj my high charms work , 
▁ xxmaj and these mine enemies are all knit up 
▁ xxmaj in their distractions . xxmaj they now are in my pow'r ; 
▁ xxmaj and in these fits i leave them , while i visit 
▁ xxmaj young xxmaj ferdinand , whom they suppose is drown'd , 
▁ xxmaj and his and mine lov'd darling . xxmaj exit above 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxup i ' th ' name of something holy , sir , why stand you 
▁ xxmaj in this strange stare ? 
▁ xxup alonso . xxup o , it is monstrous , monstrous ! 
▁ xxmaj methought the billows spoke , and told me of it ; 
▁ xxmaj the winds did sing it to me ; and the thunder , 
▁ xxmaj that deep and dreadful organ - pipe , pronounc'd 
▁ xxmaj the name of xxmaj prosper ; it did bass my trespass . 
▁ xxmaj therefore my son i ' th ' ooze is bedded ; and 
▁ xxmaj i 'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded , 
▁ xxmaj and with him there lie mudded . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj but one fiend at a time , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fight their legions o'er . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj i 'll be thy second . xxmaj exeunt xxup sebastian and xxup antonio 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj all three of them are desperate ; their great guilt , 
▁ xxmaj like poison given to work a great time after , 
▁ xxmaj now gins to bite the spirits . i do beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj that are of suppler joints , follow them swiftly , 
▁ xxmaj and hinder them from what this ecstasy 
▁ xxmaj may now provoke them to . 
▁ xxup adrian . xxmaj follow , i pray you . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj before xxup prospero 's cell 

 xxmaj enter xxup prospero , xxup ferdinand , and xxup miranda 

▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj if i have too austerely punish'd you , 
▁ xxmaj your compensation makes amends ; for 
▁ xxmaj have given you here a third of mine own life , 
▁ xxmaj or that for which i live ; who once again 
▁ i tender to thy hand . xxmaj all thy vexations 
▁ xxmaj were but my trials of thy love , and thou 
▁ xxmaj hast strangely stood the test ; here , afore heaven , 
▁ i ratify this my rich gift . o xxmaj ferdinand ! 
▁ xxmaj do not smile at me that i boast her off , 
▁ xxmaj for thou shalt find she will outstrip all praise , 
▁ xxmaj and make it halt behind her . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . i do believe it 
▁ xxmaj against an oracle . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj then , as my gift , and thine own acquisition 
▁ xxmaj wort'hily purchas'd , take my daughter . xxmaj but 
▁ xxmaj if thou dost break her virgin - knot before 
▁ xxmaj all sanctimonious ceremonies may 
▁ xxmaj with full and holy rite be minist'red , 
▁ xxmaj no sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall 
▁ xxmaj to make this contract grow ; but barren hate , 
▁ xxmaj sour - ey'd disdain , and discord , shall bestrew 
▁ xxmaj the union of your bed with weeds so loathly 
▁ xxmaj that you shall hate it both . xxmaj therefore take heed , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj hymen 's lamps shall light you . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj as i hope 
▁ xxmaj for quiet days , fair issue , and long life , 
▁ xxmaj with such love as ' tis now , the murkiest den , 
▁ xxmaj the most opportune place , the strong'st suggestion 
▁ xxmaj our worser genius can , shall never melt 
▁ xxmaj mine honour into lust , to take away 
▁ xxmaj the edge of that day 's celebration , 
▁ xxmaj when i shall think or xxmaj phoebus ' steeds are founder'd 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj night kept chain'd below . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj fairly spoke . 
▁ xxmaj sit , then , and talk with her ; she is thine own . 
▁ xxmaj what , xxmaj ariel ! my industrious servant , xxmaj ariel ! 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup ariel 

▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj what would my potent master ? xxmaj here i am . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj thou and thy meaner fellows your last service 
▁ xxmaj did worthily perform ; and i must use you 
▁ xxmaj in such another trick . xxmaj go bring the rabble , 
▁ xxmaj o'er whom i give thee pow'r , here to this place . 
▁ xxmaj incite them to quick motion ; for i must 
▁ xxmaj bestow upon the eyes of this young couple 
▁ xxmaj some vanity of mine art ; it is my promise , 
▁ xxmaj and they expect it from me . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj presently ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj ay , with a twink . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj before you can say ' come ' and ' go , ' 
▁ xxmaj and breathe twice , and cry ' so , so , ' 
▁ xxmaj each one , tripping on his toe , 
▁ xxmaj will be here with mop and mow . 
▁ xxmaj do you love me , master ? xxmaj no ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj dearly , my delicate xxmaj ariel . xxmaj do not approach 
▁ xxmaj till thou dost hear me call . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj well ! i conceive . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj look thou be true ; do not give dalliance 
▁ xxmaj too much the rein ; the strongest oaths are straw 
▁ xxmaj to th ' fire i ' th ' blood . xxmaj be more abstemious , 
▁ xxmaj or else good night your vow ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . i warrant you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj the white cold virgin snow upon my heart 
▁ xxmaj abates the ardour of my liver . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj well ! 
▁ xxmaj now come , my xxmaj ariel , bring a corollary , 
▁ xxmaj rather than want a spirit ; appear , and pertly . 
▁ xxmaj no tongue ! xxmaj all eyes ! xxmaj be silent . [ soft music ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup iris 

▁ xxup iris . xxmaj ceres , most bounteous lady , thy rich leas 
▁ xxmaj of wheat , rye , barley , vetches , oats , and pease ; 
▁ xxmaj thy turfy mountains , where live nibbling sheep , 
▁ xxmaj and flat meads thatch'd with stover , them to keep ; 
▁ xxmaj thy banks with pioned and twilled brims , 
▁ xxmaj which spongy xxmaj april at thy hest betrims , 
▁ xxmaj to make cold nymphs chaste crowns ; and thy broom groves , 
▁ xxmaj whose shadow the dismissed bachelor loves , 
▁ xxmaj being lass - lorn ; thy pole - clipt vineyard ; 
▁ xxmaj and thy sea - marge , sterile and rocky hard , 
▁ xxmaj where thou thyself dost air - the xxmaj queen o ' th ' sky , 
▁ xxmaj whose wat'ry arch and messenger am xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj bids thee leave these ; and with her sovereign grace , 
▁ xxmaj here on this grass - plot , in this very place , 
▁ xxmaj to come and sport . xxmaj her peacocks fly amain . 
▁ [ juno descends in her car ] 
▁ xxmaj approach , rich xxmaj ceres , her to entertain . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ceres 

▁ xxup ceres . xxmaj hail , many - coloured messenger , that ne'er 
▁ xxmaj dost disobey the wife of xxmaj jupiter ; 
▁ xxmaj who , with thy saffron wings , upon my flow'rs 
▁ xxmaj diffusest honey drops , refreshing show'rs ; 
▁ xxmaj and with each end of thy blue bow dost crown 
▁ xxmaj my bosky acres and my unshrubb'd down , 
▁ xxmaj rich scarf to my proud earth - why hath thy xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj summon'd me hither to this short - grass'd green ? 
▁ xxup iris . a contract of true love to celebrate , 
▁ xxmaj and some donation freely to estate 
▁ xxmaj on the blest lovers . 
▁ xxup ceres . xxmaj tell me , heavenly bow , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj venus or her son , as thou dost know , 
▁ xxmaj do now attend the xxmaj queen ? xxmaj since they did plot 
▁ xxmaj the means that dusky xxmaj dis my daughter got , 
▁ xxmaj her and her blind boy 's scandal'd company 
▁ i have forsworn . 
▁ xxup iris . xxmaj of her society 
▁ xxmaj be not afraid . i met her xxmaj deity 
▁ xxmaj cutting the clouds towards xxmaj paphos , and her son 
▁ xxmaj dove - drawn with her . xxmaj here thought they to have done 
▁ xxmaj some wanton charm upon this man and maid , 
▁ xxmaj whose vows are that no bed - rite shall be paid 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj hymen 's torch be lighted ; but in vain . 
▁ xxmaj mars 's hot minion is return'd again ; 
▁ xxmaj her waspish - headed son has broke his arrows , 
▁ xxmaj swears he will shoot no more , but play with sparrows , 
▁ xxmaj and be a boy right out . [ juno alights ] 
▁ xxup ceres . xxmaj highest xxmaj queen of xxmaj state , 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj juno , comes ; i know her by her gait . 
▁ xxup juno . xxmaj how does my bounteous sister ? xxmaj go with me 
▁ xxmaj to bless this twain , that they may prosperous be , 
▁ xxmaj and honour'd in their issue . [ they sing ] 
▁ xxup juno . xxmaj honour , riches , marriage - blessing , 
▁ xxmaj long continuance , and increasing , 
▁ xxmaj hourly joys be still upon you ! 
▁ xxmaj juno sings her blessings on you . 
▁ xxup ceres . xxmaj earth 's increase , foison plenty , 
▁ xxmaj barns and gamers never empty ; 
▁ xxmaj vines with clust'ring bunches growing , 
▁ xxmaj plants with goodly burden bowing ; 
▁ xxmaj spring come to you at the farthest , 
▁ xxmaj in the very end of harvest ! 
▁ xxmaj scarcity and want shall shun you , 
▁ xxmaj ceres ' blessing so is on you . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj this is a most majestic vision , and 
▁ xxmaj harmonious charmingly . xxmaj may i be bold 
▁ xxmaj to think these spirits ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj spirits , which by mine art 
▁ i have from their confines call'd to enact 
▁ xxmaj my present fancies . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj let me live here ever ; 
▁ xxmaj so rare a wond'red father and a wise 
▁ xxmaj makes this place xxmaj paradise . 
▁ [ juno and xxup ceres whisper , and send xxup iris on employment ] 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj sweet now , silence ; 
▁ xxmaj juno and xxmaj ceres whisper seriously . 
▁ xxmaj there 's something else to do ; hush , and be mute , 
▁ xxmaj or else our spell is marr'd . 
▁ xxup iris . xxmaj you nymphs , call'd xxmaj naiads , of the wind'ring brooks , 
▁ xxmaj with your sedg'd crowns and ever harmless looks , 
▁ xxmaj leave your crisp channels , and on this green land 
▁ xxmaj answer your summons ; xxmaj juno does command . 
▁ xxmaj come , temperate nymphs , and help to celebrate 
▁ a contract of true love ; be not too late . 

▁ xxmaj enter certain xxup nymphs 

▁ xxmaj you sun - burnt sicklemen , of xxmaj august weary , 
▁ xxmaj come hither from the furrow , and be merry ; 
▁ xxmaj make holiday ; your rye - straw hats put on , 
▁ xxmaj and these fresh nymphs encounter every one 
▁ xxmaj in country footing . 

▁ xxmaj enter certain xxup reapers , properly habited ; they join 
▁ with the xxup nymphs in a graceful dance ; towards the 
▁ end whereof xxup prospero starts suddenly , and speaks , 
▁ after which , to a strange , hollow , and confused 
▁ noise , they heavily vanish 

▁ xxup prospero . [ aside ] i had forgot that foul conspiracy 
▁ xxmaj of the beast xxmaj caliban and his confederates 
▁ xxmaj against my life ; the minute of their plot 
▁ xxmaj is almost come . [ to the xxup spirits ] xxmaj well done ; avoid ; no 
▁ more ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj this is strange ; your father 's in some passion 
▁ xxmaj that works him strongly . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj never till this day 
▁ xxmaj saw i him touch'd with anger so distemper'd . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj you do look , my son , in a mov'd sort , 
▁ xxmaj as if you were dismay'd ; be cheerful , sir . 
▁ xxmaj our revels now are ended . xxmaj these our actors , 
▁ xxmaj as i foretold you , were all spirits , and 
▁ xxmaj are melted into air , into thin air ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like the baseless fabric of this vision , 
▁ xxmaj the cloud - capp'd towers , the gorgeous palaces , 
▁ xxmaj the solemn temples , the great globe itself , 
▁ xxmaj yea , all which it inherit , shall dissolve , 
▁ xxmaj and , like this insubstantial pageant faded , 
▁ xxmaj leave not a rack behind . xxmaj we are such stuff 
▁ xxmaj as dreams are made on ; and our little life 
▁ xxmaj is rounded with a sleep . xxmaj sir , i am vex'd ; 
▁ xxmaj bear with my weakness ; my old brain is troubled ; 
▁ xxmaj be not disturb'd with my infirmity . 
▁ xxmaj if you be pleas'd , retire into my cell 
▁ xxmaj and there repose ; a turn or two xxmaj i 'll walk 
▁ xxmaj to still my beating mind . 
▁ xxup ferdinand , xxup miranda . xxmaj we wish your peace . xxmaj exeunt 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj come , with a thought . i thank thee , xxmaj ariel ; come . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ariel 

▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj thy thoughts i cleave to . xxmaj what 's thy pleasure ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj spirit , 
▁ xxmaj we must prepare to meet with xxmaj caliban . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj ay , my commander . xxmaj when i presented ' ceres . ' 
▁ i thought to have told thee of it ; but i fear'd 
▁ xxmaj lest i might anger thee . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj say again , where didst thou leave these varlets ? 
▁ xxup ariel . i told you , sir , they were red - hot with drinking ; 
▁ xxmaj so full of valour that they smote the air 
▁ xxmaj for breathing in their faces ; beat the ground 
▁ xxmaj for kissing of their feet ; yet always bending 
▁ xxmaj towards their project . xxmaj then i beat my tabor , 
▁ xxmaj at which like unback'd colts they prick'd their ears , 
▁ xxmaj advanc'd their eyelids , lifted up their noses 
▁ xxmaj as they smelt music ; so i charm'd their cars , 
▁ xxmaj that calf - like they my lowing follow'd through 
▁ xxmaj tooth'd briers , sharp furzes , pricking goss , and thorns , 
▁ xxmaj which ent'red their frail shins . xxmaj at last i left them 
▁ xxup i ' th ' filthy mantled pool beyond your cell , 
▁ xxmaj there dancing up to th ' chins , that the foul lake 
▁ xxmaj o'erstunk their feet . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj this was well done , my bird . 
▁ xxmaj thy shape invisible retain thou still . 
▁ xxmaj the trumpery in my house , go bring it hither 
▁ xxmaj for stale to catch these thieves . 
▁ xxup ariel . i go , i go . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup prospero . a devil , a born devil , on whose nature 
▁ xxmaj nurture can never stick ; on whom my pains , 
▁ xxmaj humanely taken , all , all lost , quite lost ; 
▁ xxmaj and as with age his body uglier grows , 
▁ xxmaj so his mind cankers . i will plague them all , 
▁ xxmaj even to roaring . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ariel , loaden with glistering apparel , & c. 

▁ xxmaj come , hang them on this line . 
▁ [ prospero and xxup ariel remain , invisible ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caliban , xxup stephano , and xxup trinculo , all wet 

▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj pray you , tread softly , that the blind mole may not 
▁ xxmaj hear a foot fall ; we now are near his cell . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj monster , your fairy , which you say is a harmless 
▁ fairy , has done little better than play'd the xxmaj jack with us . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj monster , i do smell all horse - piss at which my 
▁ nose is in great indignation . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj so is mine . xxmaj do you hear , monster ? xxmaj if i should 
▁ take a displeasure against you , look you- 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj thou wert but a lost monster . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj good my lord , give me thy favour still . 
▁ xxmaj be patient , for the prize xxmaj i 'll bring thee to 
▁ xxmaj shall hoodwink this mischance ; therefore speak softly . 
▁ xxmaj all 's hush'd as midnight yet . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj ay , but to lose our bottles in the pool ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj there is not only disgrace and dishonour in 
▁ that , monster , but an infinite loss . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj that 's more to me than my wetting ; yet this is 
▁ your harmless fairy , monster . 
▁ xxup stephano . i will fetch off my bottle , though i be o'er 
▁ ears for my labour . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj prithee , my king , be quiet . xxmaj seest thou here , 
▁ xxmaj this is the mouth o ' th ' cell ; no noise , and enter . 
▁ xxmaj do that good mischief which may make this island 
▁ xxmaj thine own for ever , and xxup i , thy xxmaj caliban , 
▁ xxmaj for aye thy foot - licker . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj give me thy hand . i do begin to have bloody 
▁ thoughts . 
▁ xxup trinculo . o xxmaj king xxmaj stephano ! o peer ! o worthy xxmaj stephano ! 
▁ xxmaj look what a wardrobe here is for thee ! 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj let it alone , thou fool ; it is but trash . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxup o , ho , monster ; we know what belongs to a 
▁ frippery . o xxmaj king xxmaj stephano ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj put off that gown , xxmaj trinculo ; by this hand , xxmaj i 'll 
▁ have that gown . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj thy xxmaj grace shall have it . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj the dropsy drown this fool ! xxmaj what do you mean 
▁ xxmaj to dote thus on such luggage ? xxmaj let ' t alone , 
▁ xxmaj and do the murder first . xxmaj if he awake , 
▁ xxmaj from toe to crown he 'll fill our skins with pinches ; 
▁ xxmaj make us strange stuff . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj be you quiet , monster . xxmaj mistress line , is not 
▁ this my jerkin ? xxmaj now is the jerkin under the line ; now , 
▁ jerkin , you are like to lose your hair , and prove a bald 
▁ jerkin . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj do , do . xxmaj we steal by line and level , an't like 
▁ your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup stephano . i thank thee for that jest ; here 's a garment 
▁ for't . xxmaj wit shall not go unrewarded while i am king of 
▁ this country . ' steal by line and level ' is an excellent 
▁ pass of pate ; there 's another garmet for't . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj monster , come , put some lime upon your fingers , 
▁ and away with the rest . 
▁ xxup caliban . i will have none on't . xxmaj we shall lose our time , 
▁ xxmaj and all be turn'd to barnacles , or to apes 
▁ xxmaj with foreheads villainous low . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj monster , lay - to your fingers ; help to bear this 
▁ away where my hogshead of wine is , or xxmaj i 'll turn you out 
▁ of my kingdom . xxmaj go to , carry this . 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj and this . 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj ay , and this . 

▁ a noise of hunters beard . xxmaj enter divers xxup spirits , in 
▁ shape of dogs and hounds , bunting them about ; 
▁ xxup prospero and xxup ariel setting them on 

▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj hey , xxmaj mountain , hey ! 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj silver ! there it goes , xxmaj silver ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj fury , xxmaj fury ! xxmaj there , xxmaj tyrant , there ! xxmaj hark , hark ! 
▁ [ caliban , xxup stephano , and xxup trinculo are driven out ] 
▁ xxmaj go charge my goblins that they grind their joints 
▁ xxmaj with dry convulsions , shorten up their sinews 
▁ xxmaj with aged cramps , and more pinch - spotted make them 
▁ xxmaj than pard or cat o ' mountain . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj hark , they roar . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj let them be hunted soundly . xxmaj at this hour 
▁ xxmaj lies at my mercy all mine enemies . 
▁ xxmaj shortly shall all my labours end , and thou 
▁ xxmaj shalt have the air at freedom ; for a little 
▁ xxmaj follow , and do me service . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 

 xxmaj before xxup prospero 's cell 

 xxmaj enter xxup prospero in his magic robes , and xxup ariel 

▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj now does my project gather to a head ; 
▁ xxmaj my charms crack not , my spirits obey ; and time 
▁ xxmaj goes upright with his carriage . xxmaj how 's the day ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj on the sixth hour ; at which time , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you said our work should cease . 
▁ xxup prospero . i did say so , 
▁ xxmaj when first i rais'd the tempest . xxmaj say , my spirit , 
▁ xxmaj how fares the xxmaj king and 's followers ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj confin'd together 
▁ xxmaj in the same fashion as you gave in charge ; 
▁ xxmaj just as you left them ; all prisoners , sir , 
▁ xxmaj in the line - grove which weather - fends your cell ; 
▁ xxmaj they can not budge till your release . xxmaj the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj his brother , and yours , abide all three distracted , 
▁ xxmaj and the remainder mourning over them , 
▁ xxmaj brim full of sorrow and dismay ; but chiefly 
▁ xxmaj him you term'd , sir , ' the good old lord , xxmaj gonzalo ' ; 
▁ xxmaj his tears run down his beard , like winter 's drops 
▁ xxmaj from eaves of reeds . xxmaj your charm so strongly works 'em 
▁ xxmaj that if you now beheld them your affections 
▁ xxmaj would become tender . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj dost thou think so , spirit ? 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj mine would , sir , were i human . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj and mine shall . 
▁ xxmaj hast thou , which art but air , a touch , a feeling 
▁ xxmaj of their afflictions , and shall not myself , 
▁ xxmaj one of their kind , that relish all as sharply , 
▁ xxmaj passion as they , be kindlier mov'd than thou art ? 
▁ xxmaj though with their high wrongs i am struck to th ' quick , 
▁ xxmaj yet with my nobler reason ' gainst my fury 
▁ xxmaj do i take part ; the rarer action is 
▁ xxmaj in virtue than in vengeance ; they being penitent , 
▁ xxmaj the sole drift of my purpose doth extend 
▁ xxmaj not a frown further . xxmaj go release them , xxmaj ariel ; 
▁ xxmaj my charms xxmaj i 'll break , their senses xxmaj i 'll restore , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall be themselves . 
▁ xxup ariel . xxmaj i 'll fetch them , sir . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj ye elves of hills , brooks , standing lakes , and 
▁ groves ; 
▁ xxmaj and ye that on the sands with printless foot 
▁ xxmaj do chase the ebbing xxmaj neptune , and do fly him 
▁ xxmaj when he comes back ; you demi - puppets that 
▁ xxmaj by moonshine do the green sour ringlets make , 
▁ xxmaj whereof the ewe not bites ; and you whose pastime 
▁ xxmaj is to make midnight mushrooms , that rejoice 
▁ xxmaj to hear the solemn curfew ; by whose aid- 
▁ xxmaj weak masters though ye be - i have be - dimm'd 
▁ xxmaj the noontide sun , call'd forth the mutinous winds , 
▁ xxmaj and ' twixt the green sea and the azur'd vault 
▁ xxmaj set roaring war . xxmaj to the dread rattling thunder 
▁ xxmaj have i given fire , and rifted xxmaj jove 's stout oak 
▁ xxmaj with his own bolt ; the strong - bas'd promontory 
▁ xxmaj have i made shake , and by the spurs pluck'd up 
▁ xxmaj the pine and cedar . xxmaj graves at my command 
▁ xxmaj have wak'd their sleepers , op'd , and let 'em forth , 
▁ xxmaj by my so potent art . xxmaj but this rough magic 
▁ i here abjure ; and , when i have requir'd 
▁ xxmaj some heavenly music - which even now i do- 
▁ xxmaj to work mine end upon their senses that 
▁ xxmaj this airy charm is for , xxmaj i 'll break my staff , 
▁ xxmaj bury it certain fathoms in the earth , 
▁ xxmaj and deeper than did ever plummet sound 
▁ xxmaj i 'll drown my book . [ solem music ] 

▁ xxmaj here enters xxup ariel before ; then xxup alonso , with 
▁ frantic gesture , attended by xxup gonzalo ; xxup sebastian 
▁ and xxup antonio in like manner , attended by xxup adrian 
▁ and xxup francisco . xxmaj they all enter the circle which 
▁ xxup prospero had made , and there stand charm'd ; which 
▁ xxup prospero observing , speaks 

▁ a solemn air , and the best comforter 
▁ xxmaj to an unsettled fancy , cure thy brains , 
▁ xxmaj now useless , boil'd within thy skull ! xxmaj there stand , 
▁ xxmaj for you are spell - stopp'd . 
▁ xxmaj holy xxmaj gonzalo , honourable man , 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes , ev'n sociable to the show of thine , 
▁ xxmaj fall fellowly drops . xxmaj the charm dissolves apace , 
▁ xxmaj and as the morning steals upon the night , 
▁ xxmaj melting the darkness , so their rising senses 
▁ xxmaj begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle 
▁ xxmaj their clearer reason . o good xxmaj gonzalo , 
▁ xxmaj my true preserver , and a loyal sir 
▁ xxmaj to him thou follow'st ! i will pay thy graces 
▁ xxmaj home both in word and deed . xxmaj most cruelly 
▁ xxmaj didst thou , xxmaj alonso , use me and my daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj thy brother was a furtherer in the act . 
▁ xxmaj thou art pinch'd for't now , xxmaj sebastian . xxmaj flesh and blood , 
▁ xxmaj you , brother mine , that entertain'd ambition , 
▁ xxmaj expell'd remorse and nature , who , with xxmaj sebastian- 
▁ xxmaj whose inward pinches therefore are most strong- 
▁ xxmaj would here have kill'd your king , i do forgive thee , 
▁ xxmaj unnatural though thou art . xxmaj their understanding 
▁ xxmaj begins to swell , and the approaching tide 
▁ xxmaj will shortly fill the reasonable shore 
▁ xxmaj that now lies foul and muddy . xxmaj not one of them 
▁ xxmaj that yet looks on me , or would know me . xxmaj ariel , 
▁ xxmaj fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell ; xxmaj exit xxup ariel 
▁ i will discase me , and myself present 
▁ xxmaj as i was sometime xxmaj milan . xxmaj quickly , spirit 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt ere long be free . 

▁ xxup ariel , on returning , sings and helps to attire him 

▁ xxmaj where the bee sucks , there suck xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj in a cowslip 's bell i lie ; 
▁ xxmaj there i couch when owls do cry . 
▁ xxmaj on the bat 's back i do fly 
▁ xxmaj after summer merrily . 
▁ xxmaj merrily , merrily shall i live now 
▁ xxmaj under the blossom that hangs on the bough . 

▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj why , that 's my dainty xxmaj ariel ! i shall miss thee ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet thou shalt have freedom . xxmaj so , so , so . 
▁ xxmaj to the xxmaj king 's ship , invisible as thou art ; 
▁ xxmaj there shalt thou find the mariners asleep 
▁ xxmaj under the hatches ; the master and the boatswain 
▁ xxmaj being awake , enforce them to this place ; 
▁ xxmaj and presently , i prithee . 
▁ xxup ariel . i drink the air before me , and return 
▁ xxmaj or ere your pulse twice beat . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj all torment , trouble , wonder and amazement , 
▁ xxmaj inhabits here . xxmaj some heavenly power guide us 
▁ xxmaj out of this fearful country ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj behold , xxmaj sir xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj the wronged xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan , xxmaj prospero . 
▁ xxmaj for more assurance that a living prince 
▁ xxmaj does now speak to thee , i embrace thy body ; 
▁ xxmaj and to thee and thy company i bid 
▁ a hearty welcome . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj whe'er thou be'st he or no , 
▁ xxmaj or some enchanted trifle to abuse me , 
▁ xxmaj as late i have been , i not know . xxmaj thy pulse 
▁ xxmaj beats , as of flesh and blood ; and , since i saw thee , 
▁ xxmaj th ' affliction of my mind amends , with which , 
▁ i fear , a madness held me . xxmaj this must crave- 
▁ xxmaj an if this be at all - a most strange story . 
▁ xxmaj thy dukedom i resign , and do entreat 
▁ xxmaj thou pardon me my wrongs . xxmaj but how should xxmaj prospero 
▁ xxmaj be living and be here ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj first , noble friend , 
▁ xxmaj let me embrace thine age , whose honour can not 
▁ xxmaj be measur'd or confin'd . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj whether this be 
▁ xxmaj or be not , xxmaj i 'll not swear . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj you do yet taste 
▁ xxmaj some subtleties o ' th ' isle , that will not let you 
▁ xxmaj believe things certain . xxmaj welcome , my friends all ! 
▁ [ aside to xxup sebastian and xxup antonio ] xxmaj but you , my brace of 
▁ lords , were i so minded , 
▁ i here could pluck his xxmaj highness ' frown upon you , 
▁ xxmaj and justify you traitors ; at this time 
▁ i will tell no tales . 
▁ xxup sebastian . [ aside ] xxmaj the devil speaks in him . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj for you , most wicked sir , whom to call brother 
▁ xxmaj would even infect my mouth , i do forgive 
▁ xxmaj thy rankest fault - all of them ; and require 
▁ xxmaj my dukedom of thee , which perforce i know 
▁ xxmaj thou must restore . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj if thou beest xxmaj prospero , 
▁ xxmaj give us particulars of thy preservation ; 
▁ xxmaj how thou hast met us here , whom three hours since 
▁ xxmaj were wreck'd upon this shore ; where i have lost- 
▁ xxmaj how sharp the point of this remembrance is!- 
▁ xxmaj my dear son xxmaj ferdinand . 
▁ xxup prospero . i am woe for't , sir . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj irreparable is the loss ; and patience 
▁ xxmaj says it is past her cure . 
▁ xxup prospero . i rather think 
▁ xxmaj you have not sought her help , of whose soft grace 
▁ xxmaj for the like loss i have her sovereign aid , 
▁ xxmaj and rest myself content . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj you the like loss ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj as great to me as late ; and , supportable 
▁ xxmaj to make the dear loss , have i means much weaker 
▁ xxmaj than you may call to comfort you , for i 
▁ xxmaj have lost my daughter . 
▁ xxup alonso . a daughter ! 
▁ o heavens , that they were living both in xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king and xxmaj queen there ! xxmaj that they were , i wish 
▁ xxmaj myself were mudded in that oozy bed 
▁ xxmaj where my son lies . xxmaj when did you lose your daughter ? 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj in this last tempest . i perceive these lords 
▁ xxmaj at this encounter do so much admire 
▁ xxmaj that they devour their reason , and scarce think 
▁ xxmaj their eyes do offices of truth , their words 
▁ xxmaj are natural breath ; but , howsoe'er you have 
▁ xxmaj been justled from your senses , know for certain 
▁ xxmaj that i am xxmaj prospero , and that very duke 
▁ xxmaj which was thrust forth of xxmaj milan ; who most strangely 
▁ xxmaj upon this shore , where you were wrecked , was landed 
▁ xxmaj to be the lord on't . xxmaj no more yet of this ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a chronicle of day by day , 
▁ xxmaj not a relation for a breakfast , nor 
▁ xxmaj befitting this first meeting . xxmaj welcome , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj this cell 's my court ; here have i few attendants , 
▁ xxmaj and subjects none abroad ; pray you , look in . 
▁ xxmaj my dukedom since you have given me again , 
▁ i will requite you with as good a thing ; 
▁ xxmaj at least bring forth a wonder , to content ye 
▁ xxmaj as much as me my dukedom . 

▁ xxmaj here xxup prospero discovers xxup ferdinand and xxup miranda , 
▁ playing at chess 

▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj sweet lord , you play me false . 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj no , my dearest love , 
▁ i would not for the world . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxmaj yes , for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle 
▁ xxmaj and i would call it fair play . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj if this prove 
▁ a vision of the island , one dear son 
▁ xxmaj shall i twice lose . 
▁ xxup sebastian . a most high miracle ! 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj though the seas threaten , they are merciful ; 
▁ i have curs'd them without cause . [ kneels ] 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj now all the blessings 
▁ xxmaj of a glad father compass thee about ! 
▁ xxmaj arise , and say how thou cam'st here . 
▁ xxup miranda . xxup o , wonder ! 
▁ xxmaj how many goodly creatures are there here ! 
▁ xxmaj how beauteous mankind is ! o brave new world 
▁ xxmaj that has such people in't ! 
▁ xxup prospero . ' tis new to thee . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj what is this maid with whom thou wast at play ? 
▁ xxmaj your eld'st acquaintance can not be three hours ; 
▁ xxmaj is she the goddess that hath sever'd us , 
▁ xxmaj and brought us thus together ? 
▁ xxup ferdinand . xxmaj sir , she is mortal ; 
▁ xxmaj but by immortal xxmaj providence she 's mine . 
▁ i chose her when i could not ask my father 
▁ xxmaj for his advice , nor thought i had one . xxmaj she 
▁ xxmaj is daughter to this famous xxmaj duke of xxmaj milan , 
▁ xxmaj of whom so often i have heard renown 
▁ xxmaj but never saw before ; of whom i have 
▁ xxmaj receiv'd a second life ; and second father 
▁ xxmaj this lady makes him to me . 
▁ xxup alonso . i am hers . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxup o , how oddly will it sound that i 
▁ xxmaj must ask my child forgiveness ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj there , sir , stop ; 
▁ xxmaj let us not burden our remembrances with 
▁ a heaviness that 's gone . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . i have inly wept , 
▁ xxmaj or should have spoke ere this . xxmaj look down , you gods , 
▁ xxmaj and on this couple drop a blessed crown ; 
▁ xxmaj for it is you that have chalk'd forth the way 
▁ xxmaj which brought us hither . 
▁ xxup alonso . i say , xxmaj amen , xxmaj gonzalo ! 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj was xxmaj milan thrust from xxmaj milan , that his issue 
▁ xxmaj should become xxmaj kings of xxmaj naples ? xxup o , rejoice 
▁ xxmaj beyond a common joy , and set it down 
▁ xxmaj with gold on lasting pillars : in one voyage 
▁ xxmaj did xxmaj claribel her husband find at xxmaj tunis ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj ferdinand , her brother , found a wife 
▁ xxmaj where he himself was lost ; xxmaj prospero his dukedom 
▁ xxmaj in a poor isle ; and all of us ourselves 
▁ xxmaj when no man was his own . 
▁ xxup alonso . [ to xxup ferdinand and xxup miranda ] xxmaj give me your 
▁ hands .