xxbos xxmaj let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart 
▁ xxmaj that doth not wish you joy . 
▁ xxup gonzalo . xxmaj be it so . xxmaj amen ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ariel , with the xxup master and xxup boatswain 
▁ amazedly following 

▁ o look , sir ; look , sir ! xxmaj here is more of us ! 
▁ i prophesied , if a gallows were on land , 
▁ xxmaj this fellow could not drown . xxmaj now , blasphemy , 
▁ xxmaj that swear'st grace o'erboard , not an oath on shore ? 
▁ xxmaj hast thou no mouth by land ? xxmaj what is the news ? 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj the best news is that we have safely found 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj king and company ; the next , our ship- 
▁ xxmaj which but three glasses since we gave out split- 
▁ xxmaj is tight and yare , and bravely rigg'd , as when 
▁ xxmaj we first put out to sea . 
▁ xxup ariel . [ aside to xxup prospero ] xxmaj sir , all this service 
▁ xxmaj have i done since i went . 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside to xxup ariel ] xxmaj my tricksy spirit ! 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj these are not natural events ; they strengthen 
▁ xxmaj from strange to stranger . xxmaj say , how came you hither ? 
▁ xxup boatswain . xxmaj if i did think , sir , i were well awake , 
▁ xxmaj i 'd strive to tell you . xxmaj we were dead of sleep , 
▁ xxmaj and - how , we know not - all clapp'd under hatches ; 
▁ xxmaj where , but even now , with strange and several noises 
▁ xxmaj of roaring , shrieking , howling , jingling chains , 
▁ xxmaj and moe diversity of sounds , all horrible , 
▁ xxmaj we were awak'd ; straightway at liberty ; 
▁ xxmaj where we , in all her trim , freshly beheld 
▁ xxmaj our royal , good , and gallant ship ; our master 
▁ xxmaj cap'ring to eye her . xxmaj on a trice , so please you , 
▁ xxmaj even in a dream , were we divided from them , 
▁ xxmaj and were brought moping hither . 
▁ xxup ariel . [ aside to xxup prospero ] xxmaj was't well done ? 
▁ xxup prospero . [ aside to xxup ariel ] xxmaj bravely , my diligence . xxmaj thou 
▁ shalt be free . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj this is as strange a maze as e'er men trod ; 
▁ xxmaj and there is in this business more than nature 
▁ xxmaj was ever conduct of . xxmaj some oracle 
▁ xxmaj must rectify our knowledge . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj sir , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj do not infest your mind with beating on 
▁ xxmaj the strangeness of this business ; at pick'd leisure , 
▁ xxmaj which shall be shortly , single xxmaj i 'll resolve you , 
▁ xxmaj which to you shall seem probable , of every 
▁ xxmaj these happen'd accidents ; till when , be cheerful 
▁ xxmaj and think of each thing well . [ aside to xxup ariel ] xxmaj come 
▁ hither , spirit ; 
▁ xxmaj set xxmaj caliban and his companions free ; 
▁ xxmaj untie the spell . [ exit xxup ariel ] xxmaj how fares my gracious sir ? 
▁ xxmaj there are yet missing of your company 
▁ xxmaj some few odd lads that you remember not . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ariel , driving in xxup caliban , xxup stephano , and 
▁
▁ xxup trinculo , in their stolen apparel 
▁ xxup stephano . xxmaj every man shift for all the rest , and let no man 
▁ take care for himself ; for all is but fortune . xxmaj coragio , 
▁ bully - monster , coragio ! 
▁ xxup trinculo . xxmaj if these be true spies which i wear in my head , 
▁ here 's a goodly sight . 
▁ xxup caliban . o xxmaj setebos , these be brave spirits indeed ! 
▁ xxmaj how fine my master is ! i am afraid 
▁ xxmaj he will chastise me . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj ha , ha ! 
▁ xxmaj what things are these , my lord xxmaj antonio ? 
▁ xxmaj will money buy'em ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj very like ; one of them 
▁ xxmaj is a plain fish , and no doubt marketable . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj mark but the badges of these men , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj then say if they be true . xxmaj this mis - shapen knave- 
▁ xxmaj his mother was a witch , and one so strong 
▁ xxmaj that could control the moon , make flows and ebbs , 
▁ xxmaj and deal in her command without her power . 
▁ xxmaj these three have robb'd me ; and this demi - devil- 
▁ xxmaj for he 's a bastard one - had plotted with them 
▁ xxmaj to take my life . xxmaj two of these fellows you 
▁ xxmaj must know and own ; this thing of darkness i 
▁ xxmaj acknowledge mine . 
▁ xxup caliban . i shall be pinch'd to death . 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj is not this xxmaj stephano , my drunken butler ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj he is drunk now ; where had he wine ? 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj and xxmaj trinculo is reeling ripe ; where should they 
▁ xxmaj find this grand liquor that hath gilded 'em ? 
▁ xxmaj how cam'st thou in this pickle ? 
▁ xxup trinculo . i have been in such a pickle since i saw you 
▁ last that , i fear me , will never out of my bones . i 
▁ shall not fear fly - blowing . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj stephano ! 
▁ xxup stephano . xxup o , touch me not ; i am not xxmaj stephano , but a 
▁ cramp . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj you 'd be king o ' the isle , sirrah ? 
▁ xxup stephano . i should have been a sore one , then . 
▁ xxup alonso . [ pointing to xxup caliban ] xxmaj this is as strange a thing 
▁ as e'er i look'd on . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj he is as disproportioned in his manners 
▁ xxmaj as in his shape . xxmaj go , sirrah , to my cell ; 
▁ xxmaj take with you your companions ; as you look 
▁ xxmaj to have my pardon , trim it handsomely . 
▁ xxup caliban . xxmaj ay , that i will ; and xxmaj i 'll be wise hereafter , 
▁ xxmaj and seek for grace . xxmaj what a thrice - double ass 
▁ xxmaj was i to take this drunkard for a god , 
▁ xxmaj and worship this dull fool ! 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj go to ; away ! 
▁ xxup alonso . xxmaj hence , and bestow your luggage where you found it . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj or stole it , rather . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup caliban , xxup stephano , and xxup trinculo 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj sir , i invite your xxmaj highness and your train 
▁ xxmaj to my poor cell , where you shall take your rest 
▁ xxmaj for this one night ; which , part of it , xxmaj i 'll waste 
▁ xxmaj with such discourse as , i not doubt , shall make it 
▁ xxmaj go quick away - the story of my life , 
▁ xxmaj and the particular accidents gone by 
▁ xxmaj since i came to this isle . xxmaj and in the morn 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bring you to your ship , and so to xxmaj naples , 
▁ xxmaj where i have hope to see the nuptial 
▁ xxmaj of these our dear - belov'd solemnized , 
▁ xxmaj and thence retire me to my xxmaj milan , where 
▁ xxmaj every third thought shall be my grave . 
▁ xxup alonso . i long 
▁ xxmaj to hear the story of your life , which must 
▁ xxmaj take the ear strangely . 
▁ xxup prospero . xxmaj i 'll deliver all ; 
▁ xxmaj and promise you calm seas , auspicious gales , 
▁ xxmaj and sail so expeditious that shall catch 
▁ xxmaj your royal fleet far off . [ aside to xxup ariel ] xxmaj my xxmaj ariel , 
▁ chick , 
▁ xxmaj that is thy charge . xxmaj then to the elements 
▁ xxmaj be free , and fare thou well!-please you , draw near . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 



 xxup epilogue 
▁ xxup epilogue 
▁ xxmaj spoken by xxup prospero 

▁ xxmaj now my charms are all o'erthrown , 
▁ xxmaj and what strength i have 's mine own , 
▁ xxmaj which is most faint . xxmaj now ' tis true , 
▁ i must be here confin'd by you , 
▁ xxmaj or sent to xxmaj naples . xxmaj let me not , 
▁ xxmaj since i have my dukedom got , 
▁ xxmaj and pardon'd the deceiver , dwell 
▁ xxmaj in this bare island by your spell ; 
▁ xxmaj but release me from my bands 
▁ xxmaj with the help of your good hands . 
▁ xxmaj gentle breath of yours my sails 
▁ xxmaj must fill , or else my project fails , 
▁ xxmaj which was to please . xxmaj now i want 
▁ xxmaj spirits to enforce , art to enchant ; 
▁ xxmaj and my ending is despair 
▁ xxmaj unless i be reliev'd by prayer , 
▁ xxmaj which pierces so that it assaults 
▁ xxmaj mercy itself , and frees all faults . 
▁ xxmaj as you from crimes would pardon'd be , 
▁ xxmaj let your indulgence set me free . 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1608 

 xxup the xxup life xxup of xxup timon xxup of xxup athens 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup timon of xxmaj athens 

▁ xxup lucius 
▁ xxup lucullus 
▁ xxup sempronius 
▁ flattering lords 

▁ xxup ventidius , one of xxmaj timon 's false friends 
▁ xxup alcibiades , an xxmaj athenian captain 
▁ xxup apemantus , a churlish philosopher 
▁ xxup flavius , steward to xxmaj timon 

▁ xxup flaminius 
▁ xxup lucilius 
▁ xxup servilius 
▁ xxmaj timon 's servants 

▁ xxup caphis 
▁ xxup philotus 
▁ xxup titus 
▁ xxup hortensius 
▁ servants to xxmaj timon 's creditors 

▁ xxup poet 
▁ xxup painter 
▁ xxup jeweller 
▁ xxup merchant 
▁ xxup mercer 
▁ xxup an xxup old xxup athenian 
▁ xxup three xxup strangers 
▁ a xxup page 
▁ a xxup fool 

▁ xxup phrynia 
▁ xxup timandra 
▁ mistresses to xxmaj alcibiades 

▁ xxup cupid 
▁ xxup amazons 
▁ in the xxmaj masque 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj senators , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , xxmaj servants , xxmaj thieves , and 
▁ xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj athens and the neighbouring woods 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj athens . xxup timon 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup poet , xxup painter , xxup jeweller , xxup merchant , and xxup mercer , at several doors 

▁ xxup poet . xxmaj good day , sir . 
▁ xxup painter . i am glad y'are well . 
▁ xxup poet . i have not seen you long ; how goes the world ? 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj it wears , sir , as it grows . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj ay , that 's well known . 
▁ xxmaj but what particular rarity ? xxmaj what strange , 
▁ xxmaj which manifold record not matches ? xxmaj see , 
▁ xxmaj magic of bounty , all these spirits thy power 
▁ xxmaj hath conjur'd to attend ! i know the merchant . 
▁ xxup painter . i know them both ; th ' other 's a jeweller . 
▁ xxup merchant . xxup o , ' tis a worthy lord ! 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj nay , that 's most fix'd . 
▁ xxup merchant . a most incomparable man ; breath'd , as it were , 
▁ xxmaj to an untirable and continuate goodness . 
▁ xxmaj he passes . 
▁ xxup jeweller . i have a jewel here- 
▁ xxup merchant . xxup o , pray let 's see't . xxmaj for the xxmaj lord xxmaj timon , sir ? 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj if he will touch the estimate . xxmaj but for that- 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj when we for recompense have prais'd the vile , 
▁ xxmaj it stains the glory in that happy verse 
▁ xxmaj which aptly sings the good . 
▁ xxup merchant . [ looking at the jewel ] ' tis a good form . 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj and rich . xxmaj here is a water , look ye . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj you are rapt , sir , in some work , some dedication 
▁ xxmaj to the great lord . 
▁ xxup poet . a thing slipp'd idly from me . 
▁ xxmaj our poesy is as a gum , which oozes 
▁ xxmaj from whence ' tis nourish'd . xxmaj the fire i ' th ' flint 
▁ xxmaj shows not till it be struck : our gentle flame 
▁ xxmaj provokes itself , and like the current flies 
▁ xxmaj each bound it chafes . xxmaj what have you there ? 
▁ xxup painter . a picture , sir . xxmaj when comes your book forth ? 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj upon the heels of my presentment , sir . 
▁ xxmaj let 's see your piece . 
▁ xxup painter . ' tis a good piece . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj so ' tis ; this comes off well and excellent . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj indifferent . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj admirable . xxmaj how this grace 
▁ xxmaj speaks his own standing ! xxmaj what a mental power 
▁ xxmaj this eye shoots forth ! xxmaj how big imagination 
▁ xxmaj moves in this lip ! xxmaj to th ' dumbness of the gesture 
▁ xxmaj one might interpret . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj it is a pretty mocking of the life . 
▁ xxmaj here is a touch ; is't good ? 
▁ xxup poet . i will say of it 
▁ xxmaj it tutors nature . xxmaj artificial strife 
▁ xxmaj lives in these touches , livelier than life . 

▁ xxmaj enter certain xxup senators , and pass over 

▁ xxup painter . xxmaj how this lord is followed ! 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj the senators of xxmaj athens- happy man ! 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj look , moe ! 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj you see this confluence , this great flood of visitors . 
▁ i have in this rough work shap'd out a man 
▁ xxmaj whom this beneath world doth embrace and hug 
▁ xxmaj with amplest entertainment . xxmaj my free drift 
▁ xxmaj halts not particularly , but moves itself 
▁ xxmaj in a wide sea of tax . xxmaj no levell'd malice 
▁ xxmaj infects one comma in the course i hold , 
▁ xxmaj but flies an eagle flight , bold and forth on , 
▁ xxmaj leaving no tract behind . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj how shall i understand you ? 
▁ xxup poet . i will unbolt to you . 
▁ xxmaj you see how all conditions , how all minds- 
▁ xxmaj as well of glib and slipp'ry creatures as 
▁ xxmaj of grave and austere quality , tender down 
▁ xxmaj their services to xxmaj lord xxmaj timon . xxmaj his large fortune , 
▁ xxmaj upon his good and gracious nature hanging , 
▁ xxmaj subdues and properties to his love and tendance 
▁ xxmaj all sorts of hearts ; yea , from the glass - fac'd flatterer 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj apemantus , that few things loves better 
▁ xxmaj than to abhor himself ; even he drops down 
▁ xxmaj the knee before him , and returns in peace 
▁ xxmaj most rich in xxmaj timon 's nod . 
▁ xxup painter . i saw them speak together . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj sir , i have upon a high and pleasant hill 
▁ xxmaj feign'd xxmaj fortune to be thron'd . xxmaj the base o ' th ' mount 
▁ xxmaj is rank'd with all deserts , all kind of natures 
▁ xxmaj that labour on the bosom of this sphere 
▁ xxmaj to propagate their states . xxmaj amongst them all 
▁ xxmaj whose eyes are on this sovereign lady fix'd 
▁ xxmaj one do i personate of xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's frame , 
▁ xxmaj whom xxmaj fortune with her ivory hand wafts to her ; 
▁ xxmaj whose present grace to present slaves and servants 
▁ xxmaj translates his rivals . 
▁ xxup painter . ' tis conceiv'd to scope . 
▁ xxmaj this throne , this xxmaj fortune , and this hill , methinks , 
▁ xxmaj with one man beckon'd from the rest below , 
▁ xxmaj bowing his head against the steepy mount 
▁ xxmaj to climb his happiness , would be well express'd 
▁ xxmaj in our condition . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj nay , sir , but hear me on . 
▁ xxmaj all those which were his fellows but of late- 
▁ xxmaj some better than his value- on the moment 
▁ xxmaj follow his strides , his lobbies fill with tendance , 
▁ xxmaj rain sacrificial whisperings in his ear , 
▁ xxmaj make sacred even his stirrup , and through him 
▁ xxmaj drink the free air . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj ay , marry , what of these ? 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj when xxmaj fortune in her shift and change of mood 
▁ xxmaj spurns down her late beloved , all his dependants , 
▁ xxmaj which labour'd after him to the mountain 's top 
▁ xxmaj even on their knees and hands , let him slip down , 
▁ xxmaj not one accompanying his declining foot . 
▁ xxup painter . ' tis common . 
▁ a thousand moral paintings i can show 
▁ xxmaj that shall demonstrate these quick blows of xxmaj fortune 's 
▁ xxmaj more pregnantly than words . xxmaj yet you do well 
▁ xxmaj to show xxmaj lord xxmaj timon that mean eyes have seen 
▁ xxmaj the foot above the head . 

▁ xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj enter xxup timon , addressing himself 
▁ courteously to every suitor , a xxup messenger from 
▁ xxup ventidius talking with him ; xxup lucilius and other 
▁ servants following 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj imprison'd is he , say you ? 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj ay , my good lord . xxmaj five talents is his debt ; 
▁ xxmaj his means most short , his creditors most strait . 
▁ xxmaj your honourable letter he desires 
▁ xxmaj to those have shut him up ; which failing , 
▁ xxmaj periods his comfort . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj noble xxmaj ventidius ! xxmaj well . 
▁ i am not of that feather to shake of 
▁ xxmaj my friend when he must need me . i do know him 
▁ a gentleman that well deserves a help , 
▁ xxmaj which he shall have . xxmaj i 'll pay the debt , and free him . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj your lordship ever binds him . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj commend me to him ; i will send his ransom ; 
▁ xxmaj and being enfranchis'd , bid him come to me . 
▁ ' tis not enough to help the feeble up , 
▁ xxmaj but to support him after . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj all happiness to your honour ! xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter an xxup old xxup athenian 

▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj lord xxmaj timon , hear me speak . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj freely , good father . 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj thou hast a servant nam'd xxmaj lucilius . 
▁ xxup timon . i have so ; what of him ? 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj most noble xxmaj timon , call the man before thee . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj attends he here , or no ? xxmaj lucilius ! 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj here , at your lordship 's service . 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj this fellow here , xxmaj lord xxmaj timon , this thy creature , 
▁ xxmaj by night frequents my house . i am a man 
▁ xxmaj that from my first have been inclin'd to thrift , 
▁ xxmaj and my estate deserves an heir more rais'd 
▁ xxmaj than one which holds a trencher . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj well ; what further ? 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj one only daughter have xxup i , no kin else , 
▁ xxmaj on whom i may confer what i have got . 
▁ xxmaj the maid is fair , o ' th ' youngest for a bride , 
▁ xxmaj and i have bred her at my dearest cost 
▁ xxmaj in qualities of the best . xxmaj this man of thine 
▁ xxmaj attempts her love ; i prithee , noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj join with me to forbid him her resort ; 
▁ xxmaj myself have spoke in vain . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj the man is honest . 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj therefore he will be , xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxmaj his honesty rewards him in itself ; 
▁ xxmaj it must not bear my daughter . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj does she love him ? 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj she is young and apt : 
▁ xxmaj our own precedent passions do instruct us 
▁ xxmaj what levity 's in youth . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj love you the maid ? 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj ay , my good lord , and she accepts of it . 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj if in her marriage my consent be missing , 
▁ i call the gods to witness i will choose 
▁ xxmaj mine heir from forth the beggars of the world , 
▁ xxmaj and dispossess her all . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj how shall she be endow'd , 
▁ xxmaj if she be mated with an equal husband ? 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj three talents on the present ; in future , all . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj this gentleman of mine hath serv'd me long ; . 
▁ xxmaj to build his fortune i will strain a little , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a bond in men . xxmaj give him thy daughter : 
▁ xxmaj what you bestow , in him xxmaj i 'll counterpoise , 
▁ xxmaj and make him weigh with her . 
▁ xxup old xxup athenian . xxmaj most noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj pawn me to this your honour , she is his . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj my hand to thee ; mine honour on my promise . 
▁ xxup lucilius . xxmaj humbly i thank your lordship . xxmaj never may 
▁ xxmaj that state or fortune fall into my keeping 
▁ xxmaj which is not owed to you ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucilius and xxup old xxup athenian 
▁ xxup poet . [ presenting his poem ] xxmaj vouchsafe my labour , and long live your 
▁ lordship ! 
▁ xxup timon . i thank you ; you shall hear from me anon ; 
▁ xxmaj go not away . xxmaj what have you there , my friend ? 
▁ xxup painter . a piece of painting , which i do beseech 
▁ xxmaj your lordship to accept . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj painting is welcome . 
▁ xxmaj the painting is almost the natural man ; 
▁ xxmaj for since dishonour traffics with man 's nature , 
▁ xxmaj he is but outside ; these pencill'd figures are 
▁ xxmaj even such as they give out . i like your work , 
▁ xxmaj and you shall find i like it ; wait attendance 
▁ xxmaj till you hear further from me . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj the gods preserve ye ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj well fare you , gentleman . xxmaj give me your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj we must needs dine together . xxmaj sir , your jewel 
▁ xxmaj hath suffered under praise . 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj what , my lord ! xxmaj dispraise ? 
▁ xxup timon . a mere satiety of commendations ; 
▁ xxmaj if i should pay you for't as ' tis extoll'd , 
▁ xxmaj it would unclew me quite . 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj my lord , ' tis rated 
▁ xxmaj as those which sell would give ; but you well know 
▁ xxmaj things of like value , differing in the owners , 
▁ xxmaj are prized by their masters . xxmaj believe't , dear lord , 
▁ xxmaj you mend the jewel by the wearing it . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj well mock'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup apemantus 

▁ xxup merchant . xxmaj no , my good lord ; he speaks the common tongue , 
▁ xxmaj which all men speak with him . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj look who comes here ; will you be chid ? 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj we 'll bear , with your lordship . 
▁ xxup merchant . xxmaj he 'll spare none . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj good morrow to thee , gentle xxmaj apemantus ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj till i be gentle , stay thou for thy good morrow ; 
▁ xxmaj when thou art xxmaj timon 's dog , and these knaves honest . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj why dost thou call them knaves ? xxmaj thou know'st them not . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj are they not xxmaj athenians ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj then i repent not . 
▁ xxup jeweller . xxmaj you know me , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thou know'st i do ; i call'd thee by thy name . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj thou art proud , xxmaj apemantus . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj of nothing so much as that i am not like xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj whither art going ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj to knock out an honest xxmaj athenian 's brains . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj that 's a deed thou't die for . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj right , if doing nothing be death by th ' law . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj how lik'st thou this picture , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj the best , for the innocence . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj wrought he not well that painted it ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj he wrought better that made the painter ; and yet he 's 
▁ but a filthy piece of work . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj y'are a dog . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thy mother 's of my generation ; what 's she , if i be a dog ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj wilt dine with me , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj no ; i eat not lords . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj an thou shouldst , thou'dst anger ladies . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxup o , they eat lords ; so they come by great bellies . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj that 's a lascivious apprehension . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj so thou apprehend'st it take it for thy labour . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj how dost thou like this jewel , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj not so well as plain dealing , which will not cost a man 
▁ a doit . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what dost thou think ' tis worth ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj not worth my thinking . xxmaj how now , poet ! 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj how now , philosopher ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thou liest . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj art not one ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj then i lie not . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj art not a poet ? 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj then thou liest . xxmaj look in thy last work , where thou hast 
▁ feign'd him a worthy fellow . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj that 's not feign'd- he is so . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj yes , he is worthy of thee , and to pay thee for thy 
▁ labour . xxmaj he that loves to be flattered is worthy o ' th ' flatterer . 
▁ xxmaj heavens , that i were a lord ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what wouldst do then , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj e'en as xxmaj apemantus does now : hate a lord with my heart . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what , thyself ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj wherefore ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj that i had no angry wit to be a lord.- xxmaj art not thou a 
▁ merchant ? 
▁ xxup merchant . xxmaj ay , xxmaj apemantus . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj traffic confound thee , if the gods will not ! 
▁ xxup merchant . xxmaj if traffic do it , the gods do it . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj traffic 's thy god , and thy god confound thee ! 

▁ xxmaj trumpet sounds . xxmaj enter a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what trumpet 's that ? 
▁ xxup messenger . ' tis xxmaj alcibiades , and some twenty horse , 
▁ xxmaj all of companionship . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj pray entertain them ; give them guide to us . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt some attendants 
▁ xxmaj you must needs dine with me . xxmaj go not you hence 
▁ xxmaj till i have thank'd you . xxmaj when dinner 's done 
▁ xxmaj show me this piece . i am joyful of your sights . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup alcibiades , with the rest 

▁ xxmaj most welcome , sir ! [ they salute ] 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj so , so , there ! 
▁ xxmaj aches contract and starve your supple joints ! 
▁ xxmaj that there should be small love amongst these sweet knaves , 
▁ xxmaj and all this courtesy ! xxmaj the strain of man 's bred out 
▁ xxmaj into baboon and monkey . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj sir , you have sav'd my longing , and i feed 
▁ xxmaj most hungerly on your sight . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj right welcome , sir ! 
▁ xxmaj ere we depart we 'll share a bounteous time 
▁ xxmaj in different pleasures . xxmaj pray you , let us in . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup apemantus 

▁ xxmaj enter two xxup lords 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj what time o ' day is't , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj time to be honest . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj that time serves still . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj the more accursed thou that still omit'st it . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj thou art going to xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's feast . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ay ; to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj fare thee well , fare thee well . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj why , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj shouldst have kept one to thyself , for i mean to give 
▁ thee none . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj hang thyself . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj no , i will do nothing at thy bidding ; make thy requests 
▁ to thy friend . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj away , unpeaceable dog , or xxmaj i 'll spurn thee hence . 
▁ xxup apemantus . i will fly , like a dog , the heels o ' th ' ass . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj he 's opposite to humanity . xxmaj come , shall we in 
▁ xxmaj and taste xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's bounty ? xxmaj he outgoes 
▁ xxmaj the very heart of kindness . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he pours it out : xxmaj plutus , the god of gold , 
▁ xxmaj is but his steward ; no meed but he repays 
▁ xxmaj sevenfold above itself ; no gift to him 
▁ xxmaj but breeds the giver a return exceeding 
▁ xxmaj all use of quittance . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj the noblest mind he carries 
▁ xxmaj that ever govern'd man . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj long may he live in fortunes ! shall we in ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj i 'll keep you company . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a room of state in xxup timon 's house 

 xxmaj hautboys playing loud music . a great banquet serv'd in ; 
 xxup flavius and others attending ; and then enter xxup lord xxup timon , the states , 
 the xxup athenian xxup lords , xxup ventidius , which xxup timon redeem'd from prison . 
 xxmaj then comes , dropping after all , xxup apemantus , discontentedly , like himself 

▁ xxup ventidius . xxmaj most honoured xxmaj timon , 
▁ xxmaj it hath pleas'd the gods to remember my father 's age , 
▁ xxmaj and call him to long peace . 
▁ xxmaj he is gone happy , and has left me rich . 
▁ xxmaj then , as in grateful virtue i am bound 
▁ xxmaj to your free heart , i do return those talents , 
▁ xxmaj doubled with thanks and service , from whose help 
▁ i deriv'd liberty . 
▁ xxup timon . xxup o , by no means , 
▁ xxmaj honest xxmaj ventidius ! xxmaj you mistake my love ; 
▁ i gave it freely ever ; and there 's none 
▁ xxmaj can truly say he gives , if he receives . 
▁ xxmaj if our betters play at that game , we must not dare 
▁ xxmaj to imitate them : faults that are rich are fair . 
▁ xxup ventidius . a noble spirit ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj nay , my lords , ceremony was but devis'd at first 
▁ xxmaj to set a gloss on faint deeds , hollow welcomes , 
▁ xxmaj recanting goodness , sorry ere ' tis shown ; 
▁ xxmaj but where there is true friendship there needs none . 
▁ xxmaj pray , sit ; more welcome are ye to my fortunes 
▁ xxmaj than my fortunes to me . [ they sit ] 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj my lord , we always have confess'd it . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ho , ho , confess'd it ! xxmaj hang'd it , have you not ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxup o , xxmaj apemantus , you are welcome . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj no ; 
▁ xxmaj you shall not make me welcome . 
▁ i come to have thee thrust me out of doors . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj fie , th'art a churl ; ye have got a humour there 
▁ xxmaj does not become a man ; ' tis much to blame . 
▁ xxmaj they say , my lords , xxmaj ira furor brevis est ; but yond man is ever 
▁ angry . xxmaj go , let him have a table by himself ; for he does neither 
▁ affect company nor is he fit for't indeed . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj let me stay at thine apperil , xxmaj timon . 
▁ i come to observe ; i give thee warning on't . 
▁ xxup timon . i take no heed of thee . xxmaj th'art an xxmaj athenian , therefore 
▁ welcome . i myself would have no power ; prithee let my meat make 
▁ thee silent . 
▁ xxup apemantus . i scorn thy meat ; ' t'would choke me , for i should ne'er 
▁ flatter thee . o you gods , what a number of men eats xxmaj timon , and he 
▁ sees 'em not ! xxmaj it grieves me to see so many dip their meat in one 
▁ man 's blood ; and all the madness is , he cheers them up too . 
▁ i wonder men dare trust themselves with men . 
▁ xxmaj methinks they should invite them without knives : 
▁ xxmaj good for their meat and safer for their lives . 
▁ xxmaj there 's much example for't ; the fellow that sits next him now , 
▁ parts bread with him , pledges the breath of him in a divided 
▁ draught , is the readiest man to kill him . ' t has been proved . xxmaj if 
▁ i were a huge man i should fear to drink at meals . 
▁ xxmaj lest they should spy my windpipe 's dangerous notes : 
▁ xxmaj great men should drink with harness on their throats . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj my lord , in heart ! and let the health go round . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj let it flow this way , my good lord . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj flow this way ! a brave fellow ! xxmaj he keeps his tides well . 
▁ xxmaj those healths will make thee and thy state look ill , xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxmaj here 's that which is too weak to be a sinner , honest water , which 
▁ ne'er left man i ' th ' mire . 
▁ xxmaj this and my food are equals ; there 's no odds . ' 
▁ xxmaj feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods . 

▁ xxup apemantus ' xxmaj grace 

▁ xxmaj immortal gods , i crave no pelf ; 
▁ i pray for no man but myself . 
▁ xxmaj grant i may never prove so fond 
▁ xxmaj to trust man on his oath or bond , 
▁ xxmaj or a harlot for her weeping , 
▁ xxmaj or a dog that seems a - sleeping , 
▁ xxmaj or a keeper with my freedom , 
▁ xxmaj or my friends , if i should need 'em . 
▁ xxmaj amen . xxmaj so fall to't . 
▁ xxmaj rich men sin , and i eat root . [ eats and drinks ] 

▁ xxmaj much good dich thy good heart , xxmaj apemantus ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj captain xxmaj alcibiades , your heart 's in the field now . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj my heart is ever at your service , my lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than dinner of 
▁ friends . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj so they were bleeding new , my lord , there 's no meat 
▁ like 'em ; i could wish my best friend at such a feast . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj would all those flatterers were thine enemies then , that 
▁ then thou mightst kill 'em , and bid me to 'em . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj might we but have that happiness , my lord , that you 
▁ would once use our hearts , whereby we might express some part of 
▁ our zeals , we should think ourselves for ever perfect . 
▁ xxup timon . xxup o , no doubt , my good friends , but the gods themselves have 
▁ provided that i shall have much help from you . xxmaj how had you been 
▁ my friends else ? xxmaj why have you that charitable title from 
▁ thousands , did not you chiefly belong to my heart ? i have told 
▁ more of you to myself than you can with modesty speak in your own 
▁ behalf ; and thus far i confirm you . o you gods , think xxup i , what 
▁ need we have any friends if we should ne'er have need of 'em ? 
▁ xxmaj they were the most needless creatures living , should we ne'er 
▁ have use for 'em ; and would most resemble sweet instruments hung 
▁ up in cases , that keep their sounds to themselves . xxmaj why , i have 
▁ often wish'd myself poorer , that i might come nearer to you . xxmaj we 
▁ are born to do benefits ; and what better or properer can we call 
▁ our own than the riches of our friends ? xxup o , what a precious 
▁ comfort ' tis to have so many like brothers commanding one 
▁ another 's fortunes ! xxup o , joy 's e'en made away ere't can be born ! 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes can not hold out water , methinks . xxmaj to forget their 
▁ faults , i drink to you . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thou weep'st to make them drink , xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj joy had the like conception in our eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and at that instant like a babe sprung up . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ho , ho ! i laugh to think that babe a bastard . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . i promise you , my lord , you mov'd me much . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj much ! [ sound tucket ] 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what means that trump ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxmaj how now ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj please you , my lord , there are certain ladies most 
▁ desirous of admittance . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ladies ! xxmaj what are their wills ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj there comes with them a forerunner , my lord , which bears 
▁ that office to signify their pleasures . 
▁ xxup timon . i pray let them be admitted . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cupid 
▁ xxup cupid . xxmaj hail to thee , worthy xxmaj timon , and to all 
▁ xxmaj that of his bounties taste ! xxmaj the five best xxmaj senses 
▁ xxmaj acknowledge thee their patron , and come freely 
▁ xxmaj to gratulate thy plenteous bosom . xxmaj th ' xxmaj ear , 
▁ xxmaj taste , xxmaj touch , xxmaj smell , pleas'd from thy table rise ; 
▁ xxmaj they only now come but to feast thine eyes . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj they 're welcome all ; let 'em have kind admittance . 
▁ xxmaj music , make their welcome . xxmaj exit xxup cupid 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj you see , my lord , how ample y'are belov'd . 

▁ xxmaj music . xxmaj re - enter xxup cupid , witb a xxmaj masque of xxup ladies as xxmaj amazons , 
▁ with lutes in their hands , dancing and playing 
▁
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj hoy - day , what a sweep of vanity comes this way ! 
▁ xxmaj they dance ? xxmaj they are mad women . 
▁ xxmaj like madness is the glory of this life , 
▁ xxmaj as this pomp shows to a little oil and root . 
▁ xxmaj we make ourselves fools to disport ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj and spend our flatteries to drink those men 
▁ xxmaj upon whose age we void it up again 
▁ xxmaj with poisonous spite and envy . 
▁ xxmaj who lives that 's not depraved or depraves ? 
▁ xxmaj who dies that bears not one spurn to their graves 
▁ xxmaj of their friends ' gift ? 
▁ i should fear those that dance before me now 
▁ xxmaj would one day stamp upon me . ' t has been done : 
▁ xxmaj men shut their doors against a setting sun . 

▁ xxmaj the xxup lords rise from table , with much adoring of 
▁ xxup timon ; and to show their loves , each single out an 
▁ xxmaj amazon , and all dance , men witb women , a lofty 
▁ strain or two to the hautboys , and cease 
▁
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you have done our pleasures much grace , fair ladies , 
▁ xxmaj set a fair fashion on our entertainment , 
▁ xxmaj which was not half so beautiful and kind ; 
▁ xxmaj you have added worth unto't and lustre , 
▁ xxmaj and entertain'd me with mine own device ; 
▁ i am to thank you for't . 
▁ xxup first xxup lady . xxmaj my lord , you take us even at the best . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj faith , for the worst is filthy , and would not hold 
▁ taking , i doubt me . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ladies , there is an idle banquet attends you ; 
▁ xxmaj please you to dispose yourselves . 
▁ xxup all xxup ladies . xxmaj most thankfully , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup cupid and xxup ladies 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj flavius ! 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj the little casket bring me hither . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj yes , my lord . [ aside ] xxmaj more jewels yet ! 
▁ xxmaj there is no crossing him in 's humour , 
▁ xxmaj else i should tell him- well i ' faith , i should- 
▁ xxmaj when all 's spent , he 'd be cross'd then , an he could . 
▁ ' tis pity bounty had not eyes behind , 
▁ xxmaj that man might ne'er be wretched for his mind . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj where be our men ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj here , my lord , in readiness . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj our horses ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup flavius , with the casket 

▁ xxup timon . o my friends , 
▁ i have one word to say to you . xxmaj look you , my good lord , 
▁ i must entreat you honour me so much 
▁ xxmaj as to advance this jewel ; accept it and wear it , 
▁ xxmaj kind my lord . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i am so far already in your gifts- 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj so are we all . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj my lord , there are certain nobles of the xxmaj senate newly 
▁ alighted and come to visit you . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj they are fairly welcome . xxmaj exit xxup servant 
▁ xxup flavius . i beseech your honour , vouchsafe me a word ; it does 
▁ concern you near . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj near ! xxmaj why then , another time xxmaj i 'll hear thee . i prithee let 's 
▁ be provided to show them entertainment . 
▁ xxup flavius . [ aside ] i scarce know how . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup servant 

▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj may it please vour honour , xxmaj lord xxmaj lucius , out of his 
▁ free love , hath presented to you four milk - white horses , trapp'd 
▁ in silver . 
▁ xxup timon . i shall accept them fairly . xxmaj let the presents 
▁ xxmaj be worthily entertain'd . xxmaj exit xxup servant 

▁ xxmaj enter a third xxup servant 

▁ xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what news ? 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj please you , my lord , that honourable gentleman , xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj lucullus , entreats your company to - morrow to hunt with him and 
▁ has sent your honour two brace of greyhounds . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj i 'll hunt with him ; and let them be receiv'd , 
▁ xxmaj not without fair reward . xxmaj exit xxup servant 
▁ xxup flavius . [ aside ] xxmaj what will this come to ? 
▁ xxmaj he commands us to provide and give great gifts , 
▁ xxmaj and all out of an empty coffer ; 
▁ xxmaj nor will he know his purse , or yield me this , 
▁ xxmaj to show him what a beggar his heart is , 
▁ xxmaj being of no power to make his wishes good . 
▁ xxmaj his promises fly so beyond his state 
▁ xxmaj that what he speaks is all in debt ; he owes 
▁ xxmaj for ev'ry word . xxmaj he is so kind that he now 
▁ xxmaj pays interest for't ; his land 's put to their books . 
▁ xxmaj well , would i were gently put out of office 
▁ xxmaj before i were forc'd out ! 
▁ xxmaj happier is he that has no friend to feed 
▁ xxmaj than such that do e'en enemies exceed . 
▁ i bleed inwardly for my lord . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you do yourselves much wrong ; 
▁ xxmaj you bate too much of your own merits . 
▁ xxmaj here , my lord , a trifle of our love . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj with more than common thanks i will receive it . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxup o , he 's the very soul of bounty ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj and now i remember , my lord , you gave good words the other 
▁ day of a bay courser i rode on . ' tis yours because you lik'd it . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxup o , i beseech you pardon me , my lord , in that . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you may take my word , my lord : i know no man 
▁ xxmaj can justly praise but what he does affect . 
▁ i weigh my friend 's affection with mine own . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll tell you true ; xxmaj i 'll call to you . 
▁ xxup all xxup lords . xxup o , none so welcome ! 
▁ xxup timon . i take all and your several visitations 
▁ xxmaj so kind to heart ' tis not enough to give ; 
▁ xxmaj methinks i could deal kingdoms to my friends 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er be weary . xxmaj alcibiades , 
▁ xxmaj thou art a soldier , therefore seldom rich . 
▁ xxmaj it comes in charity to thee ; for all thy living 
▁ xxmaj is ' mongst the dead , and all the lands thou hast 
▁ xxmaj lie in a pitch'd field . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj ay , defil'd land , my lord . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj we are so virtuously bound- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj and so am i to you . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj so infinitely endear'd- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj all to you . xxmaj lights , more lights ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj the best of happiness , honour , and fortunes , keep with 
▁ you , xxmaj lord xxmaj timon ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ready for his friends . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup apemantus and xxup timon 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj what a coil 's here ! 
▁ xxmaj serving of becks and jutting - out of bums ! 
▁ i doubt whether their legs be worth the sums 
▁ xxmaj that are given for 'em . xxmaj friendship 's full of dregs : 
▁ xxmaj methinks false hearts should never have sound legs . 
▁ xxmaj thus honest fools lay out their wealth on curtsies . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj now , xxmaj apemantus , if thou wert not sullen 
▁ i would be good to thee . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll nothing ; for if i should be brib'd too , there 
▁ would be none left to rail upon thee , and then thou wouldst sin 
▁ the faster . xxmaj thou giv'st so long , xxmaj timon , i fear me thou wilt give 
▁ away thyself in paper shortly . xxmaj what needs these feasts , pomps , 
▁ and vain - glories ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj nay , an you begin to rail on society once , i am sworn not to 
▁ give regard to you . xxmaj farewell ; and come with better music . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj so . xxmaj thou wilt not hear me now : thou shalt not then . xxmaj i 'll 
▁ lock thy heaven from thee . 
▁ o that men 's ears should be 
▁ xxmaj to counsel deaf , but not to flattery ! xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 a xxup senator 's house 

 xxmaj enter a xxup senator , with papers in his hand 

▁ xxup senator . xxmaj and late , five thousand . xxmaj to xxmaj varro and to xxmaj isidore 
▁ xxmaj he owes nine thousand ; besides my former sum , 
▁ xxmaj which makes it five and twenty . xxmaj still in motion 
▁ xxmaj of raging waste ? xxmaj it can not hold ; it will not . 
▁ xxmaj if i want gold , steal but a beggar 's dog 
▁ xxmaj and give it xxmaj timon , why , the dog coins gold . 
▁ xxmaj if i would sell my horse and buy twenty moe 
▁ xxmaj better than he , why , give my horse to xxmaj timon , 
▁ xxmaj ask nothing , give it him , it foals me straight , 
▁ xxmaj and able horses . xxmaj no porter at his gate , 
▁ xxmaj but rather one that smiles and still invites 
▁ xxmaj all that pass by . xxmaj it can not hold ; no reason 
▁ xxmaj can sound his state in safety . xxmaj caphis , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj caphis , i say ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caphis 
▁
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj here , sir ; what is your pleasure ? 
▁ xxup senator . xxmaj get on your cloak and haste you to xxmaj lord xxmaj timon ; 
▁ xxmaj importune him for my moneys ; be not ceas'd 
▁ xxmaj with slight denial , nor then silenc'd when 
▁ ' commend me to your master ' and the cap 
▁ xxmaj plays in the right hand , thus ; but tell him 
▁ xxmaj my uses cry to me , i must serve my turn 
▁ xxmaj out of mine own ; his days and times are past , 
▁ xxmaj and my reliances on his fracted dates 
▁ xxmaj have smit my credit . i love and honour him , 
▁ xxmaj but must not break my back to heal his finger . 
▁ xxmaj immediate are my needs , and my relief 
▁ xxmaj must not be toss'd and turn'd to me in words , 
▁ xxmaj but find supply immediate . xxmaj get you gone ; 
▁ xxmaj put on a most importunate aspect , 
▁ a visage of demand ; for i do fear , 
▁ xxmaj when every feather sticks in his own wing , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj timon will be left a naked gull , 
▁ xxmaj which flashes now a phoenix . xxmaj get you gone . 
▁ xxup caphis . i go , sir . 
▁ xxup senator . xxmaj take the bonds along with you , 
▁ xxmaj and have the dates in compt . 
▁ xxup caphis . i will , sir . 
▁ xxup senator . xxmaj go . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj before xxup timon 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup flavius , xxup timon 's xxmaj steward , with many bills in his hand 

▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj no care , no stop ! xxmaj so senseless of expense 
▁ xxmaj that he will neither know how to maintain it 
▁ xxmaj nor cease his flow of riot ; takes no account 
▁ xxmaj how things go from him , nor resumes no care 
▁ xxmaj of what is to continue . xxmaj never mind 
▁ xxmaj was to be so unwise to be so kind . 
▁ xxmaj what shall be done ? xxmaj he will not hear till feel . 
▁ i must be round with him . xxmaj now he comes from hunting . 
▁ xxmaj fie , fie , fie , fie ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup caphis , and the xxup servants xxmaj of xxup isidore and xxup varro 

▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj good even , xxmaj varro . xxmaj what , you come for money ? 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj is't not your business too ? 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj it is . xxmaj and yours too , xxmaj isidore ? 
▁ xxup isidore 's xxup servant . xxmaj it is so . 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj would we were all discharg'd ! 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . i fear it . 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj here comes the lord . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup timon and his train , with xxup alcibiades 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj so soon as dinner 's done we 'll forth again , 
▁ xxmaj my xxmaj alcibiades.- xxmaj with me ? xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj my lord , here is a note of certain dues . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj dues ! xxmaj whence are you ? 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj of xxmaj athens here , my lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj go to my steward . 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj please it your lordship , he hath put me off 
▁ xxmaj to the succession of new days this month . 
▁ xxmaj my master is awak'd by great occasion 
▁ xxmaj to call upon his own , and humbly prays you 
▁ xxmaj that with your other noble parts you 'll suit 
▁ xxmaj in giving him his right . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj mine honest friend , 
▁ i prithee but repair to me next morning . 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj nay , good my lord- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj contain thyself , good friend . 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj one xxmaj varro 's servant , my good lord- 
▁ xxup isidore 's xxup servant . xxmaj from xxmaj isidore : he humbly prays your speedy 
▁ payment- 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj if you did know , my lord , my master 's wants- 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . ' twas due on forfeiture , my lord , six weeks and 
▁ past . 
▁ xxup isidore 's xxup servant . xxmaj your steward puts me off , my lord ; and 
▁ i am sent expressly to your lordship . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj give me breath . 
▁ i do beseech you , good my lords , keep on ;