xxbos xxmaj i 'll wait upon you instantly . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup alcibiades and xxup lords 
▁ [ to xxup flavius ] xxmaj come hither . xxmaj pray you , 
▁ xxmaj how goes the world that i am thus encount'red 
▁ xxmaj with clamorous demands of date - broke bonds 
▁ xxmaj and the detention of long - since - due debts , 
▁ xxmaj against my honour ? 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj please you , gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj the time is unagreeable to this business . 
▁ xxmaj your importunacy cease till after dinner , 
▁ xxmaj that i may make his lordship understand 
▁ xxmaj wherefore you are not paid . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj do so , my friends . 
▁ xxmaj see them well entertain'd . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj pray draw near . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup apemantus and xxup fool 

▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj stay , stay , here comes the fool with xxmaj apemantus . 
▁ xxmaj let 's ha ' some sport with 'em . 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj hang him , he 'll abuse us ! 
▁ xxup isidore 's xxup servant . a plague upon him , dog ! 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj how dost , fool ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj dost dialogue with thy shadow ? 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . i speak not to thee . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj no , ' tis to thyself . [ to the xxup fool ] xxmaj come away . 
▁ xxup isidore 's xxup servant . [ to xxup varro 's xxup servant ] xxmaj there 's the fool hangs on 
▁ your back already . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj no , thou stand'st single ; th'art not on him yet . 
▁ xxup caphis . xxmaj where 's the fool now ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj he last ask'd the question . xxmaj poor rogues and usurers ' 
▁ men ! xxmaj bawds between gold and want ! 
▁ xxup all xxup servants . xxmaj what are we , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj asses . 
▁ xxup all xxup servants . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj that you ask me what you are , and do not know 
▁ yourselves . xxmaj speak to 'em , fool . 
▁ xxup fool . xxmaj how do you , gentlemen ? 
▁ xxup all xxup servants . xxmaj gramercies , good fool . xxmaj how does your mistress ? 
▁ xxup fool . xxmaj she 's e'en setting on water to scald such chickens as you 
▁ are . xxmaj would we could see you at xxmaj corinth ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj good ! gramercy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup page 

▁ xxup fool . xxmaj look you , here comes my mistress ' page . 
▁ xxup page . [ to the xxup fool ] xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj captain ? xxmaj what do you in this wise 
▁ company ? xxmaj how dost thou , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj would i had a rod in my mouth , that i might answer thee 
▁ profitably ! 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj prithee , xxmaj apemantus , read me the superscription of these 
▁ letters ; i know not which is which . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj canst not read ? 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj there will little learning die , then , that day thou art 
▁ hang'd . xxmaj this is to xxmaj lord xxmaj timon ; this to xxmaj alcibiades . xxmaj go ; thou wast 
▁ born a bastard , and thou't die a bawd . 
▁ xxup page . xxmaj thou wast whelp'd a dog , and thou shalt famish dog 's death . 
▁ xxmaj answer not : i am gone . xxmaj exit xxup page 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj e'en so thou outrun'st grace . 
▁ xxmaj fool , i will go with you to xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's . 
▁ xxup fool . xxmaj will you leave me there ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj if xxmaj timon stay at home . xxmaj you three serve three usurers ? 
▁ xxup all xxup servants . xxmaj ay ; would they serv'd us ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj so would xxup i- as good a trick as ever hangman serv'd 
▁ thief . 
▁ xxup fool . xxmaj are you three usurers ' men ? 
▁ xxup all xxup servants . xxmaj ay , fool . 
▁ xxup fool . i think no usurer but has a fool to his servant . xxmaj my mistress 
▁ is one , and i am her fool . xxmaj when men come to borrow of your 
▁ masters , they approach sadly and go away merry ; but they enter my 
▁ mistress ' house merrily and go away sadly . xxmaj the reason of this ? 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . i could render one . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj do it then , that we may account thee a whoremaster and a 
▁ knave ; which notwithstanding , thou shalt be no less esteemed . 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj what is a whoremaster , fool ? 
▁ xxup fool . a fool in good clothes , and something like thee . ' tis a 
▁ spirit . xxmaj sometime ' t appears like a lord ; sometime like a lawyer ; 
▁ sometime like a philosopher , with two stones moe than 's 
▁ artificial one . xxmaj he is very often like a knight ; and , generally , 
▁ in all shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore to 
▁ thirteen , this spirit walks in . 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj thou art not altogether a fool . 
▁ xxup fool . xxmaj nor thou altogether a wise man . 
▁ xxmaj as much foolery as i have , so much wit thou lack'st . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj that answer might have become xxmaj apemantus . 
▁ xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj aside , aside ; here comes xxmaj lord xxmaj timon . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup timon and xxup flavius 

▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj come with me , fool , come . 
▁ xxup fool . i do not always follow lover , elder brother , and woman ; 
▁ sometime the philosopher . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup apemantus and xxup fool 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj pray you walk near ; xxmaj i 'll speak with you anon . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup servants 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you make me marvel wherefore ere this time 
▁ xxmaj had you not fully laid my state before me , 
▁ xxmaj that i might so have rated my expense 
▁ xxmaj as i had leave of means . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj you would not hear me 
▁ xxmaj at many leisures i propos'd . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj go to ; 
▁ xxmaj perchance some single vantages you took 
▁ xxmaj when my indisposition put you back , 
▁ xxmaj and that unaptness made your minister 
▁ xxmaj thus to excuse yourself . 
▁ xxup flavius . o my good lord , 
▁ xxmaj at many times i brought in my accounts , 
▁ xxmaj laid them before you ; you would throw them off 
▁ xxmaj and say you found them in mine honesty . 
▁ xxmaj when , for some trifling present , you have bid me 
▁ xxmaj return so much , i have shook my head and wept ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , ' gainst th ' authority of manners , pray'd you 
▁ xxmaj to hold your hand more close . i did endure 
▁ xxmaj not seldom , nor no slight checks , when i have 
▁ xxmaj prompted you in the ebb of your estate 
▁ xxmaj and your great flow of debts . xxmaj my lov'd lord , 
▁ xxmaj though you hear now- too late!- yet now 's a time : 
▁ xxmaj the greatest of your having lacks a half 
▁ xxmaj to pay your present debts . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj let all my land be sold . 
▁ xxup flavius . ' tis all engag'd , some forfeited and gone ; 
▁ xxmaj and what remains will hardly stop the mouth 
▁ xxmaj of present dues . xxmaj the future comes apace ; 
▁ xxmaj what shall defend the interim ? xxmaj and at length 
▁ xxmaj how goes our reck'ning ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj to xxmaj lacedaemon did my land extend . 
▁ xxup flavius . o my good lord , the world is but a word ; 
▁ xxmaj were it all yours to give it in a breath , 
▁ xxmaj how quickly were it gone ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you tell me true . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj if you suspect my husbandry or falsehood , 
▁ xxmaj call me before th ' exactest auditors 
▁ xxmaj and set me on the proof . xxmaj so the gods bless me , 
▁ xxmaj when all our offices have been oppress'd 
▁ xxmaj with riotous feeders , when our vaults have wept 
▁ xxmaj with drunken spilth of wine , when every room 
▁ xxmaj hath blaz'd with lights and bray'd with minstrelsy , 
▁ i have retir'd me to a wasteful cock 
▁ xxmaj and set mine eyes at flow . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj prithee no more . 
▁ xxup flavius . ' heavens , ' have i said ' the bounty of this lord ! 
▁ xxmaj how many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants 
▁ xxmaj this night englutted ! xxmaj who is not xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's ? 
▁ xxmaj what heart , head , sword , force , means , but is xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's ? 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj timon , noble , worthy , royal xxmaj timon ! ' 
▁ xxmaj ah ! when the means are gone that buy this praise , 
▁ xxmaj the breath is gone whereof this praise is made . 
▁ xxmaj feast - won , fast - lost ; one cloud of winter show'rs , 
▁ xxmaj these flies are couch'd . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj come , sermon me no further . 
▁ xxmaj no villainous bounty yet hath pass'd my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj unwisely , not ignobly , have i given . 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou weep ? xxmaj canst thou the conscience lack 
▁ xxmaj to think i shall lack friends ? xxmaj secure thy heart : 
▁ xxmaj if i would broach the vessels of my love , 
▁ xxmaj and try the argument of hearts by borrowing , 
▁ xxmaj men and men 's fortunes could i frankly use 
▁ xxmaj as i can bid thee speak . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj assurance bless your thoughts ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj and , in some sort , these wants of mine are crown'd 
▁ xxmaj that i account them blessings ; for by these 
▁ xxmaj shall i try friends . xxmaj you shall perceive how you 
▁ xxmaj mistake my fortunes ; i am wealthy in my friends . 
▁ xxmaj within there ! xxmaj flaminius ! xxmaj servilius ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup flaminius , xxup servilius , and another xxup servant 
▁
▁ xxup servants . xxmaj my lord ! my lord ! 
▁ xxup timon . i will dispatch you severally- you to xxmaj lord xxmaj lucius ; to xxmaj lord 
▁ xxmaj lucullus you ; i hunted with his honour to - day . xxmaj you to xxmaj sempronius . 
▁ xxmaj commend me to their loves ; and i am proud , say , that my occasions 
▁ have found time to use 'em toward a supply of money . xxmaj let the 
▁ request be fifty talents . 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj as you have said , my lord . xxmaj exeunt xxup servants 
▁ xxup flavius . [ aside ] xxmaj lord xxmaj lucius and xxmaj lucullus ? xxmaj humh ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj go you , sir , to the senators , 
▁ xxmaj of whom , even to the state 's best health , i have 
▁ xxmaj deserv'd this hearing . xxmaj bid 'em send o ' th ' instant 
▁ a thousand talents to me . 
▁ xxup flavius . i have been bold , 
▁ xxmaj for that i knew it the most general way , 
▁ xxmaj to them to use your signet and your name ; 
▁ xxmaj but they do shake their heads , and i am here 
▁ xxmaj no richer in return . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj is't true ? xxmaj ca n't be ? 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj they answer , in a joint and corporate voice , 
▁ xxmaj that now they are at fall , want treasure , can not 
▁ xxmaj do what they would , are sorry- you are honourable- 
▁ xxmaj but yet they could have wish'd- they know not- 
▁ xxmaj something hath been amiss- a noble nature 
▁ xxmaj may catch a wrench- would all were well!- ' tis pity- 
▁ xxmaj and so , intending other serious matters , 
▁ xxmaj after distasteful looks , and these hard fractions , 
▁ xxmaj with certain half - caps and cold - moving nods , 
▁ xxmaj they froze me into silence . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you gods , reward them ! 
▁ xxmaj prithee , man , look cheerly . xxmaj these old fellows 
▁ xxmaj have their ingratitude in them hereditary . 
▁ xxmaj their blood is cak'd , ' tis cold , it seldom flows ; 
▁ ' tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind ; 
▁ xxmaj and nature , as it grows again toward earth , 
▁ xxmaj is fashion'd for the journey dull and heavy . 
▁ xxmaj go to xxmaj ventidius . xxmaj prithee be not sad , 
▁ xxmaj thou art true and honest ; ingeniously i speak , 
▁ xxmaj no blame belongs to thee . xxmaj ventidius lately 
▁ xxmaj buried his father , by whose death he 's stepp'd 
▁ xxmaj into a great estate . xxmaj when he was poor , 
▁ xxmaj imprison'd , and in scarcity of friends , 
▁ i clear'd him with five talents . xxmaj greet him from me , 
▁ xxmaj bid him suppose some good necessity 
▁ xxmaj touches his friend , which craves to be rememb'red 
▁ xxmaj with those five talents . xxmaj that had , give't these fellows 
▁ xxmaj to whom ' tis instant due . xxmaj nev'r speak or think 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj timon 's fortunes ' mong his friends can sink . 
▁ xxup flavius . i would i could not think it . 
▁ xxmaj that thought is bounty 's foe ; 
▁ xxmaj being free itself , it thinks all others so . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxup lucullus ' house 

 xxup flaminius waiting to speak with xxup lucullus . xxmaj enter xxup servant to him 

▁ xxup servant . i have told my lord of you ; he is coming down to you . 
▁ xxup flaminius . i thank you , sir . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lucullus 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj here 's my lord . 
▁ xxup lucullus . [ aside ] xxmaj one of xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's men ? a gift , i warrant . xxmaj why , 
▁ this hits right ; i dreamt of a silver basin and ewer to - night- 
▁ xxmaj flaminius , honest xxmaj flaminius , you are very respectively welcome , 
▁ sir . xxmaj fill me some wine . [ exit xxup servant ] xxmaj and how does that 
▁ honourable , complete , freehearted gentleman of xxmaj athens , thy very 
▁ bountiful good lord and master ? 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj his health is well , sir . 
▁ xxup lucullus . i am right glad that his health is well , sir . xxmaj and what 
▁ hast thou there under thy cloak , pretty xxmaj flaminius ? 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj faith , nothing but an empty box , sir , which in my lord 's 
▁ behalf i come to entreat your honour to supply ; who , having 
▁ great and instant occasion to use fifty talents , hath sent to 
▁ your lordship to furnish him , nothing doubting your present 
▁ assistance therein . 
▁ xxup lucullius . xxmaj la , la , la , la ! ' nothing doubting ' says he ? xxmaj alas , good 
▁ lord ! a noble gentleman ' tis , if he would not keep so good a 
▁ house . xxmaj many a time and often i ha ' din'd with him and told him 
▁ on't ; and come again to supper to him of purpose to have him 
▁ spend less ; and yet he would embrace no counsel , take no warning 
▁ by my coming . xxmaj every man has his fault , and honesty is his . i ha ' 
▁ told him on't , but i could ne'er get him from't . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servant , with wine 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj please your lordship , here is the wine . 
▁ xxup lucullus . xxmaj flaminius , i have noted thee always wise . xxmaj here 's to thee . 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj your lordship speaks your pleasure . 
▁ xxup lucullus . i have observed thee always for a towardly prompt spirit , 
▁ give thee thy due , and one that knows what belongs to reason , and 
▁ canst use the time well , if the time use thee well . xxmaj good parts in 
▁ thee . [ to xxup servant ] xxmaj get you gone , sirrah . [ exit xxup servant ] xxmaj draw 
▁ nearer , honest xxmaj flaminius . xxmaj thy lord 's a bountiful gentleman ; but 
▁ thou art wise , and thou know'st well enough , although thou com'st 
▁ to me , that this is no time to lend money , especially upon bare 
▁ friendship without security . xxmaj here 's three solidares for thee . 
▁ xxmaj good boy , wink at me , and say thou saw'st me not . xxmaj fare thee well . 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj is't possible the world should so much differ , 
▁ xxmaj and we alive that liv'd ? xxmaj fly , damned baseness , 
▁ xxmaj to him that worships thee . [ throwing the money back ] 
▁ xxup lucullus . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj now i see thou art a fool , and fit for thy master . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj may these add to the number that may scald thee ! 
▁ xxmaj let molten coin be thy damnation , 
▁ xxmaj thou disease of a friend and not himself ! 
▁ xxmaj has friendship such a faint and milky heart 
▁ xxmaj it turns in less than two nights ? o you gods , 
▁ i feel my master 's passion ! xxmaj this slave 
▁ xxmaj unto his honour has my lord 's meat in him ; 
▁ xxmaj why should it thrive and turn to nutriment 
▁ xxmaj when he is turn'd to poison ? 
▁ xxup o , may diseases only work upon't ! 
▁ xxmaj and when he 's sick to death , let not that part of nature 
▁ xxmaj which my lord paid for be of any power 
▁ xxmaj to expel sickness , but prolong his hour ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lucius , with three xxup strangers 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj who , the xxmaj lord xxmaj timon ? xxmaj he is my very good friend , and an 
▁ honourable gentleman . 
▁ xxup first xxup stranger . xxmaj we know him for no less , though we are but 
▁ strangers to him . xxmaj but i can tell you one thing , my lord , and 
▁ which i hear from common rumours : now xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's happy hours 
▁ are done and past , and his estate shrinks from him . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj fie , no : do not believe it ; he can not want for money . 
▁ xxup second xxup stranger . xxmaj but believe you this , my lord , that not long ago 
▁ one of his men was with the xxmaj lord xxmaj lucullus to borrow so many 
▁ talents ; nay , urg'd extremely for't , and showed what necessity 
▁ belong'd to't , and yet was denied . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj how ? 
▁ xxup second xxup stranger . i tell you , denied , my lord . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj what a strange case was that ! xxmaj now , before the gods , i am 
▁ asham'd on't . xxmaj denied that honourable man ! xxmaj there was very little 
▁ honour show'd in't . xxmaj for my own part , i must needs confess i have 
▁ received some small kindnesses from him , as money , plate , jewels , 
▁ and such - like trifles , nothing comparing to his ; yet , had he 
▁ mistook him and sent to me , i should ne'er have denied his 
▁ occasion so many talents . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup servilius 

▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj see , by good hap , yonder 's my lord ; i have sweat to see 
▁ his honour.- xxmaj my honour'd lord ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj servilius ? xxmaj you are kindly met , sir . xxmaj fare thee well ; commend 
▁ me to thy honourable virtuous lord , my very exquisite friend . 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj may it please your honour , my lord hath sent- 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj what has he sent ? i am so much endeared to that lord : 
▁ he 's ever sending . xxmaj how shall i thank him , think'st thou ? xxmaj and what 
▁ has he sent now ? 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj has only sent his present occasion now , my lord , 
▁ requesting your lordship to supply his instant use with so many 
▁ talents . 
▁ xxup lucius . i know his lordship is but merry with me ; 
▁ xxmaj he can not want fifty - five hundred talents . 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj but in the mean time he wants less , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj if his occasion were not virtuous 
▁ i should not urge it half so faithfully . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj dost thou speak seriously , xxmaj servilius ? 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj upon my soul , ' tis true , sir . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj what a wicked beast was i to disfurnish myself against such 
▁ a good time , when i might ha ' shown myself honourable ! xxmaj how 
▁ unluckily it happ'ned that i should purchase the day before for a 
▁ little part and undo a great deal of honour ! xxmaj servilius , now 
▁ before the gods , i am not able to do- the more beast , i say ! i 
▁ was sending to use xxmaj lord xxmaj timon myself , these gentlemen can 
▁ witness ; but i would not for the wealth of xxmaj athens i had done't 
▁ now . xxmaj commend me bountifully to his good lordship , and i hope his 
▁ honour will conceive the fairest of me , because i have no power 
▁ to be kind . xxmaj and tell him this from me : i count it one of my 
▁ greatest afflictions , say , that i can not pleasure such an 
▁ honourable gentleman . xxmaj good xxmaj servilius , will you befriend me so far 
▁ as to use mine own words to him ? 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj yes , sir , i shall . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj i 'll look you out a good turn , xxmaj servilius . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup servilius 
▁ xxmaj true , as you said , xxmaj timon is shrunk indeed ; 
▁ xxmaj and he that 's once denied will hardly speed . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup stranger . xxmaj do you observe this , xxmaj hostilius ? 
▁ xxup second xxup stranger . xxmaj ay , too well . 
▁ xxup first xxup stranger . xxmaj why , this is the world 's soul ; and just of the same 
▁ piece 
▁ xxmaj is every flatterer 's spirit . xxmaj who can call him his friend 
▁ xxmaj that dips in the same dish ? xxmaj for , in my knowing , 
▁ xxmaj timon has been this lord 's father , 
▁ xxmaj and kept his credit with his purse ; 
▁ xxmaj supported his estate ; nay , xxmaj timon 's money 
▁ xxmaj has paid his men their wages . xxmaj he ne'er drinks 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj timon 's silver treads upon his lip ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet- xxup o , see the monstrousness of man 
▁ xxmaj when he looks out in an ungrateful shape!- 
▁ xxmaj he does deny him , in respect of his , 
▁ xxmaj what charitable men afford to beggars . 
▁ xxup third xxup stranger . xxmaj religion groans at it . 
▁ xxup first xxup stranger . xxmaj for mine own part , 
▁ i never tasted xxmaj timon in my life , 
▁ xxmaj nor came any of his bounties over me 
▁ xxmaj to mark me for his friend ; yet i protest , 
▁ xxmaj for his right noble mind , illustrious virtue , 
▁ xxmaj and honourable carriage , 
▁ xxmaj had his necessity made use of me , 
▁ i would have put my wealth into donation , 
▁ xxmaj and the best half should have return'd to him , 
▁ xxmaj so much i love his heart . xxmaj but i perceive 
▁ xxmaj men must learn now with pity to dispense ; 
▁ xxmaj for policy sits above conscience . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxup sempronius ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup sempronius and a xxup servant of xxup timon 's 

▁ xxup sempronius . xxmaj must he needs trouble me in't ? xxmaj hum ! ' bove all others ? 
▁ xxmaj he might have tried xxmaj lord xxmaj lucius or xxmaj lucullus ; 
▁ xxmaj and now xxmaj ventidius is wealthy too , 
▁ xxmaj whom he redeem'd from prison . xxmaj all these 
▁ xxmaj owe their estates unto him . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj they have all been touch'd and found base metal , for 
▁ xxmaj they have all denied him . 
▁ xxup sempronius . xxmaj how ! xxmaj have they denied him ? 
▁ xxmaj has xxmaj ventidius and xxmaj lucullus denied him ? 
▁ xxmaj and does he send to me ? xxmaj three ? xxmaj humh ! 
▁ xxmaj it shows but little love or judgment in him . 
▁ xxmaj must i be his last refuge ? xxmaj his friends , like physicians , 
▁ xxmaj thrice give him over . xxmaj must i take th ' cure upon me ? 
▁ xxmaj has much disgrac'd me in't ; xxmaj i 'm angry at him , 
▁ xxmaj that might have known my place . i see no sense for't , 
▁ xxmaj but his occasions might have woo'd me first ; 
▁ xxmaj for , in my conscience , i was the first man 
▁ xxmaj that e'er received gift from him . 
▁ xxmaj and does he think so backwardly of me now 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj i 'll requite it last ? xxmaj no ; 
▁ xxmaj so it may prove an argument of laughter 
▁ xxmaj to th ' rest , and i ' mongst lords be thought a fool . 
▁ xxmaj i 'd rather than the worth of thrice the sum 
▁ xxmaj had sent to me first , but for my mind 's sake ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'd such a courage to do him good . xxmaj but now return , 
▁ xxmaj and with their faint reply this answer join : 
▁ xxmaj who bates mine honour shall not know my coin . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj excellent ! xxmaj your lordship 's a goodly villain . xxmaj the devil 
▁ knew not what he did when he made man politic- he cross'd himself 
▁ by't ; and i can not think but , in the end , the villainies of man 
▁ will set him clear . xxmaj how fairly this lord strives to appear foul ! 
▁ xxmaj takes virtuous copies to be wicked , like those that under hot 
▁ ardent zeal would set whole realms on fire . 
▁ xxmaj of such a nature is his politic love . 
▁ xxmaj this was my lord 's best hope ; now all are fled , 
▁ xxmaj save only the gods . xxmaj now his friends are dead , 
▁ xxmaj doors that were ne'er acquainted with their wards 
▁ xxmaj many a bounteous year must be employ'd 
▁ xxmaj now to guard sure their master . 
▁ xxmaj and this is all a liberal course allows : 
▁ xxmaj who can not keep his wealth must keep his house . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 a hall in xxup timon 's house 

 xxmaj enter two xxmaj of xxup varro 's xxup men , meeting xxup lucius ' xxup servant , and others , 
 all being servants of timon 's creditors , to wait for his coming out . 
 xxmaj then enter xxup titus and xxup hortensius 

▁ xxup first xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj well met ; good morrow , xxmaj titus and xxmaj hortensius . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj the like to you , kind xxmaj varro . 
▁ xxup hortensius . xxmaj lucius ! xxmaj what , do we meet together ? 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj ay , and i think one business does command us all ; 
▁ for mine is money . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj so is theirs and ours . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup philotus 

▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj and xxmaj sir xxmaj philotus too ! 
▁ xxup philotus . xxmaj good day at once . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . welcome , good brother , what do you think the hour ? 
▁ xxup philotus . xxmaj labouring for nine . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj so much ? 
▁ xxup philotus . xxmaj is not my lord seen yet ? 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj not yet . 
▁ xxup philotus . i wonder on't ; he was wo nt to shine at seven . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj ay , but the days are wax'd shorter with him ; 
▁ xxmaj you must consider that a prodigal course 
▁ xxmaj is like the sun 's , but not like his recoverable . 
▁ i fear 
▁ ' tis deepest winter in xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's purse ; 
▁ xxmaj that is , one may reach deep enough and yet 
▁ xxmaj find little . 
▁ xxup philotus . i am of your fear for that . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj i 'll show you how t ' observe a strange event . 
▁ xxmaj your lord sends now for money . 
▁ xxup hortensius . xxmaj most true , he does . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj and he wears jewels now of xxmaj timon 's gift , 
▁ xxmaj for which i wait for money . 
▁ xxup hortensius . xxmaj it is against my heart . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj mark how strange it shows 
▁ xxmaj timon in this should pay more than he owes ; 
▁ xxmaj and e'en as if your lord should wear rich jewels 
▁ xxmaj and send for money for 'em . 
▁ xxup hortensius . xxmaj i 'm weary of this charge , the gods can witness ; 
▁ i know my lord hath spent of xxmaj timon 's wealth , 
▁ xxmaj and now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth . 
▁ xxup first xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj yes , mine 's three thousand crowns ; what 's 
▁ yours ? 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj five thousand mine . 
▁ xxup first xxup varro 's xxup servant . ' tis much deep ; and it should seem by th ' 
▁ sum 
▁ xxmaj your master 's confidence was above mine , 
▁ xxmaj else surely his had equall'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup flaminius 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj one of xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's men . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj flaminius ! xxmaj sir , a word . xxmaj pray , is my lord ready to 
▁ come forth ? 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj no , indeed , he is not . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj we attend his lordship ; pray signify so much . 
▁ xxup flaminius . i need not tell him that ; he knows you are to diligent . 
▁ xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup flavius , in a cloak , muffled 

▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj ha ! xxmaj is not that his steward muffled so ? 
▁ xxmaj he goes away in a cloud . xxmaj call him , call him . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj do you hear , sir ? 
▁ xxup second xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj by your leave , sir . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj what do ye ask of me , my friend ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj we wait for certain money here , sir . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj ay , 
▁ xxmaj if money were as certain as your waiting , 
▁ ' twere sure enough . 
▁ xxmaj why then preferr'd you not your sums and bills 
▁ xxmaj when your false masters eat of my lord 's meat ? 
▁ xxmaj then they could smile , and fawn upon his debts , 
▁ xxmaj and take down th ' int'rest into their glutt'nous maws . 
▁ xxmaj you do yourselves but wrong to stir me up ; 
▁ xxmaj let me pass quietly . 
▁ xxmaj believe't , my lord and i have made an end : 
▁ i have no more to reckon , he to spend . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj ay , but this answer will not serve . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj if ' twill not serve , ' tis not so base as you , 
▁ xxmaj for you serve knaves . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup first xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj how ! xxmaj what does his cashier'd worship mutter ? 
▁ xxup second xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj no matter what ; he 's poor , and that 's 
▁ revenge enough . xxmaj who can speak broader than he that has no house 
▁ to put his head in ? xxmaj such may rail against great buildings . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup servilius 

▁ xxup titus . xxup o , here 's xxmaj servilius ; now we shall know some answer . 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj if i might beseech you , gentlemen , to repair some other 
▁ hour , i should derive much from't ; for take't of my soul , my lord 
▁ leans wondrously to discontent . xxmaj his comfortable temper has 
▁ forsook him ; he 's much out of health and keeps his chamber . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj many do keep their chambers are not sick ; 
▁ xxmaj and if it be so far beyond his health , 
▁ xxmaj methinks he should the sooner pay his debts , 
▁ xxmaj and make a clear way to the gods . 
▁ xxup servilius . xxmaj good gods ! 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj we can not take this for answer , sir . 
▁ xxup flaminius . [ within ] xxmaj servilius , help ! xxmaj my lord ! my lord ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup timon , in a rage , xxup flaminius following 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what , are my doors oppos'd against my passage ? 
▁ xxmaj have i been ever free , and must my house 
▁ xxmaj be my retentive enemy , my gaol ? 
▁ xxmaj the place which i have feasted , does it now , 
▁ xxmaj like all mankind , show me an iron heart ? 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj put in now , xxmaj titus . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj my lord , here is my bill . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj here 's mine . 
▁ xxup hortensius . xxmaj and mine , my lord . 
▁ xxup both xxup varro 's xxup servants . xxmaj and ours , my lord . 
▁ xxup philotus . xxmaj all our bills . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj knock me down with 'em ; cleave me to the girdle . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj alas , my lord- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj cut my heart in sums . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj mine , fifty talents . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj tell out my blood . 
▁ xxup lucius ' xxup servant . xxmaj five thousand crowns , my lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj five thousand drops pays that . xxmaj what yours ? and yours ? 
▁ xxup first xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup second xxup varro 's xxup servant . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj tear me , take me , and the gods fall upon you ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hortensius . xxmaj faith , i perceive our masters may throw their caps at 
▁ their money . xxmaj these debts may well be call'd desperate ones , for a 
▁ madman owes 'em . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup timon and xxup flavius 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj they have e'en put my breath from me , the slaves . 
▁ xxmaj creditors ? xxmaj devils ! 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj my dear lord- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what if it should be so ? 
▁ xxup flaminius . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj i 'll have it so . xxmaj my steward ! 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj here , my lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj so fitly ? xxmaj go , bid all my friends again : 
▁ xxmaj lucius , xxmaj lucullus , and xxmaj sempronius- all . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll once more feast the rascals . 
▁ xxup flavius . o my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you only speak from your distracted soul ; 
▁ xxmaj there is not so much left to furnish out 
▁ a moderate table . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj be it not in thy care . 
▁ xxmaj go , i charge thee , invite them all ; let in the tide 
▁ xxmaj of knaves once more ; my cook and xxmaj i 'll provide . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj the xxmaj senate xxmaj house 

 xxmaj enter three xxup senators at one door , xxup alcibiades meeting them , with attendants 

▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj my lord , you have my voice to't : the fault 's bloody . 
▁ ' tis necessary he should die : 
▁ xxmaj nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj most true ; the law shall bruise him . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj honour , health , and compassion , to the xxmaj senate ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj now , xxmaj captain ? 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i am an humble suitor to your virtues ; 
▁ xxmaj for pity is the virtue of the law , 
▁ xxmaj and none but tyrants use it cruelly . 
▁ xxmaj it pleases time and fortune to lie heavy 
▁ xxmaj upon a friend of mine , who in hot blood 
▁ xxmaj hath stepp'd into the law , which is past depth 
▁ xxmaj to those that without heed do plunge into't . 
▁ xxmaj he is a man , setting his fate aside , 
▁ xxmaj of comely virtues ; 
▁ xxmaj nor did he soil the fact with cowardice- 
▁ xxmaj an honour in him which buys out his fault- 
▁ xxmaj but with a noble fury and fair spirit , 
▁ xxmaj seeing his reputation touch'd to death , 
▁ xxmaj he did oppose his foe ; 
▁ xxmaj and with such sober and unnoted passion 
▁ xxmaj he did behove his anger ere ' twas spent , 
▁ xxmaj as if he had but prov'd an argument . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj you undergo too strict a paradox , 
▁ xxmaj striving to make an ugly deed look fair ; 
▁ xxmaj your words have took such pains as if they labour'd 
▁ xxmaj to bring manslaughter into form and set 
▁ xxmaj quarrelling upon the head of valour ; which , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj is valour misbegot , and came into the world 
▁ xxmaj when sects and factions were newly born . 
▁ xxmaj he 's truly valiant that can wisely suffer 
▁ xxmaj the worst that man can breathe , 
▁ xxmaj and make his wrongs his outsides , 
▁ xxmaj to wear them like his raiment , carelessly , 
▁ xxmaj and ne'er prefer his injuries to his heart , 
▁ xxmaj to bring it into danger . 
▁ xxmaj if wrongs be evils , and enforce us kill , 
▁ xxmaj what folly ' tis to hazard life for ill ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj my lord- 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj you can not make gross sins look clear : 
▁ xxmaj to revenge is no valour , but to bear . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj my lords , then , under favour , pardon me 
▁ xxmaj if i speak like a captain : 
▁ xxmaj why do fond men expose themselves to battle , 
▁ xxmaj and not endure all threats ? xxmaj sleep upon't , 
▁ xxmaj and let the foes quietly cut their throats , 
▁ xxmaj without repugnancy ? xxmaj if there be 
▁ xxmaj such valour in the bearing , what make we 
▁ xxmaj abroad ? xxmaj why , then , women are more valiant , 
▁ xxmaj that stay at home , if bearing carry it ; 
▁ xxmaj and the ass more captain than the lion ; the fellow 
▁ xxmaj loaden with irons wiser than the judge , 
▁ xxmaj if wisdom be in suffering . o my lords , 
▁ xxmaj as you are great , be pitifully good . 
▁ xxmaj who can not condemn rashness in cold blood ? 
▁ xxmaj to kill , i grant , is sin 's extremest gust ; 
▁ xxmaj but , in defence , by mercy , ' tis most just . 
▁ xxmaj to be in anger is impiety ; 
▁ xxmaj but who is man that is not angry ? 
▁ xxmaj weigh but the crime with this . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj you breathe in vain . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj in vain ! xxmaj his service done 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj lacedaemon and xxmaj byzantium 
▁ xxmaj were a sufficient briber for his life . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj why , i say , my lords , has done fair service , 
▁ xxmaj and slain in fight many of your enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj how full of valour did he bear himself 
▁ xxmaj in the last conflict , and made plenteous wounds ! 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj he has made too much plenty with 'em . 
▁ xxmaj he 's a sworn rioter ; he has a sin that often 
▁ xxmaj drowns him and takes his valour prisoner . 
▁ xxmaj if there were no foes , that were enough 
▁ xxmaj to overcome him . xxmaj in that beastly fury 
▁ xxmaj he has been known to commit outrages 
▁ xxmaj and cherish factions . ' tis inferr'd to us 
▁ xxmaj his days are foul and his drink dangerous . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj he dies . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj hard fate ! xxmaj he might have died in war . 
▁ xxmaj my lords , if not for any parts in him- 
▁ xxmaj though his right arm might purchase his own time , 
▁ xxmaj and be in debt to none- yet , more to move you , 
▁ xxmaj take my deserts to his , and join 'em both ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for i know your reverend ages love 
▁ xxmaj security , xxmaj i 'll pawn my victories , all 
▁ xxmaj my honours to you , upon his good returns . 
▁ xxmaj if by this crime he owes the law his life , 
▁ xxmaj why , let the war receive't in valiant gore ; 
▁ xxmaj for law is strict , and war is nothing more . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj we are for law : he dies . xxmaj urge it no more 
▁ xxmaj on height of our displeasure . xxmaj friend or brother , 
▁ xxmaj he forfeits his own blood that spills another . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj must it be so ? xxmaj it must not be . xxmaj my lords , 
▁ i do beseech you , know me . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj how ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj call me to your remembrances . 
▁ xxup third xxup senator . xxmaj what ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i can not think but your age has forgot me ; 
▁ xxmaj it could not else be i should prove so base 
▁ xxmaj to sue , and be denied such common grace . 
▁ xxmaj my wounds ache at you . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj do you dare our anger ? 
▁ ' tis in few words , but spacious in effect : 
▁ xxmaj we banish thee for ever . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj banish me ! 
▁ xxmaj banish your dotage ! xxmaj banish usury 
▁ xxmaj that makes the xxmaj senate ugly . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj if after two days ' shine xxmaj athens contain thee , 
▁ xxmaj attend our weightier judgment . xxmaj and , not to swell our spirit , 
▁ xxmaj he shall be executed presently . xxmaj exeunt xxup senators 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj now the gods keep you old enough that you may live 
▁ xxmaj only in bone , that none may look on you ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'm worse than mad ; i have kept back their foes , 
▁ xxmaj while they have told their money and let out 
▁ xxmaj their coin upon large interest , i myself 
▁ xxmaj rich only in large hurts . xxmaj all those for this ? 
▁ xxmaj is this the balsam that the usuring xxmaj senate 
▁ xxmaj pours into captains ' wounds ? xxmaj banishment ! 
▁ xxmaj it comes not ill ; i hate not to be banish'd ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a cause worthy my spleen and fury , 
▁ xxmaj that i may strike at xxmaj athens . xxmaj i 'll cheer up 
▁ xxmaj my discontented troops , and lay for hearts . 
▁ ' tis honour with most lands to be at odds ; 
▁ xxmaj soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 a banqueting hall in xxup timon 's house 

 xxmaj music . xxmaj tables set out ; servants attending . xxmaj enter divers xxup lords , 
 friends of xxup timon , at several doors 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj the good time of day to you , sir . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i also wish it to you . i think this honourable lord 
▁ did but try us this other day . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj upon that were my thoughts tiring when we encount'red . 
▁ i hope it is not so low with him as he made it seem in the trial 
▁ of his several friends . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj it should not be , by the persuasion of his new 
▁ feasting . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i should think so . xxmaj he hath sent me an earnest inviting , 
▁ which many my near occasions did urge me to put off ; but he hath 
▁ conjur'd me beyond them , and i must needs appear . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj in like manner was i in debt to my importunate 
▁ business , but he would not hear my excuse . i am sorry , when he 
▁ sent to borrow of me , that my provision was out . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i am sick of that grief too , as i understand how all 
▁ things go . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj every man here 's so . xxmaj what would he have borrowed of 
▁ you ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . a thousand pieces . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . a thousand pieces ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj what of you ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj he sent to me , sir- here he comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup timon and attendants 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj with all my heart , gentlemen both ! xxmaj and how fare you ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj ever at the best , hearing well of your lordship . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj the swallow follows not summer more willing than we 
▁ your lordship . 
▁ xxup timon . [ aside ] xxmaj nor more willingly leaves winter ; such summer - birds 
▁ are men- xxmaj gentlemen , our dinner will not recompense this long 
▁ stay ; feast your ears with the music awhile , if they will fare so 
▁ harshly o ' th ' trumpet 's sound ; we shall to't presently . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship that 
▁ i return'd you an empty messenger . 
▁ xxup timon . o sir , let it not trouble you . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj my noble lord- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ah , my good friend , what cheer ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj my most honourable lord , i am e'en sick of shame that , 
▁ when your lordship this other day sent to me , i was so 
▁ unfortunate a beggar . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj think not on't , sir . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj if you had sent but two hours before- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj let it not cumber your better remembrance . [ the banquet 
▁ brought in ] xxmaj come , bring in all together . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj all cover'd dishes ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj royal cheer , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj doubt not that , if money and the season can yield it . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj how do you ? xxmaj what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj alcibiades is banish'd . xxmaj hear you of it ? 
▁ xxup first xxup and xxup second xxup lords . xxmaj alcibiades banish'd ! 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . ' tis so , be sure of it . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj how ? how ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . i pray you , upon what ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj my worthy friends , will you draw near ? 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj i 'll tell you more anon . xxmaj here 's a noble feast toward . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj this is the old man still . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj will't hold ? xxmaj will't hold ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj it does ; but time will- and so- 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . i do conceive . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj each man to his stool with that spur as he would to the lip 
▁ of his mistress ; your diet shall be in all places alike . xxmaj make not 
▁ a city feast of it , to let the meat cool ere we can agree upon 
▁ the first place . xxmaj sit , sit . xxmaj the gods require our thanks : 

▁ xxmaj you great benefactors , sprinkle our society with thankfulness . 
▁ xxmaj for your own gifts make yourselves prais'd ; but reserve still to 
▁ give , lest your deities be despised . xxmaj lend to each man enough , 
▁ that one need not lend to another ; for were your god - heads to 
▁ borrow of men , men would forsake the gods . xxmaj make the meat be 
▁ beloved more than the man that gives it . xxmaj let no assembly of 
▁ twenty be without a score of villains . xxmaj if there sit twelve women 
▁ at the table , let a dozen of them be- as they are . xxmaj the rest of 
▁ your foes , o gods , the senators of xxmaj athens , together with the 
▁ common lag of people , what is amiss in them , you gods , make 
▁ suitable for destruction . xxmaj for these my present friends , as they 
▁ are to me nothing , so in nothing bless them , and to nothing are 
▁ they welcome . 

▁ xxmaj uncover , dogs , and lap . [ the dishes are uncovered and 
▁ seen to he full of warm water ] 
▁ xxup some xxup speak . xxmaj what does his lordship mean ? 
▁ xxup some xxup other . i know not . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj may you a better feast never behold , 
▁ xxmaj you knot of mouth - friends ! xxmaj smoke and lukewarm water 
▁ xxmaj is your perfection . xxmaj this is xxmaj timon 's last ; 
▁ xxmaj who , stuck and spangled with your flatteries , 
▁ xxmaj washes it off , and sprinkles in your faces 
▁ [ throwing the water in their faces ] 
▁ xxmaj your reeking villainy . xxmaj live loath'd and long , 
▁ xxmaj most smiling , smooth , detested parasites , 
▁ xxmaj courteous destroyers , affable wolves , meek bears , 
▁ xxmaj you fools of fortune , trencher friends , time 's flies , 
▁ xxmaj cap and knee slaves , vapours , and minute - lacks ! 
▁ xxmaj of man and beast the infinite malady 
▁ xxmaj crust you quite o'er ! xxmaj what , dost thou go ? 
▁ xxmaj soft , take thy physic first ; thou too , and thou . 
▁ xxmaj stay , i will lend thee money , borrow none . [ throws the 
▁ dishes at them , and drives them out ] 
▁ xxmaj what , all in motion ? xxmaj henceforth be no feast 
▁ xxmaj whereat a villain 's not a welcome guest . 
▁ xxmaj burn house ! xxmaj sink xxmaj athens ! xxmaj henceforth hated be 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj timon man and all humanity ! xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter the xxup lords 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj how now , my lords ! 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj know you the quality of xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's fury ? 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj push ! xxmaj did you see my cap ? 
▁ xxup fourth xxup lord . i have lost my gown . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj he 's but a mad lord , and nought but humours sways him . 
▁ xxmaj he gave me a jewel th ' other day , and now he has beat it out of 
▁ my hat . xxmaj did you see my jewel ? 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . xxmaj did you see my cap ? 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj here ' tis . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup lord . xxmaj here lies my gown . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj let 's make no stay . 
▁ xxup second xxup lord . xxmaj lord xxmaj timon 's mad . 
▁ xxup third xxup lord . i feel't upon my bones . 
▁ xxup fourth xxup lord . xxmaj one day he gives us diamonds , next day stones . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj without the walls of xxmaj athens 

 xxmaj enter xxup timon 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj let me look back upon thee . o thou wall 
▁ xxmaj that girdles in those wolves , dive in the earth 
▁ xxmaj and fence not xxmaj athens ! xxmaj matrons , turn incontinent . 
▁ xxmaj obedience , fail in children ! xxmaj slaves and fools , 
▁ xxmaj pluck the grave wrinkled xxmaj senate from the bench 
▁ xxmaj and minister in their steads . xxmaj to general filths 
▁ xxmaj convert , o ' th ' instant , green virginity . 
▁ xxmaj do't in your parents ' eyes . xxmaj bankrupts , hold fast ; 
▁ xxmaj rather than render back , out with your knives 
▁ xxmaj and cut your trusters ' throats . xxmaj bound servants , steal : 
▁ xxmaj large - handed robbers your grave masters are , 
▁ xxmaj and pill by law . xxmaj maid , to thy master 's bed : 
▁ xxmaj thy mistress is o ' th ' brothel . xxmaj son of sixteen , 
▁ xxmaj pluck the lin'd crutch from thy old limping sire , 
▁ xxmaj with it beat out his brains . xxmaj piety and fear , 
▁ xxmaj religion to the gods , peace , justice , truth , 
▁ xxmaj domestic awe , night - rest , and neighbourhood , 
▁ xxmaj instruction , manners , mysteries , and trades , 
▁ xxmaj degrees , observances , customs and laws , 
▁ xxmaj decline to your confounding contraries 
▁ xxmaj and let confusion live . xxmaj plagues incident to men , 
▁ xxmaj your potent and infectious fevers heap 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj athens , ripe for stroke . xxmaj thou cold sciatica , 
▁ xxmaj cripple our senators , that their limbs may halt 
▁ xxmaj as lamely as their manners . xxmaj lust and liberty , 
▁ xxmaj creep in the minds and marrows of our youth , 
▁ xxmaj that ' gainst the stream of virtue they may strive 
▁ xxmaj and drown themselves in riot . xxmaj itches , blains , 
▁ xxmaj sow all th ' xxmaj athenian bosoms , and their crop 
▁ xxmaj be general leprosy ! xxmaj breath infect breath , 
▁ xxmaj that their society , as their friendship , may 
▁ xxmaj be merely poison ! xxmaj nothing xxmaj i 'll bear from thee 
▁ xxmaj but nakedness , thou detestable town ! 
▁ xxmaj take thou that too , with multiplying bans . 
▁ xxmaj timon will to the woods , where he shall find 
▁ xxmaj th ' unkindest beast more kinder than mankind . 
▁ xxmaj the gods confound- hear me , you good gods all- 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj athenians both within and out that wall ! 
▁ xxmaj and grant , as xxmaj timon grows , his hate may grow 
▁ xxmaj to the whole race of mankind , high and low ! 
▁ xxmaj amen . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj athens . timon 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup flavius , with two or three xxup servants 

▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj hear you , xxmaj master xxmaj steward , where 's our master ? 
▁ xxmaj are we undone , cast off , nothing remaining ? 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj alack , my fellows , what should i say to you ? 
▁ xxmaj let me be recorded by the righteous gods , 
▁ i am as poor as you . 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj such a house broke ! 
▁ xxmaj so noble a master fall'n ! xxmaj all gone , and not 
▁ xxmaj one friend to take his fortune by the arm 
▁ xxmaj and go along with him ? 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj as we do turn our backs 
▁ xxmaj from our companion , thrown into his grave , 
▁ xxmaj so his familiars to his buried fortunes 
▁ xxmaj slink all away ; leave their false vows with him , 
▁ xxmaj like empty purses pick'd ; and his poor self , 
▁ a dedicated beggar to the air , 
▁ xxmaj with his disease of all - shunn'd poverty , 
▁ xxmaj walks , like contempt , alone . xxmaj more of our fellows . 

▁ xxmaj enter other xxup servants 

▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj all broken implements of a ruin'd house . 
▁ xxup third xxup servant . xxmaj yet do our hearts wear xxmaj timon 's livery ; 
▁ xxmaj that see i by our faces . xxmaj we are fellows still , 
▁ xxmaj serving alike in sorrow . xxmaj leak'd is our bark ; 
▁ xxmaj and we , poor mates , stand on the dying deck , 
▁ xxmaj hearing the surges threat . xxmaj we must all part 
▁ xxmaj into this sea of air . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj good fellows all , 
▁ xxmaj the latest of my wealth xxmaj i 'll share amongst you . 
▁ xxmaj wherever we shall meet , for xxmaj timon 's sake , 
▁ xxmaj let 's yet be fellows ; let 's shake our heads and say , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere a knell unto our master 's fortune , 
▁ ' we have seen better days . ' xxmaj let each take some . 
▁ [ giving them money ] 
▁ xxmaj nay , put out all your hands . xxmaj not one word more ! 
▁ xxmaj thus part we rich in sorrow , parting poor . 
▁ [ embrace , and part several ways ] 
▁ o the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us ! 
▁ xxmaj who would not wish to be from wealth exempt , 
▁ xxmaj since riches point to misery and contempt ? 
▁ xxmaj who would be so mock'd with glory , or to live 
▁ xxmaj but in a dream of friendship , 
▁ xxmaj to have his pomp , and all what state compounds , 
▁ xxmaj but only painted , like his varnish'd friends ? 
▁ xxmaj poor honest lord , brought low by his own heart , 
▁ xxmaj undone by goodness ! xxmaj strange , unusual blood , 
▁ xxmaj when man 's worst sin is he does too much good ! 
▁ xxmaj who then dares to be half so kind again ? 
▁ xxmaj for bounty , that makes gods , does still mar men . 
▁ xxmaj my dearest lord- blest to be most accurst , 
▁ xxmaj rich only to be wretched- thy great fortunes 
▁ xxmaj are made thy chief afflictions . xxmaj alas , kind lord ! 
▁ xxmaj he 's flung in rage from this ingrateful seat 
▁ xxmaj of monstrous friends ; nor has he with him to 
▁ xxmaj supply his life , or that which can command it . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow and enquire him out . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll ever serve his mind with my best will ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst i have gold , xxmaj i 'll be his steward still . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the woods near the sea - shore . xxmaj before xxup timon 's cave