xxbos xxmaj enter xxup timon in the woods 

▁ xxup timon . o blessed breeding sun , draw from the earth 
▁ xxmaj rotten humidity ; below thy sister 's orb 
▁ xxmaj infect the air ! xxmaj twinn'd brothers of one womb- 
▁ xxmaj whose procreation , residence , and birth , 
▁ xxmaj scarce is dividant- touch them with several fortunes : 
▁ xxmaj the greater scorns the lesser . xxmaj not nature , 
▁ xxmaj to whom all sores lay siege , can bear great fortune 
▁ xxmaj but by contempt of nature . 
▁ xxmaj raise me this beggar and deny't that lord : 
▁ xxmaj the senator shall bear contempt hereditary , 
▁ xxmaj the beggar native honour . 
▁ xxmaj it is the pasture lards the rother 's sides , 
▁ xxmaj the want that makes him lean . xxmaj who dares , who dares , 
▁ xxmaj in purity of manhood stand upright , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' this man 's a flatterer ' ? xxmaj if one be , 
▁ xxmaj so are they all ; for every grise of fortune 
▁ xxmaj is smooth'd by that below . xxmaj the learned pate 
▁ xxmaj ducks to the golden fool . xxmaj all 's oblique ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's nothing level in our cursed natures 
▁ xxmaj but direct villainy . xxmaj therefore be abhorr'd 
▁ xxmaj all feasts , societies , and throngs of men ! 
▁ xxmaj his semblable , yea , himself , xxmaj timon disdains . 
▁ xxmaj destruction fang mankind ! xxmaj earth , yield me roots . 
▁ [ digging ] 
▁ xxmaj who seeks for better of thee , sauce his palate 
▁ xxmaj with thy most operant poison . xxmaj what is here ? 
▁ xxmaj gold ? xxmaj yellow , glittering , precious gold ? xxmaj no , gods , 
▁ i am no idle votarist . xxmaj roots , you clear heavens ! 
▁ xxmaj thus much of this will make black white , foul fair , 
▁ xxmaj wrong right , base noble , old young , coward valiant . 
▁ xxmaj ha , you gods ! why this ? xxmaj what , this , you gods ? xxmaj why , this 
▁ xxmaj will lug your priests and servants from your sides , 
▁ xxmaj pluck stout men 's pillows from below their heads- 
▁ xxmaj this yellow slave 
▁ xxmaj will knit and break religions , bless th ' accurs'd , 
▁ xxmaj make the hoar leprosy ador'd , place thieves 
▁ xxmaj and give them title , knee , and approbation , 
▁ xxmaj with senators on the bench . xxmaj this is it 
▁ xxmaj that makes the wappen'd widow we d again- 
▁ xxmaj she whom the spital - house and ulcerous sores 
▁ xxmaj would cast the gorge at this embalms and spices 
▁ xxmaj to th ' april day again . xxmaj come , damn'd earth , 
▁ xxmaj thou common whore of mankind , that puts odds 
▁ xxmaj among the rout of nations , i will make thee 
▁ xxmaj do thy right nature . [ march afar off ] 
▁ xxmaj ha ! a drum ? xxmaj th'art quick , 
▁ xxmaj but yet xxmaj i 'll bury thee . xxmaj thou't go , strong thief , 
▁ xxmaj when gouty keepers of thee can not stand . 
▁ xxmaj nay , stay thou out for earnest . [ keeping some gold ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup alcibiades , with drum and fife , in warlike 
▁ manner ; and xxup phrynia and xxup timandra 

▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj what art thou there ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxup timon . a beast , as thou art . xxmaj the canker gnaw thy heart 
▁ xxmaj for showing me again the eyes of man ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj what is thy name ? xxmaj is man so hateful to thee 
▁ xxmaj that art thyself a man ? 
▁ xxup timon . i am xxmaj misanthropos , and hate mankind . 
▁ xxmaj for thy part , i do wish thou wert a dog , 
▁ xxmaj that i might love thee something . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i know thee well ; 
▁ xxmaj but in thy fortunes am unlearn'd and strange . 
▁ xxup timon . i know thee too ; and more than that i know thee 
▁ i not desire to know . xxmaj follow thy drum ; 
▁ xxmaj with man 's blood paint the ground , gules , gules . 
▁ xxmaj religious canons , civil laws , are cruel ; 
▁ xxmaj then what should war be ? xxmaj this fell whore of thine 
▁ xxmaj hath in her more destruction than thy sword 
▁ xxmaj for all her cherubin look . 
▁ xxup phrynia . xxmaj thy lips rot off ! 
▁ xxup timon . i will not kiss thee ; then the rot returns 
▁ xxmaj to thine own lips again . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj how came the noble xxmaj timon to this change ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj as the moon does , by wanting light to give . 
▁ xxmaj but then renew i could not , like the moon ; 
▁ xxmaj there were no suns to borrow of . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj noble xxmaj timon , 
▁ xxmaj what friendship may i do thee ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj none , but to 
▁ xxmaj maintain my opinion . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj what is it , xxmaj timon ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj promise me friendship , but perform none . xxmaj if thou wilt not 
▁ promise , the gods plague thee , for thou art man ! xxmaj if thou dost 
▁ perform , confound thee , for thou art a man ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i have heard in some sort of thy miseries . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj thou saw'st them when i had prosperity . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i see them now ; then was a blessed time . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj as thine is now , held with a brace of harlots . 
▁ xxup timandra . xxmaj is this th ' xxmaj athenian minion whom the world 
▁ xxmaj voic'd so regardfully ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj art thou xxmaj timandra ? 
▁ xxup timandra . xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj be a whore still ; they love thee not that use thee . 
▁ xxmaj give them diseases , leaving with thee their lust . 
▁ xxmaj make use of thy salt hours . xxmaj season the slaves 
▁ xxmaj for tubs and baths ; bring down rose - cheek'd youth 
▁ xxmaj to the tub - fast and the diet . 
▁ xxup timandra . xxmaj hang thee , monster ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj pardon him , sweet xxmaj timandra , for his wits 
▁ xxmaj are drown'd and lost in his calamities . 
▁ i have but little gold of late , brave xxmaj timon , 
▁ xxmaj the want whereof doth daily make revolt 
▁ xxmaj in my penurious band . i have heard , and griev'd , 
▁ xxmaj how cursed xxmaj athens , mindless of thy worth , 
▁ xxmaj forgetting thy great deeds , when neighbour states , 
▁ xxmaj but for thy sword and fortune , trod upon them- 
▁ xxup timon . i prithee beat thy drum and get thee gone . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i am thy friend , and pity thee , dear xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj how dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble ? 
▁ i had rather be alone . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj why , fare thee well ; 
▁ xxmaj here is some gold for thee . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj keep it : i can not eat it . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj when i have laid proud xxmaj athens on a heap- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj war'st thou ' gainst xxmaj athens ? 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj ay , xxmaj timon , and have cause . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj the gods confound them all in thy conquest ; 
▁ xxmaj and thee after , when thou hast conquer'd ! 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj why me , xxmaj timon ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj that by killing of villains 
▁ xxmaj thou wast born to conquer my country . 
▁ xxmaj put up thy gold . xxmaj go on . xxmaj here 's gold . xxmaj go on . 
▁ xxmaj be as a planetary plague , when xxmaj jove 
▁ xxmaj will o'er some high - vic'd city hang his poison 
▁ xxmaj in the sick air ; let not thy sword skip one . 
▁ xxmaj pity not honour'd age for his white beard : 
▁ xxmaj he is an usurer . xxmaj strike me the counterfeit matron : 
▁ xxmaj it is her habit only that is honest , 
▁ xxmaj herself 's a bawd . xxmaj let not the virgin 's cheek 
▁ xxmaj make soft thy trenchant sword ; for those milk paps 
▁ xxmaj that through the window bars bore at men 's eyes 
▁ xxmaj are not within the leaf of pity writ , 
▁ xxmaj but set them down horrible traitors . xxmaj spare not the babe 
▁ xxmaj whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy ; 
▁ xxmaj think it a bastard whom the oracle 
▁ xxmaj hath doubtfully pronounc'd thy throat shall cut , 
▁ xxmaj and mince it sans remorse . xxmaj swear against abjects ; 
▁ xxmaj put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes , 
▁ xxmaj whose proof nor yells of mothers , maids , nor babes , 
▁ xxmaj nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding , 
▁ xxmaj shall pierce a jot . xxmaj there 's gold to pay thy soldiers . 
▁ xxmaj make large confusion ; and , thy fury spent , 
▁ xxmaj confounded be thyself ! xxmaj speak not , be gone . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj hast thou gold yet ? xxmaj i 'll take the gold thou givest me , 
▁ xxmaj not all thy counsel . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj dost thou , or dost thou not , heaven 's curse upon thee ! 
▁ xxup phrynia xxup and xxup timandra . xxmaj give us some gold , good xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxmaj hast thou more ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj enough to make a whore forswear her trade , 
▁ xxmaj and to make whores a bawd . xxmaj hold up , you sluts , 
▁ xxmaj your aprons mountant ; you are not oathable , 
▁ xxmaj although i know you 'll swear , terribly swear , 
▁ xxmaj into strong shudders and to heavenly agues , 
▁ xxmaj th ' immortal gods that hear you . xxmaj spare your oaths ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll trust to your conditions . xxmaj be whores still ; 
▁ xxmaj and he whose pious breath seeks to convert you- 
▁ xxmaj be strong in whore , allure him , burn him up ; 
▁ xxmaj let your close fire predominate his smoke , 
▁ xxmaj and be no turncoats . xxmaj yet may your pains six months 
▁ xxmaj be quite contrary ! xxmaj and thatch your poor thin roofs 
▁ xxmaj with burdens of the dead- some that were hang'd , 
▁ xxmaj no matter . xxmaj wear them , betray with them . xxmaj whore still ; 
▁ xxmaj paint till a horse may mire upon your face . 
▁ a pox of wrinkles ! 
▁ xxup phrynia xxup and xxup timandra . xxmaj well , more gold . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxmaj believe't that we 'll do anything for gold . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj consumptions sow 
▁ xxmaj in hollow bones of man ; strike their sharp shins , 
▁ xxmaj and mar men 's spurring . xxmaj crack the lawyer 's voice , 
▁ xxmaj that he may never more false title plead , 
▁ xxmaj nor sound his quillets shrilly . xxmaj hoar the flamen , 
▁ xxmaj that scolds against the quality of flesh 
▁ xxmaj and not believes himself . xxmaj down with the nose , 
▁ xxmaj down with it flat , take the bridge quite away 
▁ xxmaj of him that , his particular to foresee , 
▁ xxmaj smells from the general weal . xxmaj make curl'd - pate ruffians bald , 
▁ xxmaj and let the unscarr'd braggarts of the war 
▁ xxmaj derive some pain from you . xxmaj plague all , 
▁ xxmaj that your activity may defeat and quell 
▁ xxmaj the source of all erection . xxmaj there 's more gold . 
▁ xxmaj do you damn others , and let this damn you , 
▁ xxmaj and ditches grave you all ! 
▁ xxup phrynia xxup and xxup timandra . xxmaj more counsel with more money , bounteous 
▁ xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj more whore , more mischief first ; i have given you earnest . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj strike up the drum towards xxmaj athens . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj timon ; 
▁ xxmaj if i thrive well , xxmaj i 'll visit thee again . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj if i hope well , xxmaj i 'll never see thee more . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . i never did thee harm . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj yes , thou spok'st well of me . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj call'st thou that harm ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj men daily find it . xxmaj get thee away , and take 
▁ xxmaj thy beagles with thee . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj we but offend him . xxmaj strike . 
▁ xxmaj drum beats . xxmaj exeunt all but xxup timon 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj that nature , being sick of man 's unkindness , 
▁ xxmaj should yet be hungry ! xxmaj common mother , thou , [ digging ] 
▁ xxmaj whose womb unmeasurable and infinite breast 
▁ xxmaj teems and feeds all ; whose self - same mettle , 
▁ xxmaj whereof thy proud child , arrogant man , is puff'd , 
▁ xxmaj engenders the black toad and adder blue , 
▁ xxmaj the gilded newt and eyeless venom'd worm , 
▁ xxmaj with all th ' abhorred births below crisp heaven 
▁ xxmaj whereon xxmaj hyperion 's quick'ning fire doth shine- 
▁ xxmaj yield him , who all thy human sons doth hate , 
▁ xxmaj from forth thy plenteous bosom , one poor root ! 
▁ xxmaj ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb , 
▁ xxmaj let it no more bring out ingrateful man ! 
▁ xxmaj go great with tigers , dragons , wolves , and bears ; 
▁ xxmaj teem with new monsters whom thy upward face 
▁ xxmaj hath to the marbled mansion all above 
▁ xxmaj never presented!- xxup o , a root ! xxmaj dear thanks!- 
▁ xxmaj dry up thy marrows , vines , and plough - torn leas , 
▁ xxmaj whereof ingrateful man , with liquorish draughts 
▁ xxmaj and morsels unctuous , greases his pure mind , 
▁ xxmaj that from it all consideration slips- 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup apemantus 

▁ xxmaj more man ? xxmaj plague , plague ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . i was directed hither . xxmaj men report 
▁ xxmaj thou dost affect my manners and dost use them . 
▁ xxup timon . ' tis , then , because thou dost not keep a dog , 
▁ xxmaj whom i would imitate . xxmaj consumption catch thee ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj this is in thee a nature but infected , 
▁ a poor unmanly melancholy sprung 
▁ xxmaj from change of fortune . xxmaj why this spade , this place ? 
▁ xxmaj this slave - like habit and these looks of care ? 
▁ xxmaj thy flatterers yet wear silk , drink wine , lie soft , 
▁ xxmaj hug their diseas'd perfumes , and have forgot 
▁ xxmaj that ever xxmaj timon was . xxmaj shame not these woods 
▁ xxmaj by putting on the cunning of a carper . 
▁ xxmaj be thou a flatterer now , and seek to thrive 
▁ xxmaj by that which has undone thee : hinge thy knee , 
▁ xxmaj and let his very breath whom thou'lt observe 
▁ xxmaj blow off thy cap ; praise his most vicious strain , 
▁ xxmaj and call it excellent . xxmaj thou wast told thus ; 
▁ xxmaj thou gav'st thine ears , like tapsters that bade welcome , 
▁ xxmaj to knaves and all approachers . ' tis most just 
▁ xxmaj that thou turn rascal ; hadst thou wealth again 
▁ xxmaj rascals should have't . xxmaj do not assume my likeness . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj were i like thee , xxmaj i 'd throw away myself . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thou hast cast away thyself , being like thyself ; 
▁ a madman so long , now a fool . xxmaj what , think'st 
▁ xxmaj that the bleak air , thy boisterous chamberlain , 
▁ xxmaj will put thy shirt on warm ? xxmaj will these moist trees , 
▁ xxmaj that have outliv'd the eagle , page thy heels 
▁ xxmaj and skip when thou point'st out ? xxmaj will the cold brook , 
▁ xxmaj candied with ice , caudle thy morning taste 
▁ xxmaj to cure thy o'ernight 's surfeit ? xxmaj call the creatures 
▁ xxmaj whose naked natures live in all the spite 
▁ xxmaj of wreakful heaven , whose bare unhoused trunks , 
▁ xxmaj to the conflicting elements expos'd , 
▁ xxmaj answer mere nature- bid them flatter thee . 
▁ xxup o , thou shalt find- 
▁ xxup timon . a fool of thee . xxmaj depart . 
▁ xxup apemantus . i love thee better now than e'er i did . 
▁ xxup timon . i hate thee worse . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj thou flatter'st misery . 
▁ xxup apemantus . i flatter not , but say thou art a caitiff . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj why dost thou seek me out ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj to vex thee . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj always a villain 's office or a fool 's . 
▁ xxmaj dost please thyself in't ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what , a knave too ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj if thou didst put this sour - cold habit on 
▁ xxmaj to castigate thy pride , ' twere well ; but thou 
▁ xxmaj dost it enforcedly . xxmaj thou'dst courtier be again 
▁ xxmaj wert thou not beggar . xxmaj willing misery 
▁ xxmaj outlives incertain pomp , is crown'd before . 
▁ xxmaj the one is filling still , never complete ; 
▁ xxmaj the other , at high wish . xxmaj best state , contentless , 
▁ xxmaj hath a distracted and most wretched being , 
▁ xxmaj worse than the worst , content . 
▁ xxmaj thou should'st desire to die , being miserable . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj not by his breath that is more miserable . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a slave whom xxmaj fortune 's tender arm 
▁ xxmaj with favour never clasp'd , but bred a dog . 
▁ xxmaj hadst thou , like us from our first swath , proceeded 
▁ xxmaj the sweet degrees that this brief world affords 
▁ xxmaj to such as may the passive drugs of it 
▁ xxmaj freely command , thou wouldst have plung'd thyself 
▁ xxmaj in general riot , melted down thy youth 
▁ xxmaj in different beds of lust , and never learn'd 
▁ xxmaj the icy precepts of respect , but followed 
▁ xxmaj the sug'red game before thee . xxmaj but myself , 
▁ xxmaj who had the world as my confectionary ; 
▁ xxmaj the mouths , the tongues , the eyes , and hearts of men 
▁ xxmaj at duty , more than i could frame employment ; 
▁ xxmaj that numberless upon me stuck , as leaves 
▁ xxmaj do on the oak , have with one winter 's brush 
▁ xxmaj fell from their boughs , and left me open , bare 
▁ xxmaj for every storm that blows- i to bear this , 
▁ xxmaj that never knew but better , is some burden . 
▁ xxmaj thy nature did commence in sufferance ; time 
▁ xxmaj hath made thee hard in't . xxmaj why shouldst thou hate men ? 
▁ xxmaj they never flatter'd thee . xxmaj what hast thou given ? 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt curse , thy father , that poor rag , 
▁ xxmaj must be thy subject ; who , in spite , put stuff 
▁ xxmaj to some she - beggar and compounded thee 
▁ xxmaj poor rogue hereditary . xxmaj hence , be gone . 
▁ xxmaj if thou hadst not been born the worst of men , 
▁ xxmaj thou hadst been a knave and flatterer . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj art thou proud yet ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ay , that i am not thee . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxup i , that i was 
▁ xxmaj no prodigal . 
▁ xxup timon . xxup i , that i am one now . 
▁ xxmaj were all the wealth i have shut up in thee , 
▁ xxmaj i 'd give thee leave to hang it . xxmaj get thee gone . 
▁ xxmaj that the whole life of xxmaj athens were in this ! 
▁ xxmaj thus would i eat it . [ eating a root ] 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj here ! i will mend thy feast . 
▁ [ offering him food ] 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj first mend my company : take away thyself . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj so i shall mend mine own by th ' lack of thine . 
▁ xxup timon . ' tis not well mended so ; it is but botch'd . 
▁ xxmaj if not , i would it were . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj what wouldst thou have to xxmaj athens ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj thee thither in a whirlwind . xxmaj if thou wilt , 
▁ xxmaj tell them there i have gold ; look , so i have . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj here is no use for gold . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj the best and truest ; 
▁ xxmaj for here it sleeps and does no hired harm . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj where liest a nights , xxmaj timon ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj under that 's above me . 
▁ xxmaj where feed'st thou a days , xxmaj apemantus ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj where my stomach . finds meat ; or rather , where i eat it . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj would poison were obedient , and knew my mind ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj where wouldst thou send it ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj to sauce thy dishes . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj the middle of humanity thou never knewest , but the 
▁ extremity of both ends . xxmaj when thou wast in thy gilt and thy 
▁ perfume , they mock'd thee for too much curiosity ; in thy rags 
▁ thou know'st none , but art despis'd for the contrary . xxmaj there 's a 
▁ medlar for thee ; eat it . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj on what i hate i feed not . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj dost hate a medlar ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ay , though it look like thee . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj an th ' hadst hated medlars sooner , thou shouldst have 
▁ loved thyself better now . xxmaj what man didst thou ever know unthrift 
▁ that was beloved after his means ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj who , without those means thou talk'st of , didst thou ever 
▁ know belov'd ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj myself . 
▁ xxup timon . i understand thee : thou hadst some means to keep a dog . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj what things in the world canst thou nearest compare to 
▁ thy flatterers ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj women nearest ; but men , men are the things themselves . xxmaj what 
▁ wouldst thou do with the world , xxmaj apemantus , if it lay in thy 
▁ power ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj give it the beasts , to be rid of the men . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of men , and 
▁ remain a beast with the beasts ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ay , xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup timon . a beastly ambition , which the gods grant thee t ' attain to ! 
▁ xxmaj if thou wert the lion , the fox would beguile thee ; if thou wert 
▁ the lamb , the fox would eat thee ; if thou wert the fox , the lion 
▁ would suspect thee , when , peradventure , thou wert accus'd by the 
▁ ass . xxmaj if thou wert the ass , thy dulness would torment thee ; and 
▁ still thou liv'dst but as a breakfast to the wolf . xxmaj if thou wert 
▁ the wolf , thy greediness would afflict thee , and oft thou 
▁ shouldst hazard thy life for thy dinner . xxmaj wert thou the unicorn , 
▁ pride and wrath would confound thee , and make thine own self the 
▁ conquest of thy fury . xxmaj wert thou bear , thou wouldst be kill'd by 
▁ the horse ; wert thou a horse , thou wouldst be seiz'd by the 
▁ leopard ; wert thou a leopard , thou wert german to the lion , and 
▁ the spots of thy kindred were jurors on thy life . xxmaj all thy safety 
▁ were remotion , and thy defence absence . xxmaj what beast couldst thou 
▁ be that were not subject to a beast ? xxmaj and what beast art thou 
▁ already , that seest not thy loss in transformation ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj if thou couldst please me with speaking to me , thou 
▁ mightst have hit upon it here . xxmaj the commonwealth of xxmaj athens is 
▁ become a forest of beasts . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj how has the ass broke the wall , that thou art out of the 
▁ city ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj yonder comes a poet and a painter . xxmaj the plague of company 
▁ light upon thee ! i will fear to catch it , and give way . xxmaj when i 
▁ know not what else to do , xxmaj i 'll see thee again . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj when there is nothing living but thee , thou shalt be 
▁ welcome . i had rather be a beggar 's dog than xxmaj apemantus . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj thou art the cap of all the fools alive . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj would thou wert clean enough to spit upon ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . a plague on thee ! thou art too bad to curse . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj all villains that do stand by thee are pure . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj there is no leprosy but what thou speak'st . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj if i name thee . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll beat thee- but i should infect my hands . 
▁ xxup apemantus . i would my tongue could rot them off ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj away , thou issue of a mangy dog ! 
▁ xxmaj choler does kill me that thou art alive ; 
▁ i swoon to see thee . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj would thou wouldst burst ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj away , 
▁ xxmaj thou tedious rogue ! i am sorry i shall lose 
▁ a stone by thee . [ throws a stone at him ] 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj beast ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj slave ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj toad ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj rogue , rogue , rogue ! 
▁ i am sick of this false world , and will love nought 
▁ xxmaj but even the mere necessities upon't . 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj timon , presently prepare thy grave ; 
▁ xxmaj lie where the light foam of the sea may beat 
▁ xxmaj thy gravestone daily ; make thine epitaph , 
▁ xxmaj that death in me at others ' lives may laugh . 
▁ [ looks at the gold ] o thou sweet king - killer , and dear divorce 
▁ ' twixt natural son and sire ! thou bright defiler 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj hymen 's purest bed ! thou valiant xxmaj mars ! 
▁ xxmaj thou ever young , fresh , lov'd , and delicate wooer , 
▁ xxmaj whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow 
▁ xxmaj that lies on xxmaj dian 's lap ! thou visible god , 
▁ xxmaj that sold'rest close impossibilities , 
▁ xxmaj and mak'st them kiss ! that speak'st with every tongue 
▁ xxmaj to every purpose ! o thou touch of hearts ! 
▁ xxmaj think thy slave man rebels , and by thy virtue 
▁ xxmaj set them into confounding odds , that beasts 
▁ xxmaj may have the world in empire ! 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj would ' twere so ! 
▁ xxmaj but not till i am dead . xxmaj i 'll say th ' hast gold . 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt be throng'd to shortly . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj throng'd to ? 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj thy back , i prithee . 
▁ xxup apemantus . xxmaj live , and love thy misery ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj long live so , and so die ! [ exit xxup apemantus ] i am quit . xxmaj more 
▁ things like men ? xxmaj eat , xxmaj timon , and abhor them . 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup banditti 

▁ xxup first xxup bandit . xxmaj where should he have this gold ? xxmaj it is some poor 
▁ fragment , some slender ort of his remainder . xxmaj the mere want of 
▁ gold and the falling - from of his friends drove him into this 
▁ melancholy . 
▁ xxup second xxup bandit . xxmaj it is nois'd he hath a mass of treasure . 
▁ xxup third xxup bandit . xxmaj let us make the assay upon him ; if he care not for't , 
▁ he will supply us easily ; if he covetously reserve it , how 
▁ shall 's get it ? 
▁ xxup second xxup bandit . xxmaj true ; for he bears it not about him . ' tis hid . 
▁ xxup first xxup bandit . xxmaj is not this he ? 
▁ xxup banditti . xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxup second xxup bandit . ' tis his description . 
▁ xxup third xxup bandit . xxmaj he ; i know him . 
▁ xxup banditti . xxmaj save thee , xxmaj timon ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj now , thieves ? 
▁ xxup banditti . xxmaj soldiers , not thieves . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj both too , and women 's sons . 
▁ xxup banditti . xxmaj we are not thieves , but men that much do want . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj your greatest want is , you want much of meat . 
▁ xxmaj why should you want ? xxmaj behold , the earth hath roots ; 
▁ xxmaj within this mile break forth a hundred springs ; 
▁ xxmaj the oaks bear mast , the briars scarlet hips ; 
▁ xxmaj the bounteous housewife xxmaj nature on each bush 
▁ xxmaj lays her full mess before you . xxmaj want ! xxmaj why want ? 
▁ xxup first xxup bandit . xxmaj we can not live on grass , on berries , water , 
▁ xxmaj as beasts and birds and fishes . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj nor on the beasts themselves , the birds , and fishes ; 
▁ xxmaj you must eat men . xxmaj yet thanks i must you con 
▁ xxmaj that you are thieves profess'd , that you work not 
▁ xxmaj in holier shapes ; for there is boundless theft 
▁ xxmaj in limited professions . xxmaj rascal thieves , 
▁ xxmaj here 's gold . xxmaj go , suck the subtle blood o ' th ' grape 
▁ xxmaj till the high fever seethe your blood to froth , 
▁ xxmaj and so scape hanging . xxmaj trust not the physician ; 
▁ xxmaj his antidotes are poison , and he slays 
▁ xxmaj moe than you rob . xxmaj take wealth and lives together ; 
▁ xxmaj do villainy , do , since you protest to do't , 
▁ xxmaj like workmen . xxmaj i 'll example you with thievery : 
▁ xxmaj the sun 's a thief , and with his great attraction 
▁ xxmaj robs the vast sea ; the moon 's an arrant thief , 
▁ xxmaj and her pale fire she snatches from the sun ; 
▁ xxmaj the sea 's a thief , whose liquid surge resolves 
▁ xxmaj the moon into salt tears ; the earth 's a thief , 
▁ xxmaj that feeds and breeds by a composture stol'n 
▁ xxmaj from gen'ral excrement- each thing 's a thief . 
▁ xxmaj the laws , your curb and whip , in their rough power 
▁ xxmaj has uncheck'd theft . xxmaj love not yourselves ; away , 
▁ xxmaj rob one another . xxmaj there 's more gold . xxmaj cut throats ; 
▁ xxmaj all that you meet are thieves . xxmaj to xxmaj athens go , 
▁ xxmaj break open shops ; nothing can you steal 
▁ xxmaj but thieves do lose it . xxmaj steal not less for this 
▁ i give you ; and gold confound you howsoe'er ! 
▁ xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup third xxup bandit . xxmaj has almost charm'd me from my profession by 
▁ persuading me to it . 
▁ xxup first xxup bandit . ' tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises 
▁ us ; not to have us thrive in our mystery . 
▁ xxup second xxup bandit . xxmaj i 'll believe him as an enemy , and give over my 
▁ trade . 
▁ xxup first xxup bandit . xxmaj let us first see peace in xxmaj athens . xxmaj there is no time so 
▁ miserable but a man may be true . xxmaj exeunt xxup thieves 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup flavius , to xxup timon 
▁
▁ xxup flavius . o you gods ! 
▁ xxmaj is yond despis'd and ruinous man my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj full of decay and failing ? o monument 
▁ xxmaj and wonder of good deeds evilly bestow'd ! 
▁ xxmaj what an alteration of honour 
▁ xxmaj has desp'rate want made ! 
▁ xxmaj what viler thing upon the earth than friends , 
▁ xxmaj who can bring noblest minds to basest ends ! 
▁ xxmaj how rarely does it meet with this time 's guise , 
▁ xxmaj when man was wish'd to love his enemies ! 
▁ xxmaj grant i may ever love , and rather woo 
▁ xxmaj those that would mischief me than those that do ! 
▁ xxmaj has caught me in his eye ; i will present 
▁ xxmaj my honest grief unto him , and as my lord 
▁ xxmaj still serve him with my life . xxmaj my dearest master ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj away ! xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj have you forgot me , sir ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj why dost ask that ? i have forgot all men ; 
▁ xxmaj then , if thou grant'st th'art a man , i have forgot thee . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj an honest poor servant of yours . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj then i know thee not . 
▁ i never had honest man about me , xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj all i kept were knaves , to serve in meat to villains . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj the gods are witness , 
▁ xxmaj nev'r did poor steward wear a truer grief 
▁ xxmaj for his undone lord than mine eyes for you . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj what , dost thou weep ? xxmaj come nearer . xxmaj then i love thee 
▁ xxmaj because thou art a woman and disclaim'st 
▁ xxmaj flinty mankind , whose eyes do never give 
▁ xxmaj but thorough lust and laughter . xxmaj pity 's sleeping . 
▁ xxmaj strange times , that weep with laughing , not with weeping ! 
▁ xxup flavius . i beg of you to know me , good my lord , 
▁ xxup t ' accept my grief , and whilst this poor wealth lasts 
▁ xxmaj to entertain me as your steward still . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj had i a steward 
▁ xxmaj so true , so just , and now so comfortable ? 
▁ xxmaj it almost turns my dangerous nature mild . 
▁ xxmaj let me behold thy face . xxmaj surely , this man 
▁ xxmaj was born of woman . 
▁ xxmaj forgive my general and exceptless rashness , 
▁ xxmaj you perpetual - sober gods ! i do proclaim 
▁ xxmaj one honest man- mistake me not , but one ; 
▁ xxmaj no more , i pray- and he 's a steward . 
▁ xxmaj how fain would i have hated all mankind ! 
▁ xxmaj and thou redeem'st thyself . xxmaj but all , save thee , 
▁ i fell with curses . 
▁ xxmaj methinks thou art more honest now than wise ; 
▁ xxmaj for by oppressing and betraying me 
▁ xxmaj thou mightst have sooner got another service ; 
▁ xxmaj for many so arrive at second masters 
▁ xxmaj upon their first lord 's neck . xxmaj but tell me true , 
▁ xxmaj for i must ever doubt though ne'er so sure , 
▁ xxmaj is not thy kindness subtle , covetous , 
▁ xxmaj if not a usuring kindness , and as rich men deal gifts , 
▁ xxmaj expecting in return twenty for one ? 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj no , my most worthy master , in whose breast 
▁ xxmaj doubt and suspect , alas , are plac'd too late ! 
▁ xxmaj you should have fear'd false times when you did feast : 
▁ xxmaj suspect still comes where an estate is least . 
▁ xxmaj that which i show , heaven knows , is merely love , 
▁ xxmaj duty , and zeal , to your unmatched mind , 
▁ xxmaj care of your food and living ; and believe it , 
▁ xxmaj my most honour'd lord , 
▁ xxmaj for any benefit that points to me , 
▁ xxmaj either in hope or present , xxmaj i 'd exchange 
▁ xxmaj for this one wish , that you had power and wealth 
▁ xxmaj to requite me by making rich yourself . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj look thee , ' tis so ! xxmaj thou singly honest man , 
▁ xxmaj here , take . xxmaj the gods , out of my misery , 
▁ xxmaj have sent thee treasure . xxmaj go , live rich and happy , 
▁ xxmaj but thus condition'd ; thou shalt build from men ; 
▁ xxmaj hate all , curse all , show charity to none , 
▁ xxmaj but let the famish'd flesh slide from the bone 
▁ xxmaj ere thou relieve the beggar . xxmaj give to dogs 
▁ xxmaj what thou deniest to men ; let prisons swallow 'em , 
▁ xxmaj debts wither 'em to nothing . xxmaj be men like blasted woods , 
▁ xxmaj and may diseases lick up their false bloods ! 
▁ xxmaj and so , farewell and thrive . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxup o , let me stay 
▁ xxmaj and comfort you , my master . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj if thou hat'st curses , 
▁ xxmaj stay not ; fly whilst thou art blest and free . 
▁ xxmaj ne'er see thou man , and let me ne'er see thee . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the woods . xxmaj before timon 's cave 

 xxmaj enter xxup poet and xxup painter 

▁ xxup painter . xxmaj as i took note of the place , it can not be far where he 
▁ abides . 
▁ xxup poet . to be thought of him ? xxmaj does the rumour hold for true that he 's 
▁ so full of gold ? 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj certain . xxmaj alcibiades reports it ; xxmaj phrynia and xxmaj timandra had 
▁ gold of him . xxmaj he likewise enrich'd poor straggling soldiers with 
▁ great quantity . ' tis said he gave unto his steward a mighty sum . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends ? 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj nothing else . xxmaj you shall see him a palm in xxmaj athens again , 
▁ and flourish with the highest . xxmaj therefore ' tis not amiss we tender 
▁ our loves to him in this suppos'd distress of his ; it will show 
▁ honestly in us , and is very likely to load our purposes with what 
▁ they travail for , if it be just and true report that goes of his 
▁ having . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj what have you now to present unto him ? 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj nothing at this time but my visitation ; only i will 
▁ promise him an excellent piece . 
▁ xxup poet . i must serve him so too , tell him of an intent that 's coming 
▁ toward him . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj good as the best . xxmaj promising is the very air o ' th ' time ; 
▁ it opens the eyes of expectation . xxmaj performance is ever the duller 
▁ for his act , and but in the plainer and simpler kind of people 
▁ the deed of saying is quite out of use . xxmaj to promise is most 
▁ courtly and fashionable ; performance is a kind of will or 
▁ testament which argues a great sickness in his judgment that 
▁ makes it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup timon from his cave 

▁ xxup timon . [ aside ] xxmaj excellent workman ! xxmaj thou canst not paint a man so bad 
▁ as is thyself . 
▁ xxup poet . i am thinking what i shall say i have provided for him . xxmaj it 
▁ must be a personating of himself ; a satire against the softness 
▁ of prosperity , with a discovery of the infinite flatteries that 
▁ follow youth and opulency . 
▁ xxup timon . [ aside ] xxmaj must thou needs stand for a villain in thine own 
▁ work ? xxmaj wilt thou whip thine own faults in other men ? xxmaj do so , i have 
▁ gold for thee . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj nay , let 's seek him ; 
▁ xxmaj then do we sin against our own estate 
▁ xxmaj when we may profit meet and come too late . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj true ; 
▁ xxmaj when the day serves , before black - corner'd night , 
▁ xxmaj find what thou want'st by free and offer'd light . 
▁ xxmaj come . 
▁ xxup timon . [ aside ] xxmaj i 'll meet you at the turn . xxmaj what a god 's gold , 
▁ xxmaj that he is worshipp'd in a baser temple 
▁ xxmaj than where swine feed ! 
▁ ' tis thou that rig'st the bark and plough'st the foam , 
▁ xxmaj settlest admired reverence in a slave . 
▁ xxmaj to thee be worship ! and thy saints for aye 
▁ xxmaj be crown'd with plagues , that thee alone obey ! 
▁ xxmaj fit i meet them . [ advancing from his cave ] 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj hail , worthy xxmaj timon ! 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj our late noble master ! 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj have i once liv'd to see two honest men ? 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj having often of your open bounty tasted , 
▁ xxmaj hearing you were retir'd , your friends fall'n off , 
▁ xxmaj whose thankless natures- o abhorred spirits!- 
▁ xxmaj not all the whips of heaven are large enough- 
▁ xxmaj what ! to you , 
▁ xxmaj whose star - like nobleness gave life and influence 
▁ xxmaj to their whole being ! i am rapt , and can not cover 
▁ xxmaj the monstrous bulk of this ingratitude 
▁ xxmaj with any size of words . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj let it go naked : men may see't the better . 
▁ xxmaj you that are honest , by being what you are , 
▁ xxmaj make them best seen and known . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj he and myself 
▁ xxmaj have travail'd in the great show'r of your gifts , 
▁ xxmaj and sweetly felt it . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ay , you are honest men . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj we are hither come to offer you our service . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj most honest men ! xxmaj why , how shall i requite you ? 
▁ xxmaj can you eat roots , and drink cold water- xxmaj no ? 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj what we can do , we 'll do , to do you service . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj y'are honest men . xxmaj y'have heard that i have gold ; 
▁ i am sure you have . xxmaj speak truth ; y'are honest men . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj so it is said , my noble lord ; but therefore 
▁ xxmaj came not my friend nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj good honest men ! xxmaj thou draw'st a counterfeit 
▁ xxmaj best in all xxmaj athens . xxmaj th'art indeed the best ; 
▁ xxmaj thou counterfeit'st most lively . 
▁ xxup painter . xxmaj so , so , my lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj e'en so , sir , as i say . [ to xxmaj to xxup poet ] xxmaj and for thy fiction , 
▁ xxmaj why , thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth 
▁ xxmaj that thou art even natural in thine art . 
▁ xxmaj but for all this , my honest - natur'd friends , 
▁ i must needs say you have a little fault . 
▁ xxmaj marry , ' tis not monstrous in you ; neither wish i 
▁ xxmaj you take much pains to mend . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj beseech your honour 
▁ xxmaj to make it known to us . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you 'll take it ill . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj most thankfully , my lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj will you indeed ? 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj doubt it not , worthy lord . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj there 's never a one of you but trusts a knave 
▁ xxmaj that mightily deceives you . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj do we , my lord ? 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj ay , and you hear him cog , see him dissemble , 
▁ xxmaj know his gross patchery , love him , feed him , 
▁ xxmaj keep in your bosom ; yet remain assur'd 
▁ xxmaj that he 's a made - up villain . 
▁ xxup painter . i know not such , my lord . 
▁ xxup poet . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj look you , i love you well ; xxmaj i 'll give you gold , 
▁ xxmaj rid me these villains from your companies . 
▁ xxmaj hang them or stab them , drown them in a draught , 
▁ xxmaj confound them by some course , and come to me , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give you gold enough . 
▁ xxup both . xxmaj name them , my lord ; let 's know them . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you that way , and you this- but two in company ; 
▁ xxmaj each man apart , all single and alone , 
▁ xxmaj yet an arch - villain keeps him company . 
▁ [ to the xxup painter ] xxmaj if , where thou art , two villians shall not be , 
▁ xxmaj come not near him . [ to the xxup poet ] xxmaj if thou wouldst not reside 
▁ xxmaj but where one villain is , then him abandon.- 
▁ xxmaj hence , pack ! there 's gold ; you came for gold , ye slaves . 
▁ [ to the xxup painter ] xxmaj you have work for me ; there 's payment ; hence ! 
▁ [ to the xxup poet ] xxmaj you are an alchemist ; make gold of that.- 
▁ xxmaj out , rascal dogs ! [ beats and drives them out ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup flavius and two xxup senators 

▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj it is vain that you would speak with xxmaj timon ; 
▁ xxmaj for he is set so only to himself 
▁ xxmaj that nothing but himself which looks like man 
▁ xxmaj is friendly with him . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj bring us to his cave . 
▁ xxmaj it is our part and promise to th ' xxmaj athenians 
▁ xxmaj to speak with xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj at all times alike 
▁ xxmaj men are not still the same ; ' twas time and griefs 
▁ xxmaj that fram'd him thus . xxmaj time , with his fairer hand , 
▁ xxmaj offering the fortunes of his former days , 
▁ xxmaj the former man may make him . xxmaj bring us to him , 
▁ xxmaj and chance it as it may . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj here is his cave . 
▁ xxmaj peace and content be here ! xxmaj lord xxmaj timon ! xxmaj timon ! 
▁ xxmaj look out , and speak to friends . xxmaj th ' xxmaj athenians 
▁ xxmaj by two of their most reverend xxmaj senate greet thee . 
▁ xxmaj speak to them , noble xxmaj timon . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup timon out of his cave 

▁ xxup timon . xxmaj thou sun that comforts , burn . xxmaj speak and be hang'd ! 
▁ xxmaj for each true word a blister , and each false 
▁ xxmaj be as a cauterizing to the root o ' th ' tongue , 
▁ xxmaj consuming it with speaking ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj worthy xxmaj timon- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj of none but such as you , and you of xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj the senators of xxmaj athens greet thee , xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup timon . i thank them ; and would send them back the plague , 
▁ xxmaj could i but catch it for them . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxup o , forget 
▁ xxmaj what we are sorry for ourselves in thee . 
▁ xxmaj the senators with one consent of love 
▁ xxmaj entreat thee back to xxmaj athens , who have thought 
▁ xxmaj on special dignities , which vacant lie 
▁ xxmaj for thy best use and wearing . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj they confess 
▁ xxmaj toward thee forgetfulness too general , gross ; 
▁ xxmaj which now the public body , which doth seldom 
▁ xxmaj play the recanter , feeling in itself 
▁ a lack of xxmaj timon 's aid , hath sense withal 
▁ xxmaj of it own fail , restraining aid to xxmaj timon , 
▁ xxmaj and send forth us to make their sorrowed render , 
▁ xxmaj together with a recompense more fruitful 
▁ xxmaj than their offence can weigh down by the dram ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , even such heaps and sums of love and wealth 
▁ xxmaj as shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs 
▁ xxmaj and write in thee the figures of their love , 
▁ xxmaj ever to read them thine . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj you witch me in it ; 
▁ xxmaj surprise me to the very brink of tears . 
▁ xxmaj lend me a fool 's heart and a woman 's eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll beweep these comforts , worthy senators . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj therefore so please thee to return with us , 
▁ xxmaj and of our xxmaj athens , thine and ours , to take 
▁ xxmaj the captainship , thou shalt be met with thanks , 
▁ xxmaj allow'd with absolute power , and thy good name 
▁ xxmaj live with authority . xxmaj so soon we shall drive back 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj alcibiades th ' approaches wild , 
▁ xxmaj who , like a boar too savage , doth root up 
▁ xxmaj his country 's peace . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj and shakes his threat'ning sword 
▁ xxmaj against the walls of xxmaj athens . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj therefore , xxmaj timon- 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj well , sir , i will . xxmaj therefore i will , sir , thus : 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj alcibiades kill my countrymen , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj alcibiades know this of xxmaj timon , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj timon cares not . xxmaj but if he sack fair xxmaj athens , 
▁ xxmaj and take our goodly aged men by th ' beards , 
▁ xxmaj giving our holy virgins to the stain 
▁ xxmaj of contumelious , beastly , mad - brain'd war , 
▁ xxmaj then let him know- and tell him xxmaj timon speaks it 
▁ xxmaj in pity of our aged and our youth- 
▁ i can not choose but tell him that i care not , 
▁ xxmaj and let him take't at worst ; for their knives care not , 
▁ xxmaj while you have throats to answer . xxmaj for myself , 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a whittle in th ' unruly camp 
▁ xxmaj but i do prize it at my love before 
▁ xxmaj the reverend'st throat in xxmaj athens . xxmaj so i leave you 
▁ xxmaj to the protection of the prosperous gods , 
▁ xxmaj as thieves to keepers . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj stay not , all 's in vain . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj why , i was writing of my epitaph ; 
▁ xxmaj it will be seen to - morrow . xxmaj my long sickness 
▁ xxmaj of health and living now begins to mend , 
▁ xxmaj and nothing brings me all things . xxmaj go , live still ; 
▁ xxmaj be xxmaj alcibiades your plague , you his , 
▁ xxmaj and last so long enough ! 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj we speak in vain . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj but yet i love my country , and am not 
▁ xxmaj one that rejoices in the common wreck , 
▁ xxmaj as common bruit doth put it . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj that 's well spoke . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj commend me to my loving countrymen- 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj these words become your lips as they pass through 
▁ them . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj and enter in our ears like great triumphers 
▁ xxmaj in their applauding gates . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj commend me to them , 
▁ xxmaj and tell them that , to ease them of their griefs , 
▁ xxmaj their fears of hostile strokes , their aches , losses , 
▁ xxmaj their pangs of love , with other incident throes 
▁ xxmaj that nature 's fragile vessel doth sustain 
▁ xxmaj in life 's uncertain voyage , i will some kindness do them- 
▁ xxmaj i 'll teach them to prevent wild xxmaj alcibiades ' wrath . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . i like this well ; he will return again . 
▁ xxup timon . i have a tree , which grows here in my close , 
▁ xxmaj that mine own use invites me to cut down , 
▁ xxmaj and shortly must i fell it . xxmaj tell my friends , 
▁ xxmaj tell xxmaj athens , in the sequence of degree 
▁ xxmaj from high to low throughout , that whoso please 
▁ xxmaj to stop affliction , let him take his haste , 
▁ xxmaj come hither , ere my tree hath felt the axe , 
▁ xxmaj and hang himself . i pray you do my greeting . 
▁ xxup flavius . xxmaj trouble him no further ; thus you still shall find him . 
▁ xxup timon . xxmaj come not to me again ; but say to xxmaj athens 
▁ xxmaj timon hath made his everlasting mansion 
▁ xxmaj upon the beached verge of the salt flood , 
▁ xxmaj who once a day with his embossed froth 
▁ xxmaj the turbulent surge shall cover . xxmaj thither come , 
▁ xxmaj and let my gravestone be your oracle . 
▁ xxmaj lips , let sour words go by and language end : 
▁ xxmaj what is amiss , plague and infection mend ! 
▁ xxmaj graves only be men 's works and death their gain ! 
▁ xxmaj sun , hide thy beams . xxmaj timon hath done his reign . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup timon into his cave 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj his discontents are unremovably 
▁ xxmaj coupled to nature . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj our hope in him is dead . xxmaj let us return 
▁ xxmaj and strain what other means is left unto us 
▁ xxmaj in our dear peril . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj it requires swift foot . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj before the walls of xxmaj athens 

 xxmaj enter two other xxup senators with a xxup messenger 

▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj thou hast painfully discover'd ; are his files 
▁ xxmaj as full as thy report ? 
▁ xxup messenger . i have spoke the least . 
▁ xxmaj besides , his expedition promises 
▁ xxmaj present approach . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj we stand much hazard if they bring not xxmaj timon . 
▁ xxup messenger . i met a courier , one mine ancient friend , 
▁ xxmaj whom , though in general part we were oppos'd , 
▁ xxmaj yet our old love had a particular force , 
▁ xxmaj and made us speak like friends . xxmaj this man was riding 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj alcibiades to xxmaj timon 's cave 
▁ xxmaj with letters of entreaty , which imported 
▁ xxmaj his fellowship i ' th ' cause against your city , 
▁ xxmaj in part for his sake mov'd . 

▁ xxmaj enter the other xxup senators , from xxup timon 
▁
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj here come our brothers . 
▁ xxup third xxup senator . xxmaj no talk of xxmaj timon , nothing of him expect . 
▁ xxmaj the enemies ' drum is heard , and fearful scouring 
▁ xxmaj doth choke the air with dust . xxmaj in , and prepare . 
▁ xxmaj ours is the fall , i fear ; our foes the snare . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the timon 's cave , and a rude tomb seen 

 xxmaj enter a xxup soldier in the woods , seeking xxup timon 

▁ xxup soldier . xxmaj by all description this should be the place . 
▁ xxmaj who 's here ? xxmaj speak , ho ! xxmaj no answer ? xxmaj what is this ? 
▁ xxmaj timon is dead , who hath outstretch'd his span . 
▁ xxmaj some beast rear'd this ; here does not live a man . 
▁ xxmaj dead , sure ; and this his grave . xxmaj what 's on this tomb 
▁ i can not read ; the character xxmaj i 'll take with wax . 
▁ xxmaj our captain hath in every figure skill , 
▁ xxmaj an ag'd interpreter , though young in days ; 
▁ xxmaj before proud xxmaj athens he 's set down by this , 
▁ xxmaj whose fall the mark of his ambition is . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj before the walls of xxmaj athens 

 xxmaj trumpets sound . xxmaj enter xxup alcibiades with his powers before xxmaj athens 

▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj sound to this coward and lascivious town 
▁ xxmaj our terrible approach . 

▁ xxmaj sound a parley . xxmaj the xxup senators appear upon the walls 

▁ xxmaj till now you have gone on and fill'd the time 
▁ xxmaj with all licentious measure , making your wills 
▁ xxmaj the scope of justice ; till now , myself , and such 
▁ xxmaj as slept within the shadow of your power , 
▁ xxmaj have wander'd with our travers'd arms , and breath'd 
▁ xxmaj our sufferance vainly . xxmaj now the time is flush , 
▁ xxmaj when crouching marrow , in the bearer strong , 
▁ xxmaj cries of itself ' no more ! ' xxmaj now breathless wrong 
▁ xxmaj shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease , 
▁ xxmaj and pursy insolence shall break his wind 
▁ xxmaj with fear and horrid flight . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj noble and young , 
▁ xxmaj when thy first griefs were but a mere conceit , 
▁ xxmaj ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear , 
▁ xxmaj we sent to thee , to give thy rages balm , 
▁ xxmaj to wipe out our ingratitude with loves 
▁ xxmaj above their quantity . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj so did we woo 
▁ xxmaj transformed xxmaj timon to our city 's love 
▁ xxmaj by humble message and by promis'd means . 
▁ xxmaj we were not all unkind , nor all deserve 
▁ xxmaj the common stroke of war . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj these walls of ours 
▁ xxmaj were not erected by their hands from whom 
▁ xxmaj you have receiv'd your griefs ; nor are they such 
▁ xxmaj that these great tow'rs , trophies , and schools , should fall 
▁ xxmaj for private faults in them . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj nor are they living 
▁ xxmaj who were the motives that you first went out ; 
▁ xxmaj shame , that they wanted cunning , in excess 
▁ xxmaj hath broke their hearts . xxmaj march , noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj into our city with thy banners spread . 
▁ xxmaj by decimation and a tithed death- 
▁ xxmaj if thy revenges hunger for that food 
▁ xxmaj which nature loathes- take thou the destin'd tenth , 
▁ xxmaj and by the hazard of the spotted die 
▁ xxmaj let die the spotted . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj all have not offended ; 
▁ xxmaj for those that were , it is not square to take , 
▁ xxmaj on those that are , revenge : crimes , like lands , 
▁ xxmaj are not inherited . xxmaj then , dear countryman , 
▁ xxmaj bring in thy ranks , but leave without thy rage ; 
▁ xxmaj spare thy xxmaj athenian cradle , and those kin 
▁ xxmaj which , in the bluster of thy wrath , must fall 
▁ xxmaj with those that have offended . xxmaj like a shepherd 
▁ xxmaj approach the fold and cull th ' infected forth , 
▁ xxmaj but kill not all together . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj what thou wilt , 
▁ xxmaj thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile 
▁ xxmaj than hew to't with thy sword . 
▁ xxup first xxup senator . xxmaj set but thy foot 
▁ xxmaj against our rampir'd gates and they shall ope , 
▁ xxmaj so thou wilt send thy gentle heart before 
▁ xxmaj to say thou't enter friendly . 
▁ xxup second xxup senator . xxmaj throw thy glove , 
▁ xxmaj or any token of thine honour else , 
▁ xxmaj that thou wilt use the wars as thy redress 
▁ xxmaj and not as our confusion , all thy powers 
▁ xxmaj shall make their harbour in our town till we 
▁ xxmaj have seal'd thy full desire . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj then there 's my glove ; 
▁ xxmaj descend , and open your uncharged ports . 
▁ xxmaj those enemies of xxmaj timon 's and mine own , 
▁ xxmaj whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof , 
▁ xxmaj fall , and no more . xxmaj and , to atone your fears 
▁ xxmaj with my more noble meaning , not a man 
▁ xxmaj shall pass his quarter or offend the stream 
▁ xxmaj of regular justice in your city 's bounds , 
▁ xxmaj but shall be render'd to your public laws 
▁ xxmaj at heaviest answer . 
▁ xxup both . ' tis most nobly spoken . 
▁ xxup alcibiades . xxmaj descend , and keep your words . 
▁ [ the xxup senators descend and open the gates ] 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup soldier as a xxmaj messenger