xxbos xxup soldier . xxmaj my noble xxmaj general , xxmaj timon is dead ; 
▁ xxmaj entomb'd upon the very hem o ' th ' sea ; 
▁ xxmaj and on his grave - stone this insculpture , which 
▁ xxmaj with wax i brought away , whose soft impression 
▁ xxmaj interprets for my poor ignorance . 

▁ xxup alcibiades reads the xxmaj epitaph 

▁ ' here lies a wretched corse , of wretched soul bereft ; 
▁ xxmaj seek not my name . a plague consume you wicked caitiffs left ! 
▁ xxmaj here lie xxup i , xxmaj timon , who alive all living men did hate . 
▁ xxmaj pass by , and curse thy fill ; but pass , and stay not here thy 
▁ gait . ' 
▁ xxmaj these well express in thee thy latter spirits . 
▁ xxmaj though thou abhorr'dst in us our human griefs , 
▁ xxmaj scorn'dst our brain 's flow , and those our droplets which 
▁ xxmaj from niggard nature fall , yet rich conceit 
▁ xxmaj taught thee to make vast xxmaj neptune weep for aye 
▁ xxmaj on thy low grave , on faults forgiven . xxmaj dead 
▁ xxmaj is noble xxmaj timon , of whose memory 
▁ xxmaj hereafter more . xxmaj bring me into your city , 
▁ xxmaj and i will use the olive , with my sword ; 
▁ xxmaj make war breed peace , make peace stint war , make each 
▁ xxmaj prescribe to other , as each other 's leech . 
▁ xxmaj let our drums strike . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1594 

 xxup the xxup tragedy xxup of xxup titus xxup andronicus 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup saturninus , son to the late xxmaj emperor of xxmaj rome , afterwards xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxup bassianus , brother to xxmaj saturninus 
▁ xxup titus xxup andronicus , a noble xxmaj roman 
▁ xxup marcus xxup andronicus , xxmaj tribune of the xxmaj people , and brother to xxmaj titus 

▁ xxmaj sons to xxmaj titus xxmaj andronicus : 
▁ xxup lucius 
▁ xxup quintus 
▁ xxup martius 
▁ xxup mutius 

▁ xxup young xxup lucius , a boy , son to xxmaj lucius 
▁ xxup publius , son to xxmaj marcus xxmaj andronicus 

▁ xxmaj kinsmen to xxmaj titus : 
▁ xxup sempronius 
▁ xxup caius 
▁ xxup valentine 

▁ xxup aemilius , a noble xxmaj roman 

▁ xxmaj sons to xxmaj tamora : 
▁ xxup alarbus 
▁ xxup demetrius 
▁ xxup chiron 

▁ xxup aaron , a xxmaj moor , beloved by xxmaj tamora 
▁ a xxup captain 
▁ a xxup messenger 
▁ a xxup clown 

▁ xxup tamora , xxmaj queen of the xxmaj goths 
▁ xxup lavinia , daughter to xxmaj titus xxmaj andronicus 
▁ a xxup nurse , and a black xxup child 

▁ xxmaj romans and xxmaj goths , xxmaj senators , xxmaj tribunes , xxmaj officers , xxmaj soldiers , and 
▁ xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



▁ xxup scene : 
▁ xxmaj rome and the neighbourhood 


 xxup act 1 . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj before the xxmaj capitol 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter the xxup tribunes and xxup senators aloft ; and then enter below 
 xxup saturninus and his followers at one door , and xxup bassianus and his followers 
 at the other , with drums and trumpets 

▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj noble patricians , patrons of my right , 
▁ xxmaj defend the justice of my cause with arms ; 
▁ xxmaj and , countrymen , my loving followers , 
▁ xxmaj plead my successive title with your swords . 
▁ i am his first born son that was the last 
▁ xxmaj that ware the imperial diadem of xxmaj rome ; 
▁ xxmaj then let my father 's honours live in me , 
▁ xxmaj nor wrong mine age with this indignity . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj romans , friends , followers , favourers of my right , 
▁ xxmaj if ever xxmaj bassianus , xxmaj caesar 's son , 
▁ xxmaj were gracious in the eyes of royal xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj keep then this passage to the xxmaj capitol ; 
▁ xxmaj and suffer not dishonour to approach 
▁ xxmaj the imperial seat , to virtue consecrate , 
▁ xxmaj to justice , continence , and nobility ; 
▁ xxmaj but let desert in pure election shine ; 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj romans , fight for freedom in your choice . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup marcus xxup andronicus aloft , with the crown 

▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj princes , that strive by factions and by friends 
▁ xxmaj ambitiously for rule and empery , 
▁ xxmaj know that the people of xxmaj rome , for whom we stand 
▁ a special party , have by common voice 
▁ xxmaj in election for the xxmaj roman empery 
▁ xxmaj chosen xxmaj andronicus , surnamed xxmaj pius 
▁ xxmaj for many good and great deserts to xxmaj rome . 
▁ a nobler man , a braver warrior , 
▁ xxmaj lives not this day within the city walls . 
▁ xxmaj he by the xxmaj senate is accited home , 
▁ xxmaj from weary wars against the barbarous xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj that with his sons , a terror to our foes , 
▁ xxmaj hath yok'd a nation strong , train'd up in arms . 
▁ xxmaj ten years are spent since first he undertook 
▁ xxmaj this cause of xxmaj rome , and chastised with arms 
▁ xxmaj our enemies ' pride ; five times he hath return'd 
▁ xxmaj bleeding to xxmaj rome , bearing his valiant sons 
▁ xxmaj in coffins from the field ; and at this day 
▁ xxmaj to the monument of that xxmaj andronici 
▁ xxmaj done sacrifice of expiation , 
▁ xxmaj and slain the noblest prisoner of the xxmaj goths . 
▁ xxmaj and now at last , laden with honour 's spoils , 
▁ xxmaj returns the good xxmaj andronicus to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj renowned xxmaj titus , flourishing in arms . 
▁ xxmaj let us entreat , by honour of his name 
▁ xxmaj whom worthily you would have now succeed , 
▁ xxmaj and in the xxmaj capitol and xxmaj senate 's right , 
▁ xxmaj whom you pretend to honour and adore , 
▁ xxmaj that you withdraw you and abate your strength , 
▁ xxmaj dismiss your followers , and , as suitors should , 
▁ xxmaj plead your deserts in peace and humbleness . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj how fair the xxmaj tribune speaks to calm my thoughts . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj marcus xxmaj andronicus , so i do affy 
▁ xxmaj in thy uprightness and integrity , 
▁ xxmaj and so i love and honour thee and thine , 
▁ xxmaj thy noble brother xxmaj titus and his sons , 
▁ xxmaj and her to whom my thoughts are humbled all , 
▁ xxmaj gracious xxmaj lavinia , xxmaj rome 's rich ornament , 
▁ xxmaj that i will here dismiss my loving friends , 
▁ xxmaj and to my fortunes and the people 's favour 
▁ xxmaj commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt the soldiers of xxup bassianus 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj friends , that have been thus forward in my right , 
▁ i thank you all and here dismiss you all , 
▁ xxmaj and to the love and favour of my country 
▁ xxmaj commit myself , my person , and the cause . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt the soldiers of xxup saturninus 
▁ xxmaj rome , be as just and gracious unto me 
▁ xxmaj as i am confident and kind to thee . 
▁ xxmaj open the gates and let me in . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj tribunes , and me , a poor competitor . 
▁ [ flourish . xxmaj they go up into the xxmaj senate xxmaj house ] 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup captain 

▁ xxup captain . xxmaj romans , make way . xxmaj the good xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj patron of virtue , xxmaj rome 's best champion , 
▁ xxmaj successful in the battles that he fights , 
▁ xxmaj with honour and with fortune is return'd 
▁ xxmaj from where he circumscribed with his sword 
▁ xxmaj and brought to yoke the enemies of xxmaj rome . 

▁ xxmaj sound drums and trumpets , and then enter xxup martius 
▁ and xxup mutius , two of xxup titus ' sons ; and then two men 
▁ bearing a coffin covered with black ; then xxup lucius 
▁ and xxup quintus , two other sons ; then xxup titus xxup andronicus ; 
▁ and then xxup tamora the xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths , with her three 
▁ sons , xxup alarbus , xxup demetrius , and xxup chiron , with xxup aaron the 
▁ xxmaj moor , and others , as many as can be . xxmaj then set down 
▁ the coffin and xxup titus speaks 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj hail , xxmaj rome , victorious in thy mourning weeds ! 
▁ xxmaj lo , as the bark that hath discharg'd her fraught 
▁ xxmaj returns with precious lading to the bay 
▁ xxmaj from whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage , 
▁ xxmaj cometh xxmaj andronicus , bound with laurel boughs , 
▁ xxmaj to re - salute his country with his tears , 
▁ xxmaj tears of true joy for his return to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj thou great defender of this xxmaj capitol , 
▁ xxmaj stand gracious to the rites that we intend ! 
▁ xxmaj romans , of five and twenty valiant sons , 
▁ xxmaj half of the number that xxmaj king xxmaj priam had , 
▁ xxmaj behold the poor remains , alive and dead ! 
▁ xxmaj these that survive let xxmaj rome reward with love ; 
▁ xxmaj these that i bring unto their latest home , 
▁ xxmaj with burial amongst their ancestors . 
▁ xxmaj here xxmaj goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword . 
▁ xxmaj titus , unkind , and careless of thine own , 
▁ xxmaj why suffer'st thou thy sons , unburied yet , 
▁ xxmaj to hover on the dreadful shore of xxmaj styx ? 
▁ xxmaj make way to lay them by their brethren . 
▁ [ they open the tomb ] 
▁ xxmaj there greet in silence , as the dead are wo nt , 
▁ xxmaj and sleep in peace , slain in your country 's wars . 
▁ o sacred receptacle of my joys , 
▁ xxmaj sweet cell of virtue and nobility , 
▁ xxmaj how many sons hast thou of mine in store 
▁ xxmaj that thou wilt never render to me more ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj give us the proudest prisoner of the xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj that we may hew his limbs , and on a pile 
▁ xxmaj ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh 
▁ xxmaj before this earthy prison of their bones , 
▁ xxmaj that so the shadows be not unappeas'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor we disturb'd with prodigies on earth . 
▁ xxup titus . i give him you- the noblest that survives , 
▁ xxmaj the eldest son of this distressed queen . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj stay , xxmaj roman brethen ! xxmaj gracious conqueror , 
▁ xxmaj victorious xxmaj titus , rue the tears i shed , 
▁ a mother 's tears in passion for her son ; 
▁ xxmaj and if thy sons were ever dear to thee , 
▁ xxup o , think my son to be as dear to me ! 
▁ xxmaj sufficeth not that we are brought to xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj to beautify thy triumphs , and return 
▁ xxmaj captive to thee and to thy xxmaj roman yoke ; 
▁ xxmaj but must my sons be slaughtered in the streets 
▁ xxmaj for valiant doings in their country 's cause ? 
▁ xxup o , if to fight for king and commonweal 
▁ xxmaj were piety in thine , it is in these . 
▁ xxmaj andronicus , stain not thy tomb with blood . 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods ? 
▁ xxmaj draw near them then in being merciful . 
▁ xxmaj sweet mercy is nobility 's true badge . 
▁ xxmaj thrice - noble xxmaj titus , spare my first - born son . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj patient yourself , madam , and pardon me . 
▁ xxmaj these are their brethren , whom your xxmaj goths beheld 
▁ xxmaj alive and dead ; and for their brethren slain 
▁ xxmaj religiously they ask a sacrifice . 
▁ xxmaj to this your son is mark'd , and die he must 
▁ xxup t ' appease their groaning shadows that are gone . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj away with him , and make a fire straight ; 
▁ xxmaj and with our swords , upon a pile of wood , 
▁ xxmaj let 's hew his limbs till they be clean consum'd . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup titus ' xxup sons , with xxup alarbus 
▁ xxup tamora . o cruel , irreligious piety ! 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj was never xxmaj scythia half so barbarous ! 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj oppose not xxmaj scythia to ambitious xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj alarbus goes to rest , and we survive 
▁ xxmaj to tremble under xxmaj titus ' threat'ning look . 
▁ xxmaj then , madam , stand resolv'd , but hope withal 
▁ xxmaj the self - same gods that arm'd the xxmaj queen of xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj with opportunity of sharp revenge 
▁ xxmaj upon the xxmaj thracian tyrant in his tent 
▁ xxmaj may favour xxmaj tamora , the xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths- 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj goths were xxmaj goths and xxmaj tamora was queen- 
▁ xxmaj to quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lucius , xxup quintus , xxup martius , and 
▁ xxup mutius , the sons of xxup andronicus , with their swords bloody 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj see , lord and father , how we have perform'd 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj roman rites : xxmaj alarbus ' limbs are lopp'd , 
▁ xxmaj and entrails feed the sacrificing fire , 
▁ xxmaj whose smoke like incense doth perfume the sky . 
▁ xxmaj remaineth nought but to inter our brethren , 
▁ xxmaj and with loud ' larums welcome them to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj let it be so , and let xxmaj andronicus 
▁ xxmaj make this his latest farewell to their souls . 
▁ [ sound trumpets and lay the coffin in the tomb ] 
▁ xxmaj in peace and honour rest you here , my sons ; 
▁ xxmaj rome 's readiest champions , repose you here in rest , 
▁ xxmaj secure from worldly chances and mishaps ! 
▁ xxmaj here lurks no treason , here no envy swells , 
▁ xxmaj here grow no damned drugs , here are no storms , 
▁ xxmaj no noise , but silence and eternal sleep . 
▁ xxmaj in peace and honour rest you here , my sons ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup lavinia 

▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj in peace and honour live xxmaj lord xxmaj titus long ; 
▁ xxmaj my noble lord and father , live in fame ! 
▁ xxmaj lo , at this tomb my tributary tears 
▁ i render for my brethren 's obsequies ; 
▁ xxmaj and at thy feet i kneel , with tears of joy 
▁ xxmaj shed on this earth for thy return to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup o , bless me here with thy victorious hand , 
▁ xxmaj whose fortunes xxmaj rome 's best citizens applaud ! 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj kind xxmaj rome , that hast thus lovingly reserv'd 
▁ xxmaj the cordial of mine age to glad my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj lavinia , live ; outlive thy father 's days , 
▁ xxmaj and fame 's eternal date , for virtue 's praise ! 

▁ xxmaj enter , above , xxup marcus xxup andronicus and xxup tribunes ; 
▁ re - enter xxup saturninus , xxup bassianus , and attendants 

▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj long live xxmaj lord xxmaj titus , my beloved brother , 
▁ xxmaj gracious triumpher in the eyes of xxmaj rome ! 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj thanks , gentle xxmaj tribune , noble brother xxmaj marcus . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj and welcome , nephews , from successful wars , 
▁ xxmaj you that survive and you that sleep in fame . 
▁ xxmaj fair lords , your fortunes are alike in all 
▁ xxmaj that in your country 's service drew your swords ; 
▁ xxmaj but safer triumph is this funeral pomp 
▁ xxmaj that hath aspir'd to xxmaj solon 's happiness 
▁ xxmaj and triumphs over chance in honour 's bed . 
▁ xxmaj titus xxmaj andronicus , the people of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj whose friend in justice thou hast ever been , 
▁ xxmaj send thee by me , their xxmaj tribune and their trust , 
▁ xxmaj this par]iament of white and spotless hue ; 
▁ xxmaj and name thee in election for the empire 
▁ xxmaj with these our late - deceased xxmaj emperor 's sons : 
▁ xxmaj be candidatus then , and put it on , 
▁ xxmaj and help to set a head on headless xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup titus . a better head her glorious body fits 
▁ xxmaj than his that shakes for age and feebleness . 
▁ xxmaj what should i don this robe and trouble you ? 
▁ xxmaj be chosen with proclamations to - day , 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow yield up rule , resign my life , 
▁ xxmaj and set abroad new business for you all ? 
▁ xxmaj rome , i have been thy soldier forty years , 
▁ xxmaj and led my country 's strength successfully , 
▁ xxmaj and buried one and twenty valiant sons , 
▁ xxmaj knighted in field , slain manfully in arms , 
▁ xxmaj in right and service of their noble country . 
▁ xxmaj give me a staff of honour for mine age , 
▁ xxmaj but not a sceptre to control the world . 
▁ xxmaj upright he held it , lords , that held it last . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj titus , thou shalt obtain and ask the empery . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj proud and ambitious xxmaj tribune , canst thou tell ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj patience , xxmaj prince xxmaj saturninus . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj romans , do me right . 
▁ xxmaj patricians , draw your swords , and sheathe them not 
▁ xxmaj till xxmaj saturninus be xxmaj rome 's xxmaj emperor . 
▁ xxmaj andronicus , would thou were shipp'd to hell 
▁ xxmaj rather than rob me of the people 's hearts ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj proud xxmaj saturnine , interrupter of the good 
▁ xxmaj that noble - minded xxmaj titus means to thee ! 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj content thee , xxmaj prince ; i will restore to thee 
▁ xxmaj the people 's hearts , and wean them from themselves . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj andronicus , i do not flatter thee , 
▁ xxmaj but honour thee , and will do till i die . 
▁ xxmaj my faction if thou strengthen with thy friends , 
▁ i will most thankful be ; and thanks to men 
▁ xxmaj of noble minds is honourable meed . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj people of xxmaj rome , and people 's xxmaj tribunes here , 
▁ i ask your voices and your suffrages : 
▁ xxmaj will ye bestow them friendly on xxmaj andronicus ? 
▁ xxup tribunes . xxmaj to gratify the good xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj and gratulate his safe return to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj the people will accept whom he admits . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj tribunes , i thank you ; and this suit i make , 
▁ xxmaj that you create our xxmaj emperor 's eldest son , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj saturnine ; whose virtues will , i hope , 
▁ xxmaj reflect on xxmaj rome as xxmaj titan 's rays on earth , 
▁ xxmaj and ripen justice in this commonweal . 
▁ xxmaj then , if you will elect by my advice , 
▁ xxmaj crown him , and say ' long live our xxmaj emperor ! ' 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj with voices and applause of every sort , 
▁ xxmaj patricians and plebeians , we create 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj saturninus xxmaj rome 's great xxmaj emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj and say ' long live our xxmaj emperor xxmaj saturnine ! ' 
▁ [ a long flourish till they come down ] 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj titus xxmaj andronicus , for thy favours done 
▁ xxmaj to us in our election this day 
▁ i give thee thanks in part of thy deserts , 
▁ xxmaj and will with deeds requite thy gentleness ; 
▁ xxmaj and for an onset , xxmaj titus , to advance 
▁ xxmaj thy name and honourable family , 
▁ xxmaj lavinia will i make my emperess , 
▁ xxmaj rome 's royal mistress , mistress of my heart , 
▁ xxmaj and in the sacred xxmaj pantheon her espouse . 
▁ xxmaj tell me , xxmaj andronicus , doth this motion please thee ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj it doth , my worthy lord , and in this match 
▁ i hold me highly honoured of your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj and here in sight of xxmaj rome , to xxmaj saturnine , 
▁ xxmaj king and commander of our commonweal , 
▁ xxmaj the wide world 's xxmaj emperor , do i consecrate 
▁ xxmaj my sword , my chariot , and my prisoners , 
▁ xxmaj presents well worthy xxmaj rome 's imperious lord ; 
▁ xxmaj receive them then , the tribute that i owe , 
▁ xxmaj mine honour 's ensigns humbled at thy feet . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj thanks , noble xxmaj titus , father of my life . 
▁ xxmaj how proud i am of thee and of thy gifts 
▁ xxmaj rome shall record ; and when i do forget 
▁ xxmaj the least of these unspeakable deserts , 
▁ xxmaj romans , forget your fealty to me . 
▁ xxup titus . [ to xxup tamora ] xxmaj now , madam , are you prisoner to an emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj to him that for your honour and your state 
▁ xxmaj will use you nobly and your followers . 
▁ xxup saturninus . [ aside ] a goodly lady , trust me ; of the hue 
▁ xxmaj that i would choose , were i to choose anew.- 
▁ xxmaj clear up , fair xxmaj queen , that cloudy countenance ; 
▁ xxmaj though chance of war hath wrought this change of cheer , 
▁ xxmaj thou com'st not to be made a scorn in xxmaj rome- 
▁ xxmaj princely shall be thy usage every way . 
▁ xxmaj rest on my word , and let not discontent 
▁ xxmaj daunt all your hopes . xxmaj madam , he comforts you 
▁ xxmaj can make you greater than the xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths . 
▁ xxmaj lavinia , you are not displeas'd with this ? 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj not xxup i , my lord , sith true nobility 
▁ xxmaj warrants these words in princely courtesy . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj thanks , sweet xxmaj lavinia . xxmaj romans , let us go . 
▁ xxmaj ransomless here we set our prisoners free . 
▁ xxmaj proclaim our honours , lords , with trump and drum . 
▁ [ flourish ] 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj lord xxmaj titus , by your leave , this maid is mine . 
▁ [ seizing xxup lavinia ] 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj how , sir ! xxmaj are you in earnest then , my lord ? 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj ay , noble xxmaj titus , and resolv'd withal 
▁ xxmaj to do myself this reason and this right . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj suum cuique is our xxmaj roman justice : 
▁ xxmaj this prince in justice seizeth but his own . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj and that he will and shall , if xxmaj lucius live . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj traitors , avaunt ! xxmaj where is the xxmaj emperor 's guard ? 
▁ xxmaj treason , my lord- xxmaj lavinia is surpris'd ! 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj surpris'd ! xxmaj by whom ? 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj by him that justly may 
▁ xxmaj bear his betroth'd from all the world away . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup bassianus and xxup marcus with xxup lavinia 
▁ xxup mutius . xxmaj brothers , help to convey her hence away , 
▁ xxmaj and with my sword xxmaj i 'll keep this door safe . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucius , xxup quintus , and xxup martius 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj follow , my lord , and xxmaj i 'll soon bring her back . 
▁ xxup mutius . xxmaj my lord , you pass not here . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj what , villain boy ! 
▁ xxmaj bar'st me my way in xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxup mutius . xxmaj help , xxmaj lucius , help ! 
▁ xxup titus kills him . xxmaj during the fray , exeunt xxup saturninus , 
▁ xxup tamora , xxup demetrius , xxup chiron , and xxup aaron 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxmaj lucius 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj my lord , you are unjust , and more than so : 
▁ xxmaj in wrongful quarrel you have slain your son . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj nor thou nor he are any sons of mine ; 
▁ xxmaj my sons would never so dishonour me . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter aloft the xxup emperor 
▁ with xxup tamora and her two xxmaj sons , and xxup aaron the xxmaj moor 

▁ xxmaj traitor , restore xxmaj lavinia to the xxmaj emperor . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj dead , if you will ; but not to be his wife , 
▁ xxmaj that is another 's lawful promis'd love . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj no , xxmaj titus , no ; the xxmaj emperor needs her not , 
▁ xxmaj nor her , nor thee , nor any of thy stock . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll trust by leisure him that mocks me once ; 
▁ xxmaj thee never , nor thy traitorous haughty sons , 
▁ xxmaj confederates all thus to dishonour me . 
▁ xxmaj was there none else in xxmaj rome to make a stale 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj saturnine ? xxmaj full well , xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine 
▁ xxmaj that saidst i begg'd the empire at thy hands . 
▁ xxup titus . o monstrous ! xxmaj what reproachful words are these ? 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj but go thy ways ; go , give that changing piece 
▁ xxmaj to him that flourish'd for her with his sword . 
▁ a valiant son - in - law thou shalt enjoy ; 
▁ xxmaj one fit to bandy with thy lawless sons , 
▁ xxmaj to ruffle in the commonwealth of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj these words are razors to my wounded heart . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj and therefore , lovely xxmaj tamora , xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj that , like the stately xxmaj phoebe ' mongst her nymphs , 
▁ xxmaj dost overshine the gallant'st dames of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj if thou be pleas'd with this my sudden choice , 
▁ xxmaj behold , i choose thee , xxmaj tamora , for my bride 
▁ xxmaj and will create thee xxmaj emperess of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths , dost thou applaud my choice ? 
▁ xxmaj and here i swear by all the xxmaj roman gods- 
▁ xxmaj sith priest and holy water are so near , 
▁ xxmaj and tapers burn so bright , and everything 
▁ xxmaj in readiness for xxmaj hymenaeus stand- 
▁ i will not re - salute the streets of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj or climb my palace , till from forth this place 
▁ i lead espous'd my bride along with me . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj and here in sight of heaven to xxmaj rome i swear , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj saturnine advance the xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj she will a handmaid be to his desires , 
▁ a loving nurse , a mother to his youth . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj ascend , fair xxmaj queen , xxmaj pantheon . xxmaj lords , accompany 
▁ xxmaj your noble xxmaj emperor and his lovely bride , 
▁ xxmaj sent by the heavens for xxmaj prince xxmaj saturnine , 
▁ xxmaj whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered ; 
▁ xxmaj there shall we consummate our spousal rites . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup titus 
▁ xxup titus . i am not bid to wait upon this bride . 
▁ xxup titus , when wert thou wo nt to walk alone , 
▁ xxmaj dishonoured thus , and challenged of wrongs ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup marcus , 
▁ and xxup titus ' xxup sons , xxup lucius , xxup quintus , and xxup martius 

▁ xxup marcus . o xxmaj titus , see , xxup o , see what thou hast done ! 
▁ xxmaj in a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj no , foolish xxmaj tribune , no ; no son of mine- 
▁ xxmaj nor thou , nor these , confederates in the deed 
▁ xxmaj that hath dishonoured all our family ; 
▁ xxmaj unworthy brother and unworthy sons ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj but let us give him burial , as becomes ; 
▁ xxmaj give xxmaj mutius burial with our bretheren . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj traitors , away ! xxmaj he rests not in this tomb . 
▁ xxmaj this monument five hundred years hath stood , 
▁ xxmaj which i have sumptuously re - edified ; 
▁ xxmaj here none but soldiers and xxmaj rome 's servitors 
▁ xxmaj repose in fame ; none basely slain in brawls . 
▁ xxmaj bury him where you can , he comes not here . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj my lord , this is impiety in you . 
▁ xxmaj my nephew xxmaj mutius ' deeds do plead for him ; 
▁ xxmaj he must be buried with his bretheren . 
▁ xxup quintus & xxup martius . xxmaj and shall , or him we will accompany . 
▁ xxup titus . ' and shall ! ' xxmaj what villain was it spake that word ? 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj he that would vouch it in any place but here . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj what , would you bury him in my despite ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj no , noble xxmaj titus , but entreat of thee 
▁ xxmaj to pardon xxmaj mutius and to bury him . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj marcus , even thou hast struck upon my crest , 
▁ xxmaj and with these boys mine honour thou hast wounded . 
▁ xxmaj my foes i do repute you every one ; 
▁ xxmaj so trouble me no more , but get you gone . 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj he is not with himself ; let us withdraw . 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj not xxup i , till xxmaj mutius ' bones be buried . 
▁ [ the xxup brother and the xxup sons kneel ] 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj brother , for in that name doth nature plead- 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj father , and in that name doth nature speak- 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj speak thou no more , if all the rest will speed . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj renowned xxmaj titus , more than half my soul- 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj dear father , soul and substance of us all- 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj suffer thy brother xxmaj marcus to inter 
▁ xxmaj his noble nephew here in virtue 's nest , 
▁ xxmaj that died in honour and xxmaj lavinia 's cause . 
▁ xxmaj thou art a xxmaj roman- be not barbarous . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj greeks upon advice did bury xxmaj ajax , 
▁ xxmaj that slew himself ; and wise xxmaj laertes ' son 
▁ xxmaj did graciously plead for his funerals . 
▁ xxmaj let not young xxmaj mutius , then , that was thy joy , 
▁ xxmaj be barr'd his entrance here . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj rise , xxmaj marcus , rise ; 
▁ xxmaj the dismal'st day is this that e'er i saw , 
▁ xxmaj to be dishonoured by my sons in xxmaj rome ! 
▁ xxmaj well , bury him , and bury me the next . 
▁ [ they put xxup mutius in the tomb ] 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj there lie thy bones , sweet xxmaj mutius , with thy friends , 
▁ xxmaj till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb . 
▁ xxup all . [ kneeling ] xxmaj no man shed tears for noble xxmaj mutius ; 
▁ xxmaj he lives in fame that died in virtue 's cause . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj my lord- to step out of these dreary dumps- 
▁ xxmaj how comes it that the subtle xxmaj queen of xxmaj goths 
▁ xxmaj is of a sudden thus advanc'd in xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxup titus . i know not , xxmaj marcus , but i know it is- 
▁ xxmaj whether by device or no , the heavens can tell . 
▁ xxmaj is she not , then , beholding to the man 
▁ xxmaj that brought her for this high good turn so far ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj yes , and will nobly him remunerate . 

▁ xxmaj flourish . xxmaj re - enter the xxup emperor , xxup tamora 
▁ and her two xxup sons , with the xxup moor , at one door ; 
▁ at the other door , xxup bassianus and xxup lavinia , with others 

▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj so , xxmaj bassianus , you have play'd your prize : 
▁ xxmaj god give you joy , sir , of your gallant bride ! 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj and you of yours , my lord ! i say no more , 
▁ xxmaj nor wish no less ; and so i take my leave . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj traitor , if xxmaj rome have law or we have power , 
▁ xxmaj thou and thy faction shall repent this rape . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj rape , call you it , my lord , to seize my own , 
▁ xxmaj my true betrothed love , and now my wife ? 
▁ xxmaj but let the laws of xxmaj rome determine all ; 
▁ xxmaj meanwhile am i possess'd of that is mine . 
▁ xxup saturninus . ' tis good , sir . xxmaj you are very short with us ; 
▁ xxmaj but if we live we 'll be as sharp with you . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj my lord , what i have done , as best i may , 
▁ xxmaj answer i must , and shall do with my life . 
▁ xxmaj only thus much i give your xxmaj grace to know : 
▁ xxmaj by all the duties that i owe to xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj this noble gentleman , xxmaj lord xxmaj titus here , 
▁ xxmaj is in opinion and in honour wrong'd , 
▁ xxmaj that , in the rescue of xxmaj lavinia , 
▁ xxmaj with his own hand did slay his youngest son , 
▁ xxmaj in zeal to you , and highly mov'd to wrath 
▁ xxmaj to be controll'd in that he frankly gave . 
▁ xxmaj receive him then to favour , xxmaj saturnine , 
▁ xxmaj that hath express'd himself in all his deeds 
▁ a father and a friend to thee and xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj prince xxmaj bassianus , leave to plead my deeds . 
▁ ' tis thou and those that have dishonoured me . 
▁ xxmaj rome and the righteous heavens be my judge 
▁ xxmaj how i have lov'd and honoured xxmaj saturnine ! 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj my worthy lord , if ever xxmaj tamora 
▁ xxmaj were gracious in those princely eyes of thine , 
▁ xxmaj then hear me speak indifferently for all ; 
▁ xxmaj and at my suit , sweet , pardon what is past . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj what , madam ! be dishonoured openly , 
▁ xxmaj and basely put it up without revenge ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj not so , my lord ; the gods of xxmaj rome forfend 
▁ i should be author to dishonour you ! 
▁ xxmaj but on mine honour dare i undertake 
▁ xxmaj for good xxmaj lord xxmaj titus ' innocence in all , 
▁ xxmaj whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs . 
▁ xxmaj then at my suit look graciously on him ; 
▁ xxmaj lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose , 
▁ xxmaj nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart . 
▁ [ aside to xxup saturninus ] xxmaj my lord , be rul'd by me , 
▁ be won at last ; 
▁ xxmaj dissemble all your griefs and discontents . 
▁ xxmaj you are but newly planted in your throne ; 
▁ xxmaj lest , then , the people , and patricians too , 
▁ xxmaj upon a just survey take xxmaj titus ' part , 
▁ xxmaj and so supplant you for ingratitude , 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj rome reputes to be a heinous sin , 
▁ xxmaj yield at entreats , and then let me alone : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find a day to massacre them all , 
▁ xxmaj and raze their faction and their family , 
▁ xxmaj the cruel father and his traitorous sons , 
▁ xxmaj to whom i sued for my dear son 's life ; 
▁ xxmaj and make them know what ' tis to let a queen 
▁ xxmaj kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.- 
▁ xxmaj come , come , sweet xxmaj emperor ; come , xxmaj andronicus . 
▁ xxmaj take up this good old man , and cheer the heart 
▁ xxmaj that dies in tempest of thy angry frown . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj rise , xxmaj titus , rise ; my xxmaj empress hath prevail'd . 
▁ xxup titus . i thank your xxmaj majesty and her , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj these words , these looks , infuse new life in me . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj titus , i am incorporate in xxmaj rome , 
▁ a xxmaj roman now adopted happily , 
▁ xxmaj and must advise the xxmaj emperor for his good . 
▁ xxmaj this day all quarrels die , xxmaj andronicus ; 
▁ xxmaj and let it be mine honour , good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj that i have reconcil'd your friends and you . 
▁ xxmaj for you , xxmaj prince xxmaj bassianus , i have pass'd 
▁ xxmaj my word and promise to the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj that you will be more mild and tractable . 
▁ xxmaj and fear not , lords- and you , xxmaj lavinia . 
▁ xxmaj by my advice , all humbled on your knees , 
▁ xxmaj you shall ask pardon of his xxmaj majesty . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj we do , and vow to heaven and to his xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj that what we did was mildly as we might , 
▁ xxmaj tend'ring our sister 's honour and our own . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj that on mine honour here do i protest . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj away , and talk not ; trouble us no more . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj nay , nay , sweet xxmaj emperor , we must all be friends . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj tribune and his nephews kneel for grace . 
▁ i will not be denied . xxmaj sweet heart , look back . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj marcus , for thy sake , and thy brother 's here , 
▁ xxmaj and at my lovely xxmaj tamora 's entreats , 
▁ i do remit these young men 's heinous faults . 
▁ xxmaj stand up . 
▁ xxmaj lavinia , though you left me like a churl , 
▁ i found a friend ; and sure as death i swore 
▁ i would not part a bachelor from the priest . 
▁ xxmaj come , if the xxmaj emperor 's court can feast two brides , 
▁ xxmaj you are my guest , xxmaj lavinia , and your friends . 
▁ xxmaj this day shall be a love - day , xxmaj tamora . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj to - morrow , and it please your xxmaj majesty 
▁ xxmaj to hunt the panther and the hart with me , 
▁ xxmaj with horn and hound we 'll give your xxmaj grace bonjour . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj be it so , xxmaj titus , and gramercy too . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt . xxmaj sound trumpets 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj before the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup aaron 

▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj now climbeth xxmaj tamora xxmaj olympus ' top , 
▁ xxmaj safe out of xxmaj fortune 's shot , and sits aloft , 
▁ xxmaj secure of thunder 's crack or lightning flash , 
▁ xxmaj advanc'd above pale envy 's threat'ning reach . 
▁ xxmaj as when the golden sun salutes the morn , 
▁ xxmaj and , having gilt the ocean with his beams , 
▁ xxmaj gallops the zodiac in his glistening coach 
▁ xxmaj and overlooks the highest - peering hills , 
▁ xxmaj so xxmaj tamora . 
▁ xxmaj upon her wit doth earthly honour wait , 
▁ xxmaj and virtue stoops and trembles at her frown . 
▁ xxmaj then , xxmaj aaron , arm thy heart and fit thy thoughts 
▁ xxmaj to mount aloft with thy imperial mistress , 
▁ xxmaj and mount her pitch whom thou in triumph long . 
▁ xxmaj hast prisoner held , fett'red in amorous chains , 
▁ xxmaj and faster bound to xxmaj aaron 's charming eyes 
▁ xxmaj than is xxmaj prometheus tied to xxmaj caucasus . 
▁ xxmaj away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts ! 
▁ i will be bright and shine in pearl and gold , 
▁ xxmaj to wait upon this new - made emperess . 
▁ xxmaj to wait , said xxup i ? xxmaj to wanton with this queen , 
▁ xxmaj this goddess , this xxmaj semiramis , this nymph , 
▁ xxmaj this siren that will charm xxmaj rome 's xxmaj saturnine , 
▁ xxmaj and see his shipwreck and his commonweal 's . 
▁ xxmaj hullo ! what storm is this ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup chiron and xxup demetrius , braving 

▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj chiron , thy years wants wit , thy wits wants edge 
▁ xxmaj and manners , to intrude where i am grac'd , 
▁ xxmaj and may , for aught thou knowest , affected be . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj demetrius , thou dost over - ween in all ; 
▁ xxmaj and so in this , to bear me down with braves . 
▁ ' tis not the difference of a year or two 
▁ xxmaj makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate : 
▁ i am as able and as fit as thou 
▁ xxmaj to serve and to deserve my mistress ' grace ; 
▁ xxmaj and that my sword upon thee shall approve , 
▁ xxmaj and plead my passions for xxmaj lavinia 's love . 
▁ xxup aaron . [ aside ] xxmaj clubs , clubs ! xxmaj these lovers will not keep the 
▁ peace . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj why , boy , although our mother , unadvis'd , 
▁ xxmaj gave you a dancing rapier by your side , 
▁ xxmaj are you so desperate grown to threat your friends ? 
▁ xxmaj go to ; have your lath glued within your sheath 
▁ xxmaj till you know better how to handle it . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj meanwhile , sir , with the little skill i have , 
▁ xxmaj full well shalt thou perceive how much i dare . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj ay , boy , grow ye so brave ? [ they draw ] 
▁ xxup aaron . [ coming forward ] xxmaj why , how now , lords ! 
▁ xxmaj so near the xxmaj emperor 's palace dare ye draw 
▁ xxmaj and maintain such a quarrel openly ? 
▁ xxmaj full well i wot the ground of all this grudge : 
▁ i would not for a million of gold 
▁ xxmaj the cause were known to them it most concerns ; 
▁ xxmaj nor would your noble mother for much more 
▁ xxmaj be so dishonoured in the court of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj for shame , put up . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj not xxup i , till i have sheath'd 
▁ xxmaj my rapier in his bosom , and withal 
▁ xxmaj thrust those reproachful speeches down his throat 
▁ xxmaj that he hath breath'd in my dishonour here . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj for that i am prepar'd and full resolv'd , 
▁ xxmaj foul - spoken coward , that thund'rest with thy tongue , 
▁ xxmaj and with thy weapon nothing dar'st perform . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj away , i say ! 
▁ xxmaj now , by the gods that warlike xxmaj goths adore , 
▁ xxmaj this pretty brabble will undo us all . 
▁ xxmaj why , lords , and think you not how dangerous 
▁ xxmaj it is to jet upon a prince 's right ? 
▁ xxmaj what , is xxmaj lavinia then become so loose , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj bassianus so degenerate , 
▁ xxmaj that for her love such quarrels may be broach'd 
▁ xxmaj without controlment , justice , or revenge ? 
▁ xxmaj young lords , beware ; an should the xxmaj empress know 
▁ xxmaj this discord 's ground , the music would not please . 
▁ xxup chiron . i care not , xxup i , knew she and all the world : 
▁ i love xxmaj lavinia more than all the world . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj youngling , learn thou to make some meaner choice : 
▁ xxmaj lavina is thine elder brother 's hope . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , are ye mad , or know ye not in xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj how furious and impatient they be , 
▁ xxmaj and can not brook competitors in love ? 
▁ i tell you , lords , you do but plot your deaths 
▁ xxmaj by this device . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj aaron , a thousand deaths 
▁ xxmaj would i propose to achieve her whom i love . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj to achieve her- how ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj why mak'st thou it so strange ? 
▁ xxmaj she is a woman , therefore may be woo'd ; 
▁ xxmaj she is a woman , therefore may be won ; 
▁ xxmaj she is xxmaj lavinia , therefore must be lov'd . 
▁ xxmaj what , man ! more water glideth by the mill 
▁ xxmaj than wots the miller of ; and easy it is 
▁ xxmaj of a cut loaf to steal a shive , we know . 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj bassianus be the xxmaj emperor 's brother , 
▁ xxmaj better than he have worn xxmaj vulcan 's badge . 
▁ xxup aaron . [ aside ] xxmaj ay , and as good as xxmaj saturninus may . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj then why should he despair that knows to court it 
▁ xxmaj with words , fair looks , and liberality ? 
▁ xxmaj what , hast not thou full often struck a doe , 
▁ xxmaj and borne her cleanly by the keeper 's nose ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , then , it seems some certain snatch or so 
▁ xxmaj would serve your turns . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj ay , so the turn were served . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj aaron , thou hast hit it . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj would you had hit it too ! 
▁ xxmaj then should not we be tir'd with this ado . 
▁ xxmaj why , hark ye , hark ye ! and are you such fools 
▁ xxmaj to square for this ? xxmaj would it offend you , then , 
▁ xxmaj that both should speed ? 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj faith , not me . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj nor me , so i were one . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj for shame , be friends , and join for that you jar . 
▁ ' tis policy and stratagem must do 
▁ xxmaj that you affect ; and so must you resolve 
▁ xxmaj that what you can not as you would achieve , 
▁ xxmaj you must perforce accomplish as you may . 
▁ xxmaj take this of me : xxmaj lucrece was not more chaste 
▁ xxmaj than this xxmaj lavinia , xxmaj bassianus ' love . 
▁ a speedier course than ling'ring languishment 
▁ xxmaj must we pursue , and i have found the path . 
▁ xxmaj my lords , a solemn hunting is in hand ; 
▁ xxmaj there will the lovely xxmaj roman ladies troop ; 
▁ xxmaj the forest walks are wide and spacious , 
▁ xxmaj and many unfrequented plots there are 
▁ xxmaj fitted by kind for rape and villainy . 
▁ xxmaj single you thither then this dainty doe , 
▁ xxmaj and strike her home by force if not by words . 
▁ xxmaj this way , or not at all , stand you in hope . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , our xxmaj empress , with her sacred wit 
▁ xxmaj to villainy and vengeance consecrate , 
▁ xxmaj will we acquaint with all what we intend ; 
▁ xxmaj and she shall file our engines with advice 
▁ xxmaj that will not suffer you to square yourselves , 
▁ xxmaj but to your wishes ' height advance you both . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj emperor 's court is like the house of xxmaj fame , 
▁ xxmaj the palace full of tongues , of eyes , and ears ; 
▁ xxmaj the woods are ruthless , dreadful , deaf , and dull . 
▁ xxmaj there speak and strike , brave boys , and take your turns ; 
▁ xxmaj there serve your lust , shadowed from heaven 's eye , 
▁ xxmaj and revel in xxmaj lavinia 's treasury . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj thy counsel , lad , smells of no cowardice . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj sit fas aut nefas , till i find the stream 
▁ xxmaj to cool this heat , a charm to calm these fits , 
▁ xxmaj per xxmaj styga , per manes vehor . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a forest near xxmaj rome 

 xxmaj enter xxup titus xxup andronicus , and his three sons , xxup lucius , xxup quintus , xxup martius , 
 making a noise with hounds and horns ; and xxup marcus 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj the hunt is up , the morn is bright and grey , 
▁ xxmaj the fields are fragrant , and the woods are green . 
▁ xxmaj uncouple here , and let us make a bay , 
▁ xxmaj and wake the xxmaj emperor and his lovely bride , 
▁ xxmaj and rouse the xxmaj prince , and ring a hunter 's peal , 
▁ xxmaj that all the court may echo with the noise . 
▁ xxmaj sons , let it be your charge , as it is ours , 
▁ xxmaj to attend the xxmaj emperor 's person carefully . 
▁ i have been troubled in my sleep this night , 
▁ xxmaj but dawning day new comfort hath inspir'd . 

▁ xxmaj here a cry of hounds , and wind horns in a peal . 
▁ xxmaj then enter xxup saturninus , xxup tamora , xxup bassianus xxup lavinia , 
▁ xxup chiron , xxup demetrius , and their attendants 
▁ xxmaj many good morrows to your xxmaj majesty ! 
▁ xxmaj madam , to you as many and as good ! 
▁ i promised your xxmaj grace a hunter 's peal . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj and you have rung it lustily , my lords- 
▁ xxmaj somewhat too early for new - married ladies . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj lavinia , how say you ? 
▁ xxup lavinia . i say no ; 
▁ i have been broad awake two hours and more . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj come on then , horse and chariots let us have , 
▁ xxmaj and to our sport . [ to xxup tamora ] xxmaj madam , now shall ye see 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj roman hunting . 
▁ xxup marcus . i have dogs , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj will rouse the proudest panther in the chase , 
▁ xxmaj and climb the highest promontory top . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj and i have horse will follow where the game 
▁ xxmaj makes way , and run like swallows o'er the plain . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj chiron , we hunt not , we , with horse nor hound , 
▁ xxmaj but hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a lonely part of the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup aaron alone , with a bag of gold 

▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj he that had wit would think that i had none , 
▁ xxmaj to bury so much gold under a tree 
▁ xxmaj and never after to inherit it . 
▁ xxmaj let him that thinks of me so abjectly 
▁ xxmaj know that this gold must coin a stratagem , 
▁ xxmaj which , cunningly effected , will beget 
▁ a very excellent piece of villainy . 
▁ xxmaj and so repose , sweet gold , for their unrest 
▁ [ hides the gold ] 
▁ xxmaj that have their alms out of the xxmaj empress ' chest . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup tamora alone , to the xxmaj moor 

▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj my lovely xxmaj aaron , wherefore look'st thou sad 
▁ xxmaj when everything does make a gleeful boast ? 
▁ xxmaj the birds chant melody on every bush ; 
▁ xxmaj the snakes lie rolled in the cheerful sun ; 
▁ xxmaj the green leaves quiver with the cooling wind 
▁ xxmaj and make a chequer'd shadow on the ground ; 
▁ xxmaj under their sweet shade , xxmaj aaron , let us sit , 
▁ xxmaj and while the babbling echo mocks the hounds , 
▁ xxmaj replying shrilly to the well - tun'd horns , 
▁ xxmaj as if a double hunt were heard at once , 
▁ xxmaj let us sit down and mark their yellowing noise ; 
▁ xxmaj and- after conflict such as was suppos'd 
▁ xxmaj the wand'ring prince and xxmaj dido once enjoyed , 
▁ xxmaj when with a happy storm they were surpris'd , 
▁ xxmaj and curtain'd with a counsel - keeping cave- 
▁ xxmaj we may , each wreathed in the other 's arms , 
▁ xxmaj our pastimes done , possess a golden slumber , 
▁ xxmaj whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds 
▁ xxmaj be unto us as is a nurse 's song 
▁ xxmaj of lullaby to bring her babe asleep . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj madam , though xxmaj venus govern your desires , 
▁ xxmaj saturn is dominator over mine . 
▁ xxmaj what signifies my deadly - standing eye , 
▁ xxmaj my silence and my cloudy melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj my fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls 
▁ xxmaj even as an adder when she doth unroll 
▁ xxmaj to do some fatal execution ? 
▁ xxmaj no , madam , these are no venereal signs . 
▁ xxmaj vengeance is in my heart , death in my hand , 
▁ xxmaj blood and revenge are hammering in my head . 
▁ xxmaj hark , xxmaj tamora , the empress of my soul , 
▁ xxmaj which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee- 
▁ xxmaj this is the day of doom for xxmaj bassianus ; 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj philomel must lose her tongue to - day , 
▁ xxmaj thy sons make pillage of her chastity , 
▁ xxmaj and wash their hands in xxmaj bassianus ' blood . 
▁ xxmaj seest thou this letter ? xxmaj take it up , i pray thee , 
▁ xxmaj and give the xxmaj king this fatal - plotted scroll . 
▁ xxmaj now question me no more ; we are espied . 
▁ xxmaj here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty , 
▁ xxmaj which dreads not yet their lives ' destruction . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup bassianus and xxup lavinia 
▁
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj ah , my sweet xxmaj moor , sweeter to me than life ! 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj no more , great xxmaj empress : xxmaj bassianus comes . 
▁ xxmaj be cross with him ; and xxmaj i 'll go fetch thy sons 
▁ xxmaj to back thy quarrels , whatsoe'er they be . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj who have we here ? xxmaj rome 's royal xxmaj emperess , 
▁ xxmaj unfurnish'd of her well - beseeming troop ? 
▁ xxmaj or is it xxmaj dian , habited like her , 
▁ xxmaj who hath abandoned her holy groves 
▁ xxmaj to see the general hunting in this forest ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj saucy controller of my private steps ! 
▁ xxmaj had i the pow'r that some say xxmaj dian had , 
▁ xxmaj thy temples should be planted presently 
▁ xxmaj with horns , as was xxmaj actaeon 's ; and the hounds 
▁ xxmaj should drive upon thy new - transformed limbs , 
▁ xxmaj unmannerly intruder as thou art ! 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj under your patience , gentle xxmaj emperess , 
▁ ' tis thought you have a goodly gift in horning , 
▁ xxmaj and to be doubted that your xxmaj moor and you 
▁ xxmaj are singled forth to try thy experiments . 
▁ xxmaj jove shield your husband from his hounds to - day ! 
▁ ' tis pity they should take him for a stag . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj believe me , xxmaj queen , your swarth xxmaj cimmerian 
▁ xxmaj doth make your honour of his body 's hue , 
▁ xxmaj spotted , detested , and abominable . 
▁ xxmaj why are you sequest'red from all your train , 
▁ xxmaj dismounted from your snow - white goodly steed , 
▁ xxmaj and wand'red hither to an obscure plot , 
▁ xxmaj accompanied but with a barbarous xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj if foul desire had not conducted you ? 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj and , being intercepted in your sport , 
▁ xxmaj great reason that my noble lord be rated 
▁ xxmaj for sauciness . i pray you let us hence , 
▁ xxmaj and let her joy her raven - coloured love ; 
▁ xxmaj this valley fits the purpose passing well . 
▁ xxup bassianus . xxmaj the xxmaj king my brother shall have notice of this . 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj ay , for these slips have made him noted long . 
▁ xxmaj good king , to be so mightily abused ! 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj why , i have patience to endure all this . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup chiron and xxup demetrius 

▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj how now , dear sovereign , and our gracious mother ! 
▁ xxmaj why doth your xxmaj highness look so pale and wan ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj have i not reason , think you , to look pale ? 
▁ xxmaj these two have ' ticed me hither to this place .