xxbos a barren detested vale you see it is : 
▁ xxmaj the trees , though summer , yet forlorn and lean , 
▁ xxmaj overcome with moss and baleful mistletoe ; 
▁ xxmaj here never shines the sun ; here nothing breeds , 
▁ xxmaj unless the nightly owl or fatal raven . 
▁ xxmaj and when they show'd me this abhorred pit , 
▁ xxmaj they told me , here , at dead time of the night , 
▁ a thousand fiends , a thousand hissing snakes , 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand swelling toads , as many urchins , 
▁ xxmaj would make such fearful and confused cries 
▁ xxmaj as any mortal body hearing it 
▁ xxmaj should straight fall mad or else die suddenly . 
▁ xxmaj no sooner had they told this hellish tale 
▁ xxmaj but straight they told me they would bind me here 
▁ xxmaj unto the body of a dismal yew , 
▁ xxmaj and leave me to this miserable death . 
▁ xxmaj and then they call'd me foul adulteress , 
▁ xxmaj lascivious xxmaj goth , and all the bitterest terms 
▁ xxmaj that ever ear did hear to such effect ; 
▁ xxmaj and had you not by wondrous fortune come , 
▁ xxmaj this vengeance on me had they executed . 
▁ xxmaj revenge it , as you love your mother 's life , 
▁ xxmaj or be ye not henceforth call'd my children . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj this is a witness that i am thy son . 
▁ [ stabs xxup bassianus ] 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj and this for me , struck home to show my strength . 
▁ [ also stabs ] 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj ay , come , xxmaj semiramis- nay , barbarous xxmaj tamora , 
▁ xxmaj for no name fits thy nature but thy own ! 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj give me the poniard ; you shall know , my boys , 
▁ xxmaj your mother 's hand shall right your mother 's wrong . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj stay , madam , here is more belongs to her ; 
▁ xxmaj first thrash the corn , then after burn the straw . 
▁ xxmaj this minion stood upon her chastity , 
▁ xxmaj upon her nuptial vow , her loyalty , 
▁ xxmaj and with that painted hope braves your mightiness ; 
▁ xxmaj and shall she carry this unto her grave ? 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj an if she do , i would i were an eunuch . 
▁ xxmaj drag hence her husband to some secret hole , 
▁ xxmaj and make his dead trunk pillow to our lust . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj but when ye have the honey we desire , 
▁ xxmaj let not this wasp outlive , us both to sting . 
▁ xxup chiron . i warrant you , madam , we will make that sure . 
▁ xxmaj come , mistress , now perforce we will enjoy 
▁ xxmaj that nice - preserved honesty of yours . 
▁ xxup lavinia . o xxmaj tamora ! thou bearest a woman 's face- 
▁ xxup tamora . i will not hear her speak ; away with her ! 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj sweet lords , entreat her hear me but a word . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj listen , fair madam : let it be your glory 
▁ xxmaj to see her tears ; but be your heart to them 
▁ xxmaj as unrelenting flint to drops of rain . 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj when did the tiger 's young ones teach the dam ? 
▁ xxup o , do not learn her wrath- she taught it thee ; 
▁ xxmaj the milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to marble , 
▁ xxmaj even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny . 
▁ xxmaj yet every mother breeds not sons alike : 
▁ [ to xxup chiron ] xxmaj do thou entreat her show a woman 's pity . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj what , wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard ? 
▁ xxup lavinia . ' tis true , the raven doth not hatch a lark . 
▁ xxmaj yet have i heard- xxup o , could i find it now!- 
▁ xxmaj the lion , mov'd with pity , did endure 
▁ xxmaj to have his princely paws par'd all away . 
▁ xxmaj some say that ravens foster forlorn children , 
▁ xxmaj the whilst their own birds famish in their nests ; 
▁ xxup o , be to me , though thy hard heart say no , 
▁ xxmaj nothing so kind , but something pitiful ! 
▁ xxup tamora . i know not what it means ; away with her ! 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxup o , let me teach thee ! xxmaj for my father 's sake , 
▁ xxmaj that gave thee life when well he might have slain thee , 
▁ xxmaj be not obdurate , open thy deaf ears . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj hadst thou in person ne'er offended me , 
▁ xxmaj even for his sake am i pitiless . 
▁ xxmaj remember , boys , i pour'd forth tears in vain 
▁ xxmaj to save your brother from the sacrifice ; 
▁ xxmaj but fierce xxmaj andronicus would not relent . 
▁ xxmaj therefore away with her , and use her as you will ; 
▁ xxmaj the worse to her the better lov'd of me . 
▁ xxup lavinia . o xxmaj tamora , be call'd a gentle queen , 
▁ xxmaj and with thine own hands kill me in this place ! 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis not life that i have begg'd so long ; 
▁ xxmaj poor i was slain when xxmaj bassianus died . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj what beg'st thou , then ? xxmaj fond woman , let me go . 
▁ xxup lavinia . ' tis present death i beg ; and one thing more , 
▁ xxmaj that womanhood denies my tongue to tell : 
▁ xxup o , keep me from their worse than killing lust , 
▁ xxmaj and tumble me into some loathsome pit , 
▁ xxmaj where never man 's eye may behold my body ; 
▁ xxmaj do this , and be a charitable murderer . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj so should i rob my sweet sons of their fee ; 
▁ xxmaj no , let them satisfy their lust on thee . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj away ! for thou hast stay'd us here too long . 
▁ xxup lavinia . xxmaj no grace ? no womanhood ? xxmaj ah , beastly creature , 
▁ xxmaj the blot and enemy to our general name ! 
▁ xxmaj confusion fall- 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj nay , then xxmaj i 'll stop your mouth . xxmaj bring thou her husband . 
▁ xxmaj this is the hole where xxmaj aaron bid us hide him . 

▁ xxup demetrius throws the body 
▁ of xxup bassianus into the pit ; then exeunt 
▁ xxup demetrius and xxup chiron , dragging off xxup lavinia 

▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj farewell , my sons ; see that you make her sure . 
▁ xxmaj ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed 
▁ xxmaj till all the xxmaj andronici be made away . 
▁ xxmaj now will i hence to seek my lovely xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj and let my spleenful sons this trull deflower . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup aaron , with two 
▁ of xxup titus ' sons , xxup quintus and xxup martius 

▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj come on , my lords , the better foot before ; 
▁ xxmaj straight will i bring you to the loathsome pit 
▁ xxmaj where i espied the panther fast asleep . 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj my sight is very dull , whate'er it bodes . 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj and mine , i promise you ; were it not for shame , 
▁ xxmaj well could i leave our sport to sleep awhile . 
▁ [ falls into the pit ] 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj what , art thou fallen ? xxmaj what subtle hole is this , 
▁ xxmaj whose mouth is covered with rude - growing briers , 
▁ xxmaj upon whose leaves are drops of new - shed blood 
▁ xxmaj as fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers ? 
▁ a very fatal place it seems to me . 
▁ xxmaj speak , brother , hast thou hurt thee with the fall ? 
▁ xxup martius . o brother , with the dismal'st object hurt 
▁ xxmaj that ever eye with sight made heart lament ! 
▁ xxup aaron . [ aside ] xxmaj now will i fetch the xxmaj king to find them here , 
▁ xxmaj that he thereby may have a likely guess 
▁ xxmaj how these were they that made away his brother . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj why dost not comfort me , and help me out 
▁ xxmaj from this unhallow'd and blood - stained hole ? 
▁ xxup quintus . i am surprised with an uncouth fear ; 
▁ a chilling sweat o'er - runs my trembling joints ; 
▁ xxmaj my heart suspects more than mine eye can see . 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj to prove thou hast a true divining heart , 
▁ xxmaj aaron and thou look down into this den , 
▁ xxmaj and see a fearful sight of blood and death . 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj aaron is gone , and my compassionate heart 
▁ xxmaj will not permit mine eyes once to behold 
▁ xxmaj the thing whereat it trembles by surmise ; 
▁ xxup o , tell me who it is , for ne'er till now 
▁ xxmaj was i a child to fear i know not what . 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj lord xxmaj bassianus lies beray'd in blood , 
▁ xxmaj all on a heap , like to a slaughtered lamb , 
▁ xxmaj in this detested , dark , blood - drinking pit . 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj if it be dark , how dost thou know ' tis he ? 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj upon his bloody finger he doth wear 
▁ a precious ring that lightens all this hole , 
▁ xxmaj which , like a taper in some monument , 
▁ xxmaj doth shine upon the dead man 's earthy cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj and shows the ragged entrails of this pit ; 
▁ xxmaj so pale did shine the moon on xxmaj pyramus 
▁ xxmaj when he by night lay bath'd in maiden blood . 
▁ o brother , help me with thy fainting hand- 
▁ xxmaj if fear hath made thee faint , as me it hath- 
▁ xxmaj out of this fell devouring receptacle , 
▁ xxmaj as hateful as xxmaj cocytus ' misty mouth . 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj reach me thy hand , that i may help thee out , 
▁ xxmaj or , wanting strength to do thee so much good , 
▁ i may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb 
▁ xxmaj of this deep pit , poor xxmaj bassianus ' grave . 
▁ i have no strength to pluck thee to the brink . 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj nor i no strength to climb without thy help . 
▁ xxup quintus . xxmaj thy hand once more ; i will not loose again , 
▁ xxmaj till thou art here aloft , or i below . 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not come to me- i come to thee . [ falls in ] 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup emperor and xxup aaron the xxmaj moor 

▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj along with me ! xxmaj i 'll see what hole is here , 
▁ xxmaj and what he is that now is leapt into it . 
▁ xxmaj say , who art thou that lately didst descend 
▁ xxmaj into this gaping hollow of the earth ? 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj the unhappy sons of old xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj brought hither in a most unlucky hour , 
▁ xxmaj to find thy brother xxmaj bassianus dead . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj my brother dead ! i know thou dost but jest : 
▁ xxmaj he and his lady both are at the lodge 
▁ xxmaj upon the north side of this pleasant chase ; 
▁ ' tis not an hour since i left them there . 
▁ xxup martius . xxmaj we know not where you left them all alive ; 
▁ xxmaj but , out alas ! here have we found him dead . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup tamora , with 
▁ attendants ; xxup titus xxup andronicus and xxmaj lucius 

▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj where is my lord the xxmaj king ? 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj here , xxmaj tamora ; though griev'd with killing grief . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj where is thy brother xxmaj bassianus ? 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj now to the bottom dost thou search my wound ; 
▁ xxmaj poor xxmaj bassianus here lies murdered . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj then all too late i bring this fatal writ , 
▁ xxmaj the complot of this timeless tragedy ; 
▁ xxmaj and wonder greatly that man 's face can fold 
▁ xxmaj in pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny . 
▁ [ she giveth xxup saturnine a letter ] 
▁ xxup saturninus . [ reads ] ' an if we miss to meet him handsomely , 
▁ xxmaj sweet huntsman- xxmaj bassianus ' tis we mean- 
▁ xxmaj do thou so much as dig the grave for him . 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st our meaning . xxmaj look for thy reward 
▁ xxmaj among the nettles at the elder - tree 
▁ xxmaj which overshades the mouth of that same pit 
▁ xxmaj where we decreed to bury xxmaj bassianus . 
▁ xxmaj do this , and purchase us thy lasting friends . ' 
▁ o xxmaj tamora ! was ever heard the like ? 
▁ xxmaj this is the pit and this the elder - tree . 
▁ xxmaj look , sirs , if you can find the huntsman out 
▁ xxmaj that should have murdered xxmaj bassianus here . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj my gracious lord , here is the bag of gold . 
▁ xxup saturninus . [ to xxup titus ] xxmaj two of thy whelps , fell curs of bloody 
▁ kind , 
▁ xxmaj have here bereft my brother of his life . 
▁ xxmaj sirs , drag them from the pit unto the prison ; 
▁ xxmaj there let them bide until we have devis'd 
▁ xxmaj some never - heard - of torturing pain for them . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj what , are they in this pit ? o wondrous thing ! 
▁ xxmaj how easily murder is discovered ! 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj high xxmaj emperor , upon my feeble knee 
▁ i beg this boon , with tears not lightly shed , 
▁ xxmaj that this fell fault of my accursed sons- 
▁ xxmaj accursed if the fault be prov'd in them- 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj if it be prov'd ! xxmaj you see it is apparent . 
▁ xxmaj who found this letter ? xxmaj tamora , was it you ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj andronicus himself did take it up . 
▁ xxup titus . i did , my lord , yet let me be their bail ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by my fathers ' reverend tomb , i vow 
▁ xxmaj they shall be ready at your xxmaj highness ' will 
▁ xxmaj to answer their suspicion with their lives . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj thou shalt not bail them ; see thou follow me . 
▁ xxmaj some bring the murdered body , some the murderers ; 
▁ xxmaj let them not speak a word- the guilt is plain ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by my soul , were there worse end than death , 
▁ xxmaj that end upon them should be executed . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj andronicus , i will entreat the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj fear not thy sons ; they shall do well enough . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come , xxmaj lucius , come ; stay not to talk with them . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the forest 

 xxmaj enter the xxmaj empress ' sons , xxup demetrius and xxup chiron , with xxup lavinia , 
 her hands cut off , and her tongue cut out , and ravish'd 

▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj so , now go tell , an if thy tongue can speak , 
▁ xxmaj who ' twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj write down thy mind , bewray thy meaning so , 
▁ xxmaj an if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj see how with signs and tokens she can scrowl . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj go home , call for sweet water , wash thy hands . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj she hath no tongue to call , nor hands to wash ; 
▁ xxmaj and so let 's leave her to her silent walks . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj an ' twere my cause , i should go hang myself . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj if thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup demetrius and xxup chiron 

▁ xxmaj wind horns . xxmaj enter xxup marcus , from hunting 

▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj who is this?- my niece , that flies away so fast ? 
▁ xxmaj cousin , a word : where is your husband ? 
▁ xxmaj if i do dream , would all my wealth would wake me ! 
▁ xxmaj if i do wake , some planet strike me down , 
▁ xxmaj that i may slumber an eternal sleep ! 
▁ xxmaj speak , gentle niece . xxmaj what stern ungentle hands 
▁ xxmaj hath lopp'd , and hew'd , and made thy body bare 
▁ xxmaj of her two branches- those sweet ornaments 
▁ xxmaj whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in , 
▁ xxmaj and might not gain so great a happiness 
▁ xxmaj as half thy love ? xxmaj why dost not speak to me ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , a crimson river of warm blood , 
▁ xxmaj like to a bubbling fountain stirr'd with wind , 
▁ xxmaj doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips , 
▁ xxmaj coming and going with thy honey breath . 
▁ xxmaj but sure some xxmaj tereus hath deflowered thee , 
▁ xxmaj and , lest thou shouldst detect him , cut thy tongue . 
▁ xxmaj ah , now thou turn'st away thy face for shame ! 
▁ xxmaj and notwithstanding all this loss of blood- 
▁ xxmaj as from a conduit with three issuing spouts- 
▁ xxmaj yet do thy cheeks look red as xxmaj titan 's face 
▁ xxmaj blushing to be encount'red with a cloud . 
▁ xxmaj shall i speak for thee ? xxmaj shall i say ' tis so ? 
▁ xxup o , that i knew thy heart , and knew the beast , 
▁ xxmaj that i might rail at him to ease my mind ! 
▁ xxmaj sorrow concealed , like an oven stopp'd , 
▁ xxmaj doth burn the heart to cinders where it is . 
▁ xxmaj fair xxmaj philomel , why she but lost her tongue , 
▁ xxmaj and in a tedious sampler sew'd her mind ; 
▁ xxmaj but , lovely niece , that mean is cut from thee . 
▁ a craftier xxmaj tereus , cousin , hast thou met , 
▁ xxmaj and he hath cut those pretty fingers off 
▁ xxmaj that could have better sew'd than xxmaj philomel . 
▁ xxup o , had the monster seen those lily hands 
▁ xxmaj tremble like aspen leaves upon a lute 
▁ xxmaj and make the silken strings delight to kiss them , 
▁ xxmaj he would not then have touch'd them for his life ! 
▁ xxmaj or had he heard the heavenly harmony 
▁ xxmaj which that sweet tongue hath made , 
▁ xxmaj he would have dropp'd his knife , and fell asleep , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj cerberus at the xxmaj thracian poet 's feet . 
▁ xxmaj come , let us go , and make thy father blind , 
▁ xxmaj for such a sight will blind a father 's eye ; 
▁ xxmaj one hour 's storm will drown the fragrant meads , 
▁ xxmaj what will whole months of tears thy father 's eyes ? 
▁ xxmaj do not draw back , for we will mourn with thee ; 
▁ xxup o , could our mourning case thy misery ! xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . a street 

 xxmaj enter the xxup judges , xxup tribunes , and xxup senators , with xxup titus ' two sons 
 xxup martius and xxup quintus bound , passing on the stage to the place of execution , 
 and xxup titus going before , pleading 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj hear me , grave fathers ; noble xxmaj tribunes , stay ! 
▁ xxmaj for pity of mine age , whose youth was spent 
▁ xxmaj in dangerous wars whilst you securely slept ; 
▁ xxmaj for all my blood in xxmaj rome 's great quarrel shed , 
▁ xxmaj for all the frosty nights that i have watch'd , 
▁ xxmaj and for these bitter tears , which now you see 
▁ xxmaj filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj be pitiful to my condemned sons , 
▁ xxmaj whose souls are not corrupted as ' tis thought . 
▁ xxmaj for two and twenty sons i never wept , 
▁ xxmaj because they died in honour 's lofty bed . 
▁ [ andronicus lieth down , and the judges 
▁ pass by him with the prisoners , and exeunt ] 
▁ xxmaj for these , xxmaj tribunes , in the dust i write 
▁ xxmaj my heart 's deep languor and my soul 's sad tears . 
▁ xxmaj let my tears stanch the earth 's dry appetite ; 
▁ xxmaj my sons ' sweet blood will make it shame and blush . 
▁ o earth , i will befriend thee more with rain 
▁ xxmaj that shall distil from these two ancient urns , 
▁ xxmaj than youthful xxmaj april shall with all his show'rs . 
▁ xxmaj in summer 's drought xxmaj i 'll drop upon thee still ; 
▁ xxmaj in winter with warm tears xxmaj i 'll melt the snow 
▁ xxmaj and keep eternal spring - time on thy face , 
▁ xxmaj so thou refuse to drink my dear sons ' blood . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxmaj lucius with his weapon drawn 

▁ o reverend xxmaj tribunes ! o gentle aged men ! 
▁ xxmaj unbind my sons , reverse the doom of death , 
▁ xxmaj and let me say , that never wept before , 
▁ xxmaj my tears are now prevailing orators . 
▁ xxup lucius . o noble father , you lament in vain ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj tribunes hear you not , no man is by , 
▁ xxmaj and you recount your sorrows to a stone . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj ah , xxmaj lucius , for thy brothers let me plead ! 
▁ xxmaj grave xxmaj tribunes , once more i entreat of you . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj my gracious lord , no tribune hears you speak . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , ' tis no matter , man : if they did hear , 
▁ xxmaj they would not mark me ; if they did mark , 
▁ xxmaj they would not pity me ; yet plead i must , 
▁ xxmaj and bootless unto them . 
▁ xxmaj therefore i tell my sorrows to the stones ; 
▁ xxmaj who though they can not answer my distress , 
▁ xxmaj yet in some sort they are better than the xxmaj tribunes , 
▁ xxmaj for that they will not intercept my tale . 
▁ xxmaj when i do weep , they humbly at my feet 
▁ xxmaj receive my tears , and seem to weep with me ; 
▁ xxmaj and were they but attired in grave weeds , 
▁ xxmaj rome could afford no tribunes like to these . 
▁ a stone is soft as wax : tribunes more hard than stones . 
▁ a stone is silent and offendeth not , 
▁ xxmaj and tribunes with their tongues doom men to death . 
▁ [ rises ] 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj to rescue my two brothers from their death ; 
▁ xxmaj for which attempt the judges have pronounc'd 
▁ xxmaj my everlasting doom of banishment . 
▁ xxup titus . o happy man ! they have befriended thee . 
▁ xxmaj why , foolish xxmaj lucius , dost thou not perceive 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj rome is but a wilderness of tigers ? 
▁ xxmaj tigers must prey , and xxmaj rome affords no prey 
▁ xxmaj but me and mine ; how happy art thou then 
▁ xxmaj from these devourers to be banished ! 
▁ xxmaj but who comes with our brother xxmaj marcus here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup marcus with xxup lavinia 

▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj titus , prepare thy aged eyes to weep , 
▁ xxmaj or if not so , thy noble heart to break . 
▁ i bring consuming sorrow to thine age . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj will it consume me ? xxmaj let me see it then . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj this was thy daughter . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , xxmaj marcus , so she is . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj ay me ! this object kills me . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj faint - hearted boy , arise , and look upon her . 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj lavinia , what accursed hand 
▁ xxmaj hath made thee handless in thy father 's sight ? 
▁ xxmaj what fool hath added water to the sea , 
▁ xxmaj or brought a fagot to bright - burning xxmaj troy ? 
▁ xxmaj my grief was at the height before thou cam'st , 
▁ xxmaj and now like xxmaj nilus it disdaineth bounds . 
▁ xxmaj give me a sword , xxmaj i 'll chop off my hands too , 
▁ xxmaj for they have fought for xxmaj rome , and all in vain ; 
▁ xxmaj and they have nurs'd this woe in feeding life ; 
▁ xxmaj in bootless prayer have they been held up , 
▁ xxmaj and they have serv'd me to effectless use . 
▁ xxmaj now all the service i require of them 
▁ xxmaj is that the one will help to cut the other . 
▁ ' tis well , xxmaj lavinia , that thou hast no hands ; 
▁ xxmaj for hands to do xxmaj rome service is but vain . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj speak , gentle sister , who hath martyr'd thee ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxup o , that delightful engine of her thoughts 
▁ xxmaj that blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence 
▁ xxmaj is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage , 
▁ xxmaj where like a sweet melodious bird it sung 
▁ xxmaj sweet varied notes , enchanting every ear ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxup o , say thou for her , who hath done this deed ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxup o , thus i found her straying in the park , 
▁ xxmaj seeking to hide herself as doth the deer 
▁ xxmaj that hath receiv'd some unrecuring wound . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj it was my dear , and he that wounded her 
▁ xxmaj hath hurt me more than had he kill'd me dead ; 
▁ xxmaj for now i stand as one upon a rock , 
▁ xxmaj environ'd with a wilderness of sea , 
▁ xxmaj who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave , 
▁ xxmaj expecting ever when some envious surge 
▁ xxmaj will in his brinish bowels swallow him . 
▁ xxmaj this way to death my wretched sons are gone ; 
▁ xxmaj here stands my other son , a banish'd man , 
▁ xxmaj and here my brother , weeping at my woes . 
▁ xxmaj but that which gives my soul the greatest spurn 
▁ xxmaj is dear xxmaj lavinia , dearer than my soul . 
▁ xxmaj had i but seen thy picture in this plight , 
▁ xxmaj it would have madded me ; what shall i do 
▁ xxmaj now i behold thy lively body so ? 
▁ xxmaj thou hast no hands to wipe away thy tears , 
▁ xxmaj nor tongue to tell me who hath martyr'd thee ; 
▁ xxmaj thy husband he is dead , and for his death 
▁ xxmaj thy brothers are condemn'd , and dead by this . 
▁ xxmaj look , xxmaj marcus ! xxmaj ah , son xxmaj lucius , look on her ! 
▁ xxmaj when i did name her brothers , then fresh tears 
▁ xxmaj stood on her cheeks , as doth the honey dew 
▁ xxmaj upon a gath'red lily almost withered . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband ; 
▁ xxmaj perchance because she knows them innocent . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj if they did kill thy husband , then be joyful , 
▁ xxmaj because the law hath ta'en revenge on them . 
▁ xxmaj no , no , they would not do so foul a deed ; 
▁ xxmaj witness the sorrow that their sister makes . 
▁ xxmaj gentle xxmaj lavinia , let me kiss thy lips , 
▁ xxmaj or make some sign how i may do thee ease . 
▁ xxmaj shall thy good uncle and thy brother xxmaj lucius 
▁ xxmaj and thou and i sit round about some fountain , 
▁ xxmaj looking all downwards to behold our cheeks 
▁ xxmaj how they are stain'd , like meadows yet not dry 
▁ xxmaj with miry slime left on them by a flood ? 
▁ xxmaj and in the fountain shall we gaze so long , 
▁ xxmaj till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness , 
▁ xxmaj and made a brine - pit with our bitter tears ? 
▁ xxmaj or shall we cut away our hands like thine ? 
▁ xxmaj or shall we bite our tongues , and in dumb shows 
▁ xxmaj pass the remainder of our hateful days ? 
▁ xxmaj what shall we do ? xxmaj let us that have our tongues 
▁ xxmaj plot some device of further misery 
▁ xxmaj to make us wonder'd at in time to come . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sweet father , cease your tears ; for at your grief 
▁ xxmaj see how my wretched sister sobs and weeps . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj patience , dear niece . xxmaj good xxmaj titus , dry thine eyes . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj ah , xxmaj marcus , xxmaj marcus ! xxmaj brother , well i wot 
▁ xxmaj thy napkin can not drink a tear of mine , 
▁ xxmaj for thou , poor man , hast drown'd it with thine own . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj ah , my xxmaj lavinia , i will wipe thy cheeks . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj mark , xxmaj marcus , mark ! i understand her signs . 
▁ xxmaj had she a tongue to speak , now would she say 
▁ xxmaj that to her brother which i said to thee : 
▁ xxmaj his napkin , with his true tears all bewet , 
▁ xxmaj can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks . 
▁ xxup o , what a sympathy of woe is this 
▁ xxmaj as far from help as xxmaj limbo is from bliss ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aaron the xxmaj moor 

▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj titus xxmaj andronicus , my lord the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj sends thee this word , that , if thou love thy sons , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj marcus , xxmaj lucius , or thyself , old xxmaj titus , 
▁ xxmaj or any one of you , chop off your hand 
▁ xxmaj and send it to the xxmaj king : he for the same 
▁ xxmaj will send thee hither both thy sons alive , 
▁ xxmaj and that shall be the ransom for their fault . 
▁ xxup titus . o gracious xxmaj emperor ! o gentle xxmaj aaron ! 
▁ xxmaj did ever raven sing so like a lark 
▁ xxmaj that gives sweet tidings of the sun 's uprise ? 
▁ xxmaj with all my heart xxmaj i 'll send the xxmaj emperor my hand . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj aaron , wilt thou help to chop it off ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj stay , father ! for that noble hand of thine , 
▁ xxmaj that hath thrown down so many enemies , 
▁ xxmaj shall not be sent . xxmaj my hand will serve the turn , 
▁ xxmaj my youth can better spare my blood than you , 
▁ xxmaj and therefore mine shall save my brothers ' lives . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj which of your hands hath not defended xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj and rear'd aloft the bloody battle - axe , 
▁ xxmaj writing destruction on the enemy 's castle ? 
▁ xxup o , none of both but are of high desert ! 
▁ xxmaj my hand hath been but idle ; let it serve 
▁ xxmaj to ransom my two nephews from their death ; 
▁ xxmaj then have i kept it to a worthy end . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj nay , come , agree whose hand shall go along , 
▁ xxmaj for fear they die before their pardon come . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj my hand shall go . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj by heaven , it shall not go ! 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj sirs , strive no more ; such with'red herbs as these 
▁ xxmaj are meet for plucking up , and therefore mine . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sweet father , if i shall be thought thy son , 
▁ xxmaj let me redeem my brothers both from death . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj and for our father 's sake and mother 's care , 
▁ xxmaj now let me show a brother 's love to thee . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj agree between you ; i will spare my hand . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj then xxmaj i 'll go fetch an axe . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj but i will use the axe . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup lucius and xxup marcus 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come hither , xxmaj aaron , xxmaj i 'll deceive them both ; 
▁ xxmaj lend me thy hand , and i will give thee mine . 
▁ xxup aaron . [ aside ] xxmaj if that be call'd deceit , i will be honest , 
▁ xxmaj and never whilst i live deceive men so ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll deceive you in another sort , 
▁ xxmaj and that you 'll say ere half an hour pass . 
▁ [ he cuts off xxup titus ' hand ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lucius and xxup marcus 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj now stay your strife . xxmaj what shall be is dispatch'd . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj aaron , give his xxmaj majesty my hand ; 
▁ xxmaj tell him it was a hand that warded him 
▁ xxmaj from thousand dangers ; bid him bury it . 
▁ xxmaj more hath it merited- that let it have . 
▁ xxmaj as for my sons , say i account of them 
▁ xxmaj as jewels purchas'd at an easy price ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet dear too , because i bought mine own . 
▁ xxup aaron . i go , xxmaj andronicus ; and for thy hand 
▁ xxmaj look by and by to have thy sons with thee . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj their heads i mean . xxup o , how this villainy 
▁ xxmaj doth fat me with the very thoughts of it ! 
▁ xxmaj let fools do good , and fair men call for grace : 
▁ xxmaj aaron will have his soul black like his face . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup titus . xxup o , here i lift this one hand up to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj and bow this feeble ruin to the earth ; 
▁ xxmaj if any power pities wretched tears , 
▁ xxmaj to that i call ! [ to xxup lavinia ] xxmaj what , would'st thou kneel with me ? 
▁ xxmaj do , then , dear heart ; for heaven shall hear our prayers , 
▁ xxmaj or with our sighs we 'll breathe the welkin dim 
▁ xxmaj and stain the sun with fog , as sometime clouds 
▁ xxmaj when they do hug him in their melting bosoms . 
▁ xxup marcus . o brother , speak with possibility , 
▁ xxmaj and do not break into these deep extremes . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj is not my sorrow deep , having no bottom ? 
▁ xxmaj then be my passions bottomless with them . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj but yet let reason govern thy lament . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj if there were reason for these miseries , 
▁ xxmaj then into limits could i bind my woes . 
▁ xxmaj when heaven doth weep , doth not the earth o'erflow ? 
▁ xxmaj if the winds rage , doth not the sea wax mad , 
▁ xxmaj threat'ning the welkin with his big - swol'n face ? 
▁ xxmaj and wilt thou have a reason for this coil ? 
▁ i am the sea ; hark how her sighs do blow . 
▁ xxmaj she is the weeping welkin , i the earth ; 
▁ xxmaj then must my sea be moved with her sighs ; 
▁ xxmaj then must my earth with her continual tears 
▁ xxmaj become a deluge , overflow'd and drown'd ; 
▁ xxmaj for why my bowels can not hide her woes , 
▁ xxmaj but like a drunkard must i vomit them . 
▁ xxmaj then give me leave ; for losers will have leave 
▁ xxmaj to ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup messenger , with two heads and a hand 
▁
▁ xxup messenger . xxmaj worthy xxmaj andronicus , ill art thou repaid 
▁ xxmaj for that good hand thou sent'st the xxmaj emperor . 
▁ xxmaj here are the heads of thy two noble sons ; 
▁ xxmaj and here 's thy hand , in scorn to thee sent back- 
▁ xxmaj thy grief their sports , thy resolution mock'd , 
▁ xxmaj that woe is me to think upon thy woes , 
▁ xxmaj more than remembrance of my father 's death . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj now let hot xxmaj aetna cool in xxmaj sicily , 
▁ xxmaj and be my heart an ever - burning hell ! 
▁ xxmaj these miseries are more than may be borne . 
▁ xxmaj to weep with them that weep doth ease some deal , 
▁ xxmaj but sorrow flouted at is double death . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj ah , that this sight should make so deep a wound , 
▁ xxmaj and yet detested life not shrink thereat ! 
▁ xxmaj that ever death should let life bear his name , 
▁ xxmaj where life hath no more interest but to breathe ! 
▁ [ lavinia kisses xxup titus ] 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj alas , poor heart , that kiss is comfortless 
▁ xxmaj as frozen water to a starved snake . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj when will this fearful slumber have an end ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj now farewell , flatt'ry ; die , xxmaj andronicus . 
▁ xxmaj thou dost not slumber : see thy two sons ' heads , 
▁ xxmaj thy warlike hand , thy mangled daughter here ; 
▁ xxmaj thy other banish'd son with this dear sight 
▁ xxmaj struck pale and bloodless ; and thy brother , xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj even like a stony image , cold and numb . 
▁ xxmaj ah ! now no more will i control thy griefs . 
▁ xxmaj rent off thy silver hair , thy other hand 
▁ xxmaj gnawing with thy teeth ; and be this dismal sight 
▁ xxmaj the closing up of our most wretched eyes . 
▁ xxmaj now is a time to storm ; why art thou still ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj ha , ha , ha ! 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj why dost thou laugh ? xxmaj it fits not with this hour . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , i have not another tear to shed ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , this sorrow is an enemy , 
▁ xxmaj and would usurp upon my wat'ry eyes 
▁ xxmaj and make them blind with tributary tears . 
▁ xxmaj then which way shall i find xxmaj revenge 's cave ? 
▁ xxmaj for these two heads do seem to speak to me , 
▁ xxmaj and threat me i shall never come to bliss 
▁ xxmaj till all these mischiefs be return'd again 
▁ xxmaj even in their throats that have committed them . 
▁ xxmaj come , let me see what task i have to do . 
▁ xxmaj you heavy people , circle me about , 
▁ xxmaj that i may turn me to each one of you 
▁ xxmaj and swear unto my soul to right your wrongs . 
▁ xxmaj the vow is made . xxmaj come , brother , take a head , 
▁ xxmaj and in this hand the other will i bear . 
▁ xxmaj and , xxmaj lavinia , thou shalt be employ'd in this ; 
▁ xxmaj bear thou my hand , sweet wench , between thy teeth . 
▁ xxmaj as for thee , boy , go , get thee from my sight ; 
▁ xxmaj thou art an exile , and thou must not stay . 
▁ xxmaj hie to the xxmaj goths and raise an army there ; 
▁ xxmaj and if ye love me , as i think you do , 
▁ xxmaj let 's kiss and part , for we have much to do . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxmaj lucius 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj andronicus , my noble father , 
▁ xxmaj the woefull'st man that ever liv'd in xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , proud xxmaj rome ; till xxmaj lucius come again , 
▁ xxmaj he leaves his pledges dearer than his life . 
▁ xxmaj farewell , xxmaj lavinia , my noble sister ; 
▁ xxup o , would thou wert as thou tofore hast been ! 
▁ xxmaj but now nor xxmaj lucius nor xxmaj lavinia lives 
▁ xxmaj but in oblivion and hateful griefs . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj lucius live , he will requite your wrongs 
▁ xxmaj and make proud xxmaj saturnine and his emperess 
▁ xxmaj beg at the gates like xxmaj tarquin and his queen . 
▁ xxmaj now will i to the xxmaj goths , and raise a pow'r 
▁ xxmaj to be reveng'd on xxmaj rome and xxmaj saturnine . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . xxup titus ' house 

 a banquet . 

 xxmaj enter xxup titus , xxup marcus , xxup lavinia , and the boy xxup young xxup lucius 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj so so , now sit ; and look you eat no more 
▁ xxmaj than will preserve just so much strength in us 
▁ xxmaj as will revenge these bitter woes of ours . 
▁ xxmaj marcus , unknit that sorrow - wreathen knot ; 
▁ xxmaj thy niece and xxup i , poor creatures , want our hands , 
▁ xxmaj and can not passionate our tenfold grief 
▁ xxmaj with folded arms . xxmaj this poor right hand of mine 
▁ xxmaj is left to tyrannize upon my breast ; 
▁ xxmaj who , when my heart , all mad with misery , 
▁ xxmaj beats in this hollow prison of my flesh , 
▁ xxmaj then thus i thump it down . 
▁ [ to xxup lavinia ] xxmaj thou map of woe , that thus dost talk in signs ! 
▁ xxmaj when thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating , 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not strike it thus to make it still . 
▁ xxmaj wound it with sighing , girl , kill it with groans ; 
▁ xxmaj or get some little knife between thy teeth 
▁ xxmaj and just against thy heart make thou a hole , 
▁ xxmaj that all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall 
▁ xxmaj may run into that sink and , soaking in , 
▁ xxmaj drown the lamenting fool in sea - salt tears . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj fie , brother , fie ! xxmaj teach her not thus to lay 
▁ xxmaj such violent hands upon her tender life . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj has sorrow made thee dote already ? 
▁ xxmaj why , xxmaj marcus , no man should be mad but xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj what violent hands can she lay on her life ? 
▁ xxmaj ah , wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands ? 
▁ xxmaj to bid xxmaj aeneas tell the tale twice o'er 
▁ xxmaj how xxmaj troy was burnt and he made miserable ? 
▁ xxup o , handle not the theme , to talk of hands , 
▁ xxmaj lest we remember still that we have none . 
▁ xxmaj fie , fie , how franticly i square my talk , 
▁ xxmaj as if we should forget we had no hands , 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj marcus did not name the word of hands ! 
▁ xxmaj come , let 's fall to ; and , gentle girl , eat this : 
▁ xxmaj here is no drink . xxmaj hark , xxmaj marcus , what she says- 
▁ i can interpret all her martyr'd signs ; 
▁ xxmaj she says she drinks no other drink but tears , 
▁ xxmaj brew'd with her sorrow , mesh'd upon her cheeks . 
▁ xxmaj speechless complainer , i will learn thy thought ; 
▁ xxmaj in thy dumb action will i be as perfect 
▁ xxmaj as begging hermits in their holy prayers . 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt not sigh , nor hold thy stumps to heaven , 
▁ xxmaj nor wink , nor nod , nor kneel , nor make a sign , 
▁ xxmaj but i of these will wrest an alphabet , 
▁ xxmaj and by still practice learn to know thy meaning . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj good grandsire , leave these bitter deep laments ; 
▁ xxmaj make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj alas , the tender boy , in passion mov'd , 
▁ xxmaj doth weep to see his grandsire 's heaviness . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj peace , tender sapling ; thou art made of tears , 
▁ xxmaj and tears will quickly melt thy life away . 
▁ [ marcus strikes the dish with a knife ] 
▁ xxmaj what dost thou strike at , xxmaj marcus , with thy knife ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj at that that i have kill'd , my lord- a fly . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj out on thee , murderer , thou kill'st my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj mine eyes are cloy'd with view of tyranny ; 
▁ a deed of death done on the innocent 
▁ xxmaj becomes not xxmaj titus ' brother . xxmaj get thee gone ; 
▁ i see thou art not for my company . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj alas , my lord , i have but kill'd a fly . 
▁ xxup titus . ' but ! ' xxmaj how if that fly had a father and mother ? 
▁ xxmaj how would he hang his slender gilded wings 
▁ xxmaj and buzz lamenting doings in the air ! 
▁ xxmaj poor harmless fly , 
▁ xxmaj that with his pretty buzzing melody 
▁ xxmaj came here to make us merry ! xxmaj and thou hast kill'd him . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj pardon me , sir ; it was a black ill - favour'd fly , 
▁ xxmaj like to the xxmaj empress ' xxmaj moor ; therefore i kill'd him . 
▁ xxup titus . xxup o , xxup o , xxup o ! 
▁ xxmaj then pardon me for reprehending thee , 
▁ xxmaj for thou hast done a charitable deed . 
▁ xxmaj give me thy knife , i will insult on him , 
▁ xxmaj flattering myself as if it were the xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj come hither purposely to poison me . 
▁ xxmaj there 's for thyself , and that 's for xxmaj tamora . 
▁ xxmaj ah , sirrah ! 
▁ xxmaj yet , i think , we are not brought so low 
▁ xxmaj but that between us we can kill a fly 
▁ xxmaj that comes in likeness of a coal - black xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj alas , poor man ! grief has so wrought on him , 
▁ xxmaj he takes false shadows for true substances . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come , take away . xxmaj lavinia , go with me ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to thy closet , and go read with thee 
▁ xxmaj sad stories chanced in the times of old . 
▁ xxmaj come , boy , and go with me ; thy sight is young , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj rome . xxup titus ' garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup young xxup lucius and xxup lavinia running after him , 
 and the boy flies from her with his books under his arm . 

 xxmaj enter xxup titus and xxup marcus 

▁ xxup boy . xxmaj help , grandsire , help ! my aunt xxmaj lavinia 
▁ xxmaj follows me everywhere , i know not why . 
▁ xxmaj good uncle xxmaj marcus , see how swift she comes ! 
▁ xxmaj alas , sweet aunt , i know not what you mean . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj stand by me , xxmaj lucius ; do not fear thine aunt . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj she loves thee , boy , too well to do thee harm . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj ay , when my father was in xxmaj rome she did . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj what means my niece xxmaj lavinia by these signs ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj fear her not , xxmaj lucius ; somewhat doth she mean . 
▁ xxmaj see , xxmaj lucius , see how much she makes of thee . 
▁ xxmaj somewhither would she have thee go with her . 
▁ xxmaj ah , boy , xxmaj cornelia never with more care 
▁ xxmaj read to her sons than she hath read to thee 
▁ xxmaj sweet poetry and xxmaj tully 's xxmaj orator . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus ? 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj my lord , i know not , xxup i , nor can i guess , 
▁ xxmaj unless some fit or frenzy do possess her ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have heard my grandsire say full oft 
▁ xxmaj extremity of griefs would make men mad ; 
▁ xxmaj and i have read that xxmaj hecuba of xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj ran mad for sorrow . xxmaj that made me to fear ; 
▁ xxmaj although , my lord , i know my noble aunt 
▁ xxmaj loves me as dear as e'er my mother did , 
▁ xxmaj and would not , but in fury , fright my youth ; 
▁ xxmaj which made me down to throw my books , and fly- 
▁ xxmaj causeless , perhaps . xxmaj but pardon me , sweet aunt ; 
▁ xxmaj and , madam , if my uncle xxmaj marcus go , 
▁ i will most willingly attend your ladyship . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj lucius , i will . [ lavinia turns over with her 
▁ stumps the books which xxmaj lucius has let fall ] 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj how now , xxmaj lavinia ! xxmaj marcus , what means this ? 
▁ xxmaj some book there is that she desires to see . 
▁ xxmaj which is it , girl , of these?- xxmaj open them , boy.- 
▁ xxmaj but thou art deeper read and better skill'd ; 
▁ xxmaj come and take choice of all my library , 
▁ xxmaj and so beguile thy sorrow , till the heavens 
▁ xxmaj reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed . 
▁ xxmaj why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus ? 
▁ xxup marcus . i think she means that there were more than one 
▁ xxmaj confederate in the fact ; ay , more there was , 
▁ xxmaj or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj lucius , what book is that she tosseth so ? 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj grandsire , ' tis xxmaj ovid 's xxmaj metamorphoses ; 
▁ xxmaj my mother gave it me . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj for love of her that 's gone , 
▁ xxmaj perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj soft ! xxmaj so busily she turns the leaves ! xxmaj help her . 
▁ xxmaj what would she find ? xxmaj lavinia , shall i read ? 
▁ xxmaj this is the tragic tale of xxmaj philomel 
▁ xxmaj and treats of xxmaj tereus ' treason and his rape ; 
▁ xxmaj and rape , i fear , was root of thy annoy . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj see , brother , see ! xxmaj note how she quotes the leaves . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj lavinia , wert thou thus surpris'd , sweet girl , 
▁ xxmaj ravish'd and wrong'd as xxmaj philomela was , 
▁ xxmaj forc'd in the ruthless , vast , and gloomy woods ? 
▁ xxmaj see , see ! 
▁ xxmaj ay , such a place there is where we did hunt- 
▁ xxup o , had we never , never hunted there!- 
▁ xxmaj pattern'd by that the poet here describes , 
▁ xxmaj by nature made for murders and for rapes . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxup o , why should nature build so foul a den , 
▁ xxmaj unless the gods delight in tragedies ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj give signs , sweet girl , for here are none but friends , 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj roman lord it was durst do the deed . 
▁ xxmaj or slunk not xxmaj saturnine , as xxmaj tarquin erst , 
▁ xxmaj that left the camp to sin in xxmaj lucrece ' bed ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj sit down , sweet niece ; brother , sit down by me . 
▁ xxmaj apollo , xxmaj pallas , xxmaj jove , or xxmaj mercury , 
▁ xxmaj inspire me , that i may this treason find ! 
▁ xxmaj my lord , look here ! xxmaj look here , xxmaj lavinia ! 
▁ [ he writes his name with his 
▁ staff , and guides it with feet and mouth ] 
▁ xxmaj this sandy plot is plain ; guide , if thou canst , 
▁ xxmaj this after me . i have writ my name 
▁ xxmaj without the help of any hand at all . 
▁ xxmaj curs'd be that heart that forc'd us to this shift ! 
▁ xxmaj write thou , good niece , and here display at last 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj god will have discovered for revenge . 
▁ xxmaj heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain , 
▁ xxmaj that we may know the traitors and the truth ! 
▁ [ she takes the staff in her mouth 
▁ and guides it with stumps , and writes ] 
▁ xxup o , do ye read , my lord , what she hath writ ? 
▁ xxup titus . ' stuprum- xxmaj chiron- xxmaj demetrius . ' 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj what , what ! the lustful sons of xxmaj tamora 
▁ xxmaj performers of this heinous bloody deed ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj magni xxmaj dominator poli , 
▁ xxmaj tam lentus audis scelera ? tam lentus vides ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxup o , calm thee , gentle lord ! although i know 
▁ xxmaj there is enough written upon this earth 
▁ xxmaj to stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj and arm the minds of infants to exclaims . 
▁ xxmaj my lord , kneel down with me ; xxmaj lavinia , kneel ; 
▁ xxmaj and kneel , sweet boy , the xxmaj roman xxmaj hector 's hope ; 
▁ xxmaj and swear with me- as , with the woeful fere 
▁ xxmaj and father of that chaste dishonoured dame , 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj junius xxmaj brutus sware for xxmaj lucrece ' rape- 
▁ xxmaj that we will prosecute , by good advice , 
▁ xxmaj mortal revenge upon these traitorous xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj and see their blood or die with this reproach . 
▁ xxup titus . ' tis sure enough , an you knew how ; 
▁ xxmaj but if you hunt these bear - whelps , then beware : 
▁ xxmaj the dam will wake ; and if she wind ye once , 
▁ xxmaj she 's with the lion deeply still in league , 
▁ xxmaj and lulls him whilst she playeth on her back , 
▁ xxmaj and when he sleeps will she do what she list . 
▁ xxmaj you are a young huntsman , xxmaj marcus ; let alone ; 
▁ xxmaj and come , i will go get a leaf of brass , 
▁ xxmaj and with a gad of steel will write these words , 
▁ xxmaj and lay it by . xxmaj the angry northern wind 
▁ xxmaj will blow these sands like xxmaj sibyl 's leaves abroad , 
▁ xxmaj and where 's our lesson , then ? xxmaj boy , what say you ? 
▁ xxup boy . i say , my lord , that if i were a man 
▁ xxmaj their mother 's bedchamber should not be safe 
▁ xxmaj for these base bondmen to the yoke of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj ay , that 's my boy ! xxmaj thy father hath full oft 
▁ xxmaj for his ungrateful country done the like . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj and , uncle , so will xxup i , an if i live . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come , go with me into mine armoury . 
▁ xxmaj lucius , xxmaj i 'll fit thee ; and withal my boy 
▁ xxmaj shall carry from me to the xxmaj empress ' sons 
▁ xxmaj presents that i intend to send them both . 
▁ xxmaj come , come ; thou'lt do my message , wilt thou not ? 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj ay , with my dagger in their bosoms , grandsire . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj no , boy , not so ; xxmaj i 'll teach thee another course . 
▁ xxmaj lavinia , come . xxmaj marcus , look to my house . 
▁ xxmaj lucius and xxmaj i 'll go brave it at the court ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , marry , will we , sir ! and we 'll be waited on . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup titus , xxup lavinia , and xxup young xxup lucius 
▁ xxup marcus . o heavens , can you hear a good man groan 
▁ xxmaj and not relent , or not compassion him ? 
▁ xxmaj marcus , attend him in his ecstasy , 
▁ xxmaj that hath more scars of sorrow in his heart 
▁ xxmaj than foemen 's marks upon his batt'red shield , 
▁ xxmaj but yet so just that he will not revenge . 
▁ xxmaj revenge the heavens for old xxmaj andronicus ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj the palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup aaron , xxup demetrius and xxup chiron , at one door ; and at the other door , 
 xxup young xxup lucius and another with a bundle of weapons , and verses writ upon them 

▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj demetrius , here 's the son of xxmaj lucius ; 
▁ xxmaj he hath some message to deliver us . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj ay , some mad message from his mad grandfather . 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj my lords , with all the humbleness i may , 
▁ i greet your honours from xxmaj andronicus- 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj and pray the xxmaj roman gods confound you both ! 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj gramercy , lovely xxmaj lucius . xxmaj what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup boy . [ aside ] xxmaj that you are both decipher'd , that 's the news , 
▁ xxmaj for villains mark'd with rape.- xxmaj may it please you , 
▁ xxmaj my grandsire , well advis'd , hath sent by me 
▁ xxmaj the goodliest weapons of his armoury 
▁ xxmaj to gratify your honourable youth , 
▁ xxmaj the hope of xxmaj rome ; for so he bid me say ; 
▁ xxmaj and so i do , and with his gifts present 
▁ xxmaj your lordships , that , whenever you have need , 
▁ xxmaj you may be armed and appointed well . 
▁ xxmaj and so i leave you both- [ aside ] like bloody villains . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup young xxup lucius and attendant 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj what 's here ? a scroll , and written round about . 
▁ xxmaj let 's see : 
▁ [ reads ] ' integer vitae , scelerisque purus , 
▁ xxmaj non eget xxmaj mauri iaculis , nec arcu . ' 
▁ xxup chiron . xxup o , ' tis a verse in xxmaj horace , i know it well ; 
▁ i read it in the grammar long ago . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj ay , just- a verse in xxmaj horace . xxmaj right , you have it . 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj now , what a thing it is to be an ass ! 
▁ xxmaj here 's no sound jest ! xxmaj the old man hath found their guilt , 
▁ xxmaj and sends them weapons wrapp'd about with lines 
▁ xxmaj that wound , beyond their feeling , to the quick . 
▁ xxmaj but were our witty xxmaj empress well afoot , 
▁ xxmaj she would applaud xxmaj andronicus ' conceit . 
▁ xxmaj but let her rest in her unrest awhile- 
▁ xxmaj and now , young lords , was't not a happy star 
▁ xxmaj led us to xxmaj rome , strangers , and more than so , 
▁ xxmaj captives , to be advanced to this height ? 
▁ xxmaj it did me good before the palace gate 
▁ xxmaj to brave the xxmaj tribune in his brother 's hearing . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj but me more good to see so great a lord 
▁ xxmaj basely insinuate and send us gifts . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj had he not reason , xxmaj lord xxmaj demetrius ? 
▁ xxmaj did you not use his daughter very friendly ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . i would we had a thousand xxmaj roman dames 
▁ xxmaj at such a bay , by turn to serve our lust . 
▁ xxup chiron . a charitable wish and full of love . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj here lacks but your mother for to say amen . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj and that would she for twenty thousand more . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj come , let us go and pray to all the gods 
▁ xxmaj for our beloved mother in her pains . 
▁ xxup aaron . [ aside ] xxmaj pray to the devils ; the gods have given us over . 
▁ [ trumpets sound ] 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj why do the xxmaj emperor 's trumpets flourish thus ? 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj belike , for joy the xxmaj emperor hath a son . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj soft ! who comes here ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup nurse , with a blackamoor xxup child 

▁ xxup nurse . xxmaj good morrow , lords . 
▁ xxup o , tell me , did you see xxmaj aaron the xxmaj moor ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj well , more or less , or ne'er a whit at all , 
▁ xxmaj here xxmaj aaron is ; and what with xxmaj aaron now ? 
▁ xxup nurse . o gentle xxmaj aaron , we are all undone ! 
▁ xxmaj now help , or woe betide thee evermore ! 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , what a caterwauling dost thou keep ! 
▁ xxmaj what dost thou wrap and fumble in thy arms ? 
▁ xxup nurse . xxup o , that which i would hide from heaven 's eye : 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj empress ' shame and stately xxmaj rome 's disgrace ! 
▁ xxmaj she is delivered , lord ; she is delivered . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj to whom ? 
▁ xxup nurse . i mean she is brought a - bed . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj well , xxmaj god give her good rest ! xxmaj what hath he sent her ? 
▁ xxup nurse . a devil . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , then she is the devil 's dam ; 
▁ a joyful issue . 
▁ xxup nurse . a joyless , dismal , black , and sorrowful issue ! 
▁ xxmaj here is the babe , as loathsome as a toad 
▁ xxmaj amongst the fair - fac'd breeders of our clime ; 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj empress sends it thee , thy stamp , thy seal , 
▁ xxmaj and bids thee christen it with thy dagger 's point . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj zounds , ye whore ! xxmaj is black so base a hue ? 
▁ xxmaj sweet blowse , you are a beauteous blossom sure . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj villain , what hast thou done ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj that which thou canst not undo .