xxbos xxup chiron . xxmaj thou hast undone our mother . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj villain , i have done thy mother . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj and therein , hellish dog , thou hast undone her . 
▁ xxmaj woe to her chance , and damn'd her loathed choice ! 
▁ xxmaj accurs'd the offspring of so foul a fiend ! 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj it shall not live . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj it shall not die . 
▁ xxup nurse . xxmaj aaron , it must ; the mother wills it so . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj what , must it , nurse ? xxmaj then let no man but i 
▁ xxmaj do execution on my flesh and blood . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj i 'll broach the tadpole on my rapier 's point . 
▁ xxmaj nurse , give it me ; my sword shall soon dispatch it . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up . 
▁ [ takes the xxup child from the xxup nurse , and draws ] 
▁ xxmaj stay , murderous villains , will you kill your brother ! 
▁ xxmaj now , by the burning tapers of the sky 
▁ xxmaj that shone so brightly when this boy was got , 
▁ xxmaj he dies upon my scimitar 's sharp point 
▁ xxmaj that touches this my first - born son and heir . 
▁ i tell you , younglings , not xxmaj enceladus , 
▁ xxmaj with all his threat'ning band of xxmaj typhon 's brood , 
▁ xxmaj nor great xxmaj alcides , nor the god of war , 
▁ xxmaj shall seize this prey out of his father 's hands . 
▁ xxmaj what , what , ye sanguine , shallow - hearted boys ! 
▁ xxmaj ye white - lim'd walls ! ye alehouse painted signs ! 
▁ xxmaj coal - black is better than another hue 
▁ xxmaj in that it scorns to bear another hue ; 
▁ xxmaj for all the water in the ocean 
▁ xxmaj can never turn the swan 's black legs to white , 
▁ xxmaj although she lave them hourly in the flood . 
▁ xxmaj tell the xxmaj empress from me i am of age 
▁ xxmaj to keep mine own- excuse it how she can . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj my mistress is my mistress : this my self , 
▁ xxmaj the vigour and the picture of my youth . 
▁ xxmaj this before all the world do i prefer ; 
▁ xxmaj this maugre all the world will i keep safe , 
▁ xxmaj or some of you shall smoke for it in xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj by this our mother is for ever sham'd . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj rome will despise her for this foul escape . 
▁ xxup nurse . xxmaj the xxmaj emperor in his rage will doom her death . 
▁ xxup chiron . i blush to think upon this ignomy . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , there 's the privilege your beauty bears : 
▁ xxmaj fie , treacherous hue , that will betray with blushing 
▁ xxmaj the close enacts and counsels of thy heart ! 
▁ xxmaj here 's a young lad fram'd of another leer . 
▁ xxmaj look how the black slave smiles upon the father , 
▁ xxmaj as who should say ' old lad , i am thine own . ' 
▁ xxmaj he is your brother , lords , sensibly fed 
▁ xxmaj of that self - blood that first gave life to you ; 
▁ xxmaj and from your womb where you imprisoned were 
▁ xxmaj he is enfranchised and come to light . 
▁ xxmaj nay , he is your brother by the surer side , 
▁ xxmaj although my seal be stamped in his face . 
▁ xxup nurse . xxmaj aaron , what shall i say unto the xxmaj empress ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj advise thee , xxmaj aaron , what is to be done , 
▁ xxmaj and we will all subscribe to thy advice . 
▁ xxmaj save thou the child , so we may all be safe . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj then sit we down and let us all consult . 
▁ xxmaj my son and i will have the wind of you : 
▁ xxmaj keep there ; now talk at pleasure of your safety . 
▁ [ they sit ] 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj how many women saw this child of his ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , so , brave lords ! xxmaj when we join in league 
▁ i am a lamb ; but if you brave the xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj the chafed boar , the mountain lioness , 
▁ xxmaj the ocean swells not so as xxmaj aaron storms . 
▁ xxmaj but say , again , how many saw the child ? 
▁ xxup nurse . xxmaj cornelia the midwife and myself ; 
▁ xxmaj and no one else but the delivered xxmaj empress . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj the xxmaj emperess , the midwife , and yourself . 
▁ xxmaj two may keep counsel when the third 's away : 
▁ xxmaj go to the xxmaj empress , tell her this i said . [ he kills her ] 
▁ xxmaj weeke weeke ! 
▁ xxmaj so cries a pig prepared to the spit . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj what mean'st thou , xxmaj aaron ? xxmaj wherefore didst thou this ? 
▁ xxup aaron . o xxmaj lord , sir , ' tis a deed of policy . 
▁ xxmaj shall she live to betray this guilt of ours- 
▁ a long - tongu'd babbling gossip ? xxmaj no , lords , no . 
▁ xxmaj and now be it known to you my full intent : 
▁ xxmaj not far , one xxmaj muliteus , my countryman- 
▁ xxmaj his wife but yesternight was brought to bed ; 
▁ xxmaj his child is like to her , fair as you are . 
▁ xxmaj go pack with him , and give the mother gold , 
▁ xxmaj and tell them both the circumstance of all , 
▁ xxmaj and how by this their child shall be advanc'd , 
▁ xxmaj and be received for the xxmaj emperor 's heir 
▁ xxmaj and substituted in the place of mine , 
▁ xxmaj to calm this tempest whirling in the court ; 
▁ xxmaj and let the xxmaj emperor dandle him for his own . 
▁ xxmaj hark ye , lords . xxmaj you see i have given her physic , 
▁ [ pointing to the xxup nurse ] 
▁ xxmaj and you must needs bestow her funeral ; 
▁ xxmaj the fields are near , and you are gallant grooms . 
▁ xxmaj this done , see that you take no longer days , 
▁ xxmaj but send the midwife presently to me . 
▁ xxmaj the midwife and the nurse well made away , 
▁ xxmaj then let the ladies tattle what they please . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj aaron , i see thou wilt not trust the air 
▁ xxmaj with secrets . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj for this care of xxmaj tamora , 
▁ xxmaj herself and hers are highly bound to thee . 

▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup demetrius and xxup chiron , bearing off the dead xxup nurse 

▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj now to the xxmaj goths , as swift as swallow flies , 
▁ xxmaj there to dispose this treasure in mine arms , 
▁ xxmaj and secretly to greet the xxmaj empress ' friends . 
▁ xxmaj come on , you thick - lipp'd slave , xxmaj i 'll bear you hence ; 
▁ xxmaj for it is you that puts us to our shifts . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make you feed on berries and on roots , 
▁ xxmaj and feed on curds and whey , and suck the goat , 
▁ xxmaj and cabin in a cave , and bring you up 
▁ xxmaj to be a warrior and command a camp . 
▁ xxmaj exit with the xxup child 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj rome . a public place 

 xxmaj enter xxup titus , bearing arrows with letters on the ends of them ; 
 with him xxup marcus , xxup young xxup lucius , and other gentlemen , 
 xxup publius , xxup sempronius , and xxup caius , with bows 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come , xxmaj marcus , come ; kinsmen , this is the way . 
▁ xxmaj sir boy , let me see your archery ; 
▁ xxmaj look ye draw home enough , and ' tis there straight . 
▁ xxmaj terras xxmaj astrea reliquit , 
▁ xxmaj be you rememb'red , xxmaj marcus ; she 's gone , she 's fled . 
▁ xxmaj sirs , take you to your tools . xxmaj you , cousins , shall 
▁ xxmaj go sound the ocean and cast your nets ; 
▁ xxmaj happily you may catch her in the sea ; 
▁ xxmaj yet there 's as little justice as at land . 
▁ xxmaj no ; xxmaj publius and xxmaj sempronius , you must do it ; 
▁ ' tis you must dig with mattock and with spade , 
▁ xxmaj and pierce the inmost centre of the earth ; 
▁ xxmaj then , when you come to xxmaj pluto 's region , 
▁ i pray you deliver him this petition . 
▁ xxmaj tell him it is for justice and for aid , 
▁ xxmaj and that it comes from old xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj shaken with sorrows in ungrateful xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj rome ! xxmaj well , well , i made thee miserable 
▁ xxmaj what time i threw the people 's suffrages 
▁ xxmaj on him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me . 
▁ xxmaj go get you gone ; and pray be careful all , 
▁ xxmaj and leave you not a man - of - war unsearch'd . 
▁ xxmaj this wicked xxmaj emperor may have shipp'd her hence ; 
▁ xxmaj and , kinsmen , then we may go pipe for justice . 
▁ xxup marcus . o xxmaj publius , is not this a heavy case , 
▁ xxmaj to see thy noble uncle thus distract ? 
▁ xxup publius . xxmaj therefore , my lords , it highly us concerns 
▁ xxmaj by day and night t ' attend him carefully , 
▁ xxmaj and feed his humour kindly as we may 
▁ xxmaj till time beget some careful remedy . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj kinsmen , his sorrows are past remedy . 
▁ xxmaj join with the xxmaj goths , and with revengeful war 
▁ xxmaj take wreak on xxmaj rome for this ingratitude , 
▁ xxmaj and vengeance on the traitor xxmaj saturnine . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj publius , how now ? xxmaj how now , my masters ? 
▁ xxmaj what , have you met with her ? 
▁ xxup publius . xxmaj no , my good lord ; but xxmaj pluto sends you word , 
▁ xxmaj if you will have xxmaj revenge from hell , you shall . 
▁ xxmaj marry , for xxmaj justice , she is so employ'd , 
▁ xxmaj he thinks , with xxmaj jove in heaven , or somewhere else , 
▁ xxmaj so that perforce you must needs stay a time . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj he doth me wrong to feed me with delays . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll dive into the burning lake below 
▁ xxmaj and pull her out of xxmaj acheron by the heels . 
▁ xxmaj marcus , we are but shrubs , no cedars we , 
▁ xxmaj no big - bon'd men fram'd of the xxmaj cyclops ' size ; 
▁ xxmaj but metal , xxmaj marcus , steel to the very back , 
▁ xxmaj yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear ; 
▁ xxmaj and , sith there 's no justice in earth nor hell , 
▁ xxmaj we will solicit heaven , and move the gods 
▁ xxmaj to send down justice for to wreak our wrongs . 
▁ xxmaj come , to this gear . xxmaj you are a good archer , xxmaj marcus . 
▁ [ he gives them the arrows ] 
▁ ' ad xxmaj jovem ' that 's for you ; here ' ad xxmaj apollinem . ' 
▁ ' ad xxmaj martem ' that 's for myself . 
▁ xxmaj here , boy , ' to xxmaj pallas ' ; here ' to xxmaj mercury . ' 
▁ ' to xxmaj saturn , ' xxmaj caius- not to xxmaj saturnine : 
▁ xxmaj you were as good to shoot against the wind . 
▁ xxmaj to it , boy . xxmaj marcus , loose when i bid . 
▁ xxmaj of my word , i have written to effect ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a god left unsolicited . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj kinsmen , shoot all your shafts into the court ; 
▁ xxmaj we will afflict the xxmaj emperor in his pride . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj now , masters , draw . [ they shoot ] xxup o , well said , xxmaj lucius ! 
▁ xxmaj good boy , in xxmaj virgo 's lap ! xxmaj give it xxmaj pallas . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj my lord , i aim a mile beyond the moon ; 
▁ xxmaj your letter is with xxmaj jupiter by this . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj ha ! ha ! 
▁ xxmaj publius , xxmaj publius , hast thou done ? 
▁ xxmaj see , see , thou hast shot off one of xxmaj taurus ' horns . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj this was the sport , my lord : when xxmaj publius shot , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj bull , being gall'd , gave xxmaj aries such a knock 
▁ xxmaj that down fell both the xxmaj ram 's horns in the court ; 
▁ xxmaj and who should find them but the xxmaj empress ' villain ? 
▁ xxmaj she laugh'd , and told the xxmaj moor he should not choose 
▁ xxmaj but give them to his master for a present . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , there it goes ! xxmaj god give his lordship joy ! 

▁ xxmaj enter the xxup clown , with a basket and two pigeons in it 

▁ xxmaj news , news from heaven ! xxmaj marcus , the post is come . 
▁ xxmaj sirrah , what tidings ? xxmaj have you any letters ? 
▁ xxmaj shall i have justice ? xxmaj what says xxmaj jupiter ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ho , the gibbet - maker ? xxmaj he says that he hath taken them down 
▁ again , for the man must not be hang'd till the next week . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj but what says xxmaj jupiter , i ask thee ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj alas , sir , i know not xxmaj jupiter ; i never drank with him in all 
▁ my life . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , villain , art not thou the carrier ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay , of my pigeons , sir ; nothing else . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , didst thou not come from heaven ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj from heaven ! xxmaj alas , sir , i never came there . xxmaj god forbid i 
▁ should be so bold to press to heaven in my young days . xxmaj why , i am 
▁ going with my pigeons to the xxmaj tribunal xxmaj plebs , to take up a matter 
▁ of brawl betwixt my uncle and one of the xxmaj emperal 's men . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj why , sir , that is as fit as can be to serve for your 
▁ oration ; and let him deliver the pigeons to the xxmaj emperor from you . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj tell me , can you deliver an oration to the xxmaj emperor with a 
▁ grace ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj nay , truly , sir , i could never say grace in all my life . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj sirrah , come hither . xxmaj make no more ado , 
▁ xxmaj but give your pigeons to the xxmaj emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj by me thou shalt have justice at his hands . 
▁ xxmaj hold , hold ! xxmaj meanwhile here 's money for thy charges . 
▁ xxmaj give me pen and ink . xxmaj sirrah , can you with a grace deliver up a 
▁ supplication ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay , sir . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj then here is a supplication for you . xxmaj and when you come to 
▁ him , at the first approach you must kneel ; then kiss his foot ; 
▁ then deliver up your pigeons ; and then look for your reward . xxmaj i 'll 
▁ be at hand , sir ; see you do it bravely . 
▁ xxup clown . i warrant you , sir ; let me alone . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj sirrah , hast thou a knife ? xxmaj come let me see it . 
▁ xxmaj here , xxmaj marcus , fold it in the oration ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou hast made it like a humble suppliant . 
▁ xxmaj and when thou hast given it to the xxmaj emperor , 
▁ xxmaj knock at my door , and tell me what he says . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj god be with you , sir ; i will . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come , xxmaj marcus , let us go . xxmaj publius , follow me . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj before the palace 

 xxmaj enter the xxup emperor , and the xxup empress and her two sons , xxup demetrius and xxup chiron ; 
 xxup lords and others . xxmaj the xxup emperor brings the arrows in his hand that xxup titus 
 shot at him 

▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj why , lords , what wrongs are these ! xxmaj was ever seen 
▁ xxmaj an emperor in xxmaj rome thus overborne , 
▁ xxmaj troubled , confronted thus ; and , for the extent 
▁ xxmaj of egal justice , us'd in such contempt ? 
▁ xxmaj my lords , you know , as know the mightful gods , 
▁ xxmaj however these disturbers of our peace 
▁ xxmaj buzz in the people 's ears , there nought hath pass'd 
▁ xxmaj but even with law against the wilful sons 
▁ xxmaj of old xxmaj andronicus . xxmaj and what an if 
▁ xxmaj his sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits , 
▁ xxmaj shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks , 
▁ xxmaj his fits , his frenzy , and his bitterness ? 
▁ xxmaj and now he writes to heaven for his redress . 
▁ xxmaj see , here 's ' to xxmaj jove ' and this ' to xxmaj mercury ' ; 
▁ xxmaj this ' to xxmaj apollo ' ; this ' to the xxmaj god of xxmaj war'- 
▁ xxmaj sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of xxmaj rome ! 
▁ xxmaj what 's this but libelling against the xxmaj senate , 
▁ xxmaj and blazoning our unjustice every where ? 
▁ a goodly humour , is it not , my lords ? 
▁ xxmaj as who would say in xxmaj rome no justice were . 
▁ xxmaj but if i live , his feigned ecstasies 
▁ xxmaj shall be no shelter to these outrages ; 
▁ xxmaj but he and his shall know that justice lives 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj saturninus ' health ; whom , if she sleep , 
▁ xxmaj he 'll so awake as he in fury shall 
▁ xxmaj cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj my gracious lord , my lovely xxmaj saturnine , 
▁ xxmaj lord of my life , commander of my thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj calm thee , and bear the faults of xxmaj titus ' age , 
▁ xxmaj th ' effects of sorrow for his valiant sons 
▁ xxmaj whose loss hath pierc'd him deep and scarr'd his heart ; 
▁ xxmaj and rather comfort his distressed plight 
▁ xxmaj than prosecute the meanest or the best 
▁ xxmaj for these contempts . [ aside ] xxmaj why , thus it shall become 
▁ xxmaj high - witted xxmaj tamora to gloze with all . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj titus , i have touch'd thee to the quick , 
▁ xxmaj thy life - blood out ; if xxmaj aaron now be wise , 
▁ xxmaj then is all safe , the anchor in the port . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clown 

▁ xxmaj how now , good fellow ! xxmaj wouldst thou speak with us ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj yes , forsooth , an your mistriship be xxmaj emperial . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj empress i am , but yonder sits the xxmaj emperor . 
▁ xxup clown . ' tis he.- xxmaj god and xxmaj saint xxmaj stephen give you godden . i have 
▁ brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here . 
▁ [ saturninus reads the letter ] 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj go take him away , and hang him presently . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj how much money must i have ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj come , sirrah , you must be hang'd . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj hang'd ! by'r lady , then i have brought up a neck to a fair 
▁ end . [ exit guarded ] 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj despiteful and intolerable wrongs ! 
▁ xxmaj shall i endure this monstrous villainy ? 
▁ i know from whence this same device proceeds . 
▁ xxmaj may this be borne- as if his traitorous sons 
▁ xxmaj that died by law for murder of our brother 
▁ xxmaj have by my means been butchered wrongfully ? 
▁ xxmaj go drag the villain hither by the hair ; 
▁ xxmaj nor age nor honour shall shape privilege . 
▁ xxmaj for this proud mock xxmaj i 'll be thy slaughterman , 
▁ xxmaj sly frantic wretch , that holp'st to make me great , 
▁ xxmaj in hope thyself should govern xxmaj rome and me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup nuntius xxup aemilius 

▁ xxmaj what news with thee , xxmaj aemilius ? 
▁ xxup aemilius . xxmaj arm , my lords ! xxmaj rome never had more cause . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj goths have gathered head ; and with a power 
▁ xxmaj of high resolved men , bent to the spoil , 
▁ xxmaj they hither march amain , under conduct 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj lucius , son to old xxmaj andronicus ; 
▁ xxmaj who threats in course of this revenge to do 
▁ xxmaj as much as ever xxmaj coriolanus did . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj is warlike xxmaj lucius general of the xxmaj goths ? 
▁ xxmaj these tidings nip me , and i hang the head 
▁ xxmaj as flowers with frost , or grass beat down with storms . 
▁ xxmaj ay , now begins our sorrows to approach . 
▁ ' tis he the common people love so much ; 
▁ xxmaj myself hath often heard them say- 
▁ xxmaj when i have walked like a private man- 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj lucius ' banishment was wrongfully , 
▁ xxmaj and they have wish'd that xxmaj lucius were their emperor . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj why should you fear ? xxmaj is not your city strong ? 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj ay , but the citizens favour xxmaj lucius , 
▁ xxmaj and will revolt from me to succour him . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj king , be thy thoughts imperious like thy name ! 
▁ xxmaj is the sun dimm'd , that gnats do fly in it ? 
▁ xxmaj the eagle suffers little birds to sing , 
▁ xxmaj and is not careful what they mean thereby , 
▁ xxmaj knowing that with the shadow of his wings 
▁ xxmaj he can at pleasure stint their melody ; 
▁ xxmaj even so mayest thou the giddy men of xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj then cheer thy spirit ; for know thou , xxmaj emperor , 
▁ i will enchant the old xxmaj andronicus 
▁ xxmaj with words more sweet , and yet more dangerous , 
▁ xxmaj than baits to fish or honey - stalks to sheep , 
▁ xxmaj when as the one is wounded with the bait , 
▁ xxmaj the other rotted with delicious feed . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj but he will not entreat his son for us . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj if xxmaj tamora entreat him , then he will ; 
▁ xxmaj for i can smooth and fill his aged ears 
▁ xxmaj with golden promises , that , were his heart 
▁ xxmaj almost impregnable , his old ears deaf , 
▁ xxmaj yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue . 
▁ [ to xxup aemilius ] xxmaj go thou before to be our ambassador ; 
▁ xxmaj say that the xxmaj emperor requests a parley 
▁ xxmaj of warlike xxmaj lucius , and appoint the meeting 
▁ xxmaj even at his father 's house , the old xxmaj andronicus . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj aemilius , do this message honourably ; 
▁ xxmaj and if he stand on hostage for his safety , 
▁ xxmaj bid him demand what pledge will please him best . 
▁ xxup aemilius . xxmaj your bidding shall i do effectually . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj now will i to that old xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj and temper him with all the art i have , 
▁ xxmaj to pluck proud xxmaj lucius from the warlike xxmaj goths . 
▁ xxmaj and now , sweet xxmaj emperor , be blithe again , 
▁ xxmaj and bury all thy fear in my devices . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj then go successantly , and plead to him . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj plains near xxmaj rome 

 xxmaj enter xxup lucius with an army of xxup goths with drums and colours 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj approved warriors and my faithful friends , 
▁ i have received letters from great xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj which signifies what hate they bear their xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj and how desirous of our sight they are . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , great lords , be , as your titles witness , 
▁ xxmaj imperious and impatient of your wrongs ; 
▁ xxmaj and wherein xxmaj rome hath done you any scath , 
▁ xxmaj let him make treble satisfaction . 
▁ xxup first xxup goth . xxmaj brave slip , sprung from the great xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj whose name was once our terror , now our comfort , 
▁ xxmaj whose high exploits and honourable deeds 
▁ xxmaj ingrateful xxmaj rome requites with foul contempt , 
▁ xxmaj be bold in us : we 'll follow where thou lead'st , 
▁ xxmaj like stinging bees in hottest summer 's day , 
▁ xxmaj led by their master to the flow'red fields , 
▁ xxmaj and be aveng'd on cursed xxmaj tamora . 
▁ xxup all xxup the xxup goths . xxmaj and as he saith , so say we all with him . 
▁ xxup lucius . i humbly thank him , and i thank you all . 
▁ xxmaj but who comes here , led by a lusty xxmaj goth ? 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup goth , leading xxup aaron with his xxup child in his arms 

▁ xxup second xxup goth . xxmaj renowned xxmaj lucius , from our troops i stray'd 
▁ xxmaj to gaze upon a ruinous monastery ; 
▁ xxmaj and as i earnestly did fix mine eye 
▁ xxmaj upon the wasted building , suddenly 
▁ i heard a child cry underneath a wall . 
▁ i made unto the noise , when soon i heard 
▁ xxmaj the crying babe controll'd with this discourse : 
▁ ' peace , tawny slave , half me and half thy dam ! 
▁ xxmaj did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art , 
▁ xxmaj had nature lent thee but thy mother 's look , 
▁ xxmaj villain , thou mightst have been an emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj but where the bull and cow are both milk - white , 
▁ xxmaj they never do beget a coal - black calf . 
▁ xxmaj peace , villain , peace!'- even thus he rates the babe- 
▁ ' for i must bear thee to a trusty xxmaj goth , 
▁ xxmaj who , when he knows thou art the xxmaj empress ' babe , 
▁ xxmaj will hold thee dearly for thy mother 's sake . ' 
▁ xxmaj with this , my weapon drawn , i rush'd upon him , 
▁ xxmaj surpris'd him suddenly , and brought him hither 
▁ xxmaj to use as you think needful of the man . 
▁ xxup lucius . o worthy xxmaj goth , this is the incarnate devil 
▁ xxmaj that robb'd xxmaj andronicus of his good hand ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the pearl that pleas'd your xxmaj empress ' eye ; 
▁ xxmaj and here 's the base fruit of her burning lust . 
▁ xxmaj say , wall - ey'd slave , whither wouldst thou convey 
▁ xxmaj this growing image of thy fiend - like face ? 
▁ xxmaj why dost not speak ? xxmaj what , deaf ? xxmaj not a word ? 
▁ a halter , soldiers ! xxmaj hang him on this tree , 
▁ xxmaj and by his side his fruit of bastardy . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj touch not the boy , he is of royal blood . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj too like the sire for ever being good . 
▁ xxmaj first hang the child , that he may see it sprawl- 
▁ a sight to vex the father 's soul withal . 
▁ xxmaj get me a ladder . 
▁ [ a ladder brought , which xxup aaron is made to climb ] 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj lucius , save the child , 
▁ xxmaj and bear it from me to the xxmaj emperess . 
▁ xxmaj if thou do this , xxmaj i 'll show thee wondrous things 
▁ xxmaj that highly may advantage thee to hear ; 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt not , befall what may befall , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll speak no more but ' vengeance rot you all ! ' 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj say on ; an if it please me which thou speak'st , 
▁ xxmaj thy child shall live , and i will see it nourish'd . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj an if it please thee ! xxmaj why , assure thee , xxmaj lucius , 
▁ ' twill vex thy soul to hear what i shall speak ; 
▁ xxmaj for i must talk of murders , rapes , and massacres , 
▁ xxmaj acts of black night , abominable deeds , 
▁ xxmaj complots of mischief , treason , villainies , 
▁ xxmaj ruthful to hear , yet piteously perform'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and this shall all be buried in my death , 
▁ xxmaj unless thou swear to me my child shall live . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj tell on thy mind ; i say thy child shall live . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj swear that he shall , and then i will begin . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj who should i swear by ? xxmaj thou believest no god ; 
▁ xxmaj that granted , how canst thou believe an oath ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj what if i do not ? as indeed i do not ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , for i know thou art religious 
▁ xxmaj and hast a thing within thee called conscience , 
▁ xxmaj with twenty popish tricks and ceremonies 
▁ xxmaj which i have seen thee careful to observe , 
▁ xxmaj therefore i urge thy oath . xxmaj for that i know 
▁ xxmaj an idiot holds his bauble for a god , 
▁ xxmaj and keeps the oath which by that god he swears , 
▁ xxmaj to that xxmaj i 'll urge him . xxmaj therefore thou shalt vow 
▁ xxmaj by that same god- what god soe'er it be 
▁ xxmaj that thou adorest and hast in reverence- 
▁ xxmaj to save my boy , to nourish and bring him up ; 
▁ xxmaj or else i will discover nought to thee . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj even by my god i swear to thee i will . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj first know thou , i begot him on the xxmaj empress . 
▁ xxup lucius . o most insatiate and luxurious woman ! 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj tut , xxmaj lucius , this was but a deed of charity 
▁ xxmaj to that which thou shalt hear of me anon . 
▁ ' twas her two sons that murdered xxmaj bassianus ; 
▁ xxmaj they cut thy sister 's tongue , and ravish'd her , 
▁ xxmaj and cut her hands , and trimm'd her as thou sawest . 
▁ xxup lucius . o detestable villain ! xxmaj call'st thou that trimming ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj why , she was wash'd , and cut , and trimm'd , and ' twas 
▁ xxmaj trim sport for them which had the doing of it . 
▁ xxup lucius . o barbarous beastly villains like thyself ! 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj indeed , i was their tutor to instruct them . 
▁ xxmaj that codding spirit had they from their mother , 
▁ xxmaj as sure a card as ever won the set ; 
▁ xxmaj that bloody mind , i think , they learn'd of me , 
▁ xxmaj as true a dog as ever fought at head . 
▁ xxmaj well , let my deeds be witness of my worth . 
▁ i train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole 
▁ xxmaj where the dead corpse of xxmaj bassianus lay ; 
▁ i wrote the letter that thy father found , 
▁ xxmaj and hid the gold within that letter mention'd , 
▁ xxmaj confederate with the xxmaj queen and her two sons ; 
▁ xxmaj and what not done , that thou hast cause to rue , 
▁ xxmaj wherein i had no stroke of mischief in it ? 
▁ i play'd the cheater for thy father 's hand , 
▁ xxmaj and , when i had it , drew myself apart 
▁ xxmaj and almost broke my heart with extreme laughter . 
▁ i pried me through the crevice of a wall , 
▁ xxmaj when , for his hand , he had his two sons ' heads ; 
▁ xxmaj beheld his tears , and laugh'd so heartily 
▁ xxmaj that both mine eyes were rainy like to his ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i told the xxmaj empress of this sport , 
▁ xxmaj she swooned almost at my pleasing tale , 
▁ xxmaj and for my tidings gave me twenty kisses . 
▁ xxup goth . xxmaj what , canst thou say all this and never blush ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj ay , like a black dog , as the saying is . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds ? 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj ay , that i had not done a thousand more . 
▁ xxmaj even now i curse the day- and yet , i think , 
▁ xxmaj few come within the compass of my curse- 
▁ xxmaj wherein i did not some notorious ill ; 
▁ xxmaj as kill a man , or else devise his death ; 
▁ xxmaj ravish a maid , or plot the way to do it ; 
▁ xxmaj accuse some innocent , and forswear myself ; 
▁ xxmaj set deadly enmity between two friends ; 
▁ xxmaj make poor men 's cattle break their necks ; 
▁ xxmaj set fire on barns and hay - stacks in the night , 
▁ xxmaj and bid the owners quench them with their tears . 
▁ xxmaj oft have i digg'd up dead men from their graves , 
▁ xxmaj and set them upright at their dear friends ' door 
▁ xxmaj even when their sorrows almost was forgot , 
▁ xxmaj and on their skins , as on the bark of trees , 
▁ xxmaj have with my knife carved in xxmaj roman letters 
▁ ' let not your sorrow die , though i am dead . ' 
▁ xxmaj tut , i have done a thousand dreadful things 
▁ xxmaj as willingly as one would kill a fly ; 
▁ xxmaj and nothing grieves me heartily indeed 
▁ xxmaj but that i can not do ten thousand more . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj bring down the devil , for he must not die 
▁ xxmaj so sweet a death as hanging presently . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj if there be devils , would i were a devil , 
▁ xxmaj to live and burn in everlasting fire , 
▁ xxmaj so i might have your company in hell 
▁ xxmaj but to torment you with my bitter tongue ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj sirs , stop his mouth , and let him speak no more . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aemilius 

▁ xxup goth . xxmaj my lord , there is a messenger from xxmaj rome 
▁ xxmaj desires to be admitted to your presence . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj let him come near . 
▁ xxmaj welcome , xxmaj aemilius . xxmaj what 's the news from xxmaj rome ? 
▁ xxup aemilius . xxmaj lord xxmaj lucius , and you xxmaj princes of the xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj roman xxmaj emperor greets you all by me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for he understands you are in arms , 
▁ xxmaj he craves a parley at your father 's house , 
▁ xxmaj willing you to demand your hostages , 
▁ xxmaj and they shall be immediately deliver'd . 
▁ xxup first xxup goth . xxmaj what says our general ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj aemilius , let the xxmaj emperor give his pledges 
▁ xxmaj unto my father and my uncle xxmaj marcus . 
▁ xxmaj and we will come . xxmaj march away . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj rome . xxmaj before xxup titus ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup tamora , and her two sons , xxup demetrius and xxup chiron , disguised 

▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj thus , in this strange and sad habiliment , 
▁ i will encounter with xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj and say i am xxmaj revenge , sent from below 
▁ xxmaj to join with him and right his heinous wrongs . 
▁ xxmaj knock at his study , where they say he keeps 
▁ xxmaj to ruminate strange plots of dire revenge ; 
▁ xxmaj tell him xxmaj revenge is come to join with him , 
▁ xxmaj and work confusion on his enemies . 

▁ xxmaj they knock and xxup titus opens his study door , above 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj who doth molest my contemplation ? 
▁ xxmaj is it your trick to make me ope the door , 
▁ xxmaj that so my sad decrees may fly away 
▁ xxmaj and all my study be to no effect ? 
▁ xxmaj you are deceiv'd ; for what i mean to do 
▁ xxmaj see here in bloody lines i have set down ; 
▁ xxmaj and what is written shall be executed . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj titus , i am come to talk with thee . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj no , not a word . xxmaj how can i grace my talk , 
▁ xxmaj wanting a hand to give it that accord ? 
▁ xxmaj thou hast the odds of me ; therefore no more . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj if thou didst know me , thou wouldst talk with me . 
▁ xxup titus . i am not mad , i know thee well enough : 
▁ xxmaj witness this wretched stump , witness these crimson lines ; 
▁ xxmaj witness these trenches made by grief and care ; 
▁ xxmaj witness the tiring day and heavy night ; 
▁ xxmaj witness all sorrow that i know thee well 
▁ xxmaj for our proud xxmaj empress , mighty xxmaj tamora . 
▁ xxmaj is not thy coming for my other hand ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj know thou , sad man , i am not xxmaj tamora : 
▁ xxmaj she is thy enemy and i thy friend . 
▁ i am xxmaj revenge , sent from th ' infernal kingdom 
▁ xxmaj to ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind 
▁ xxmaj by working wreakful vengeance on thy foes . 
▁ xxmaj come down and welcome me to this world 's light ; 
▁ xxmaj confer with me of murder and of death ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a hollow cave or lurking - place , 
▁ xxmaj no vast obscurity or misty vale , 
▁ xxmaj where bloody murder or detested rape 
▁ xxmaj can couch for fear but i will find them out ; 
▁ xxmaj and in their ears tell them my dreadful name- 
▁ xxmaj revenge , which makes the foul offender quake . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj art thou xxmaj revenge ? and art thou sent to me 
▁ xxmaj to be a torment to mine enemies ? 
▁ xxup tamora . i am ; therefore come down and welcome me . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj do me some service ere i come to thee . 
▁ xxmaj lo , by thy side where xxmaj rape and xxmaj murder stands ; 
▁ xxmaj now give some surance that thou art xxmaj revenge- 
▁ xxmaj stab them , or tear them on thy chariot wheels ; 
▁ xxmaj and then xxmaj i 'll come and be thy waggoner 
▁ xxmaj and whirl along with thee about the globes . 
▁ xxmaj provide thee two proper palfreys , black as jet , 
▁ xxmaj to hale thy vengeful waggon swift away , 
▁ xxmaj and find out murderers in their guilty caves ; 
▁ xxmaj and when thy car is loaden with their heads , 
▁ i will dismount , and by thy waggon wheel 
▁ xxmaj trot , like a servile footman , all day long , 
▁ xxmaj even from xxmaj hyperion 's rising in the east 
▁ xxmaj until his very downfall in the sea . 
▁ xxmaj and day by day xxmaj i 'll do this heavy task , 
▁ xxmaj so thou destroy xxmaj rapine and xxmaj murder there . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj these are my ministers , and come with me . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj are they thy ministers ? xxmaj what are they call'd ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj rape and xxmaj murder ; therefore called so 
▁ 'cause they take vengeance of such kind of men . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj good xxmaj lord , how like the xxmaj empress ' sons they are ! 
▁ xxmaj and you the xxmaj empress ! xxmaj but we worldly men 
▁ xxmaj have miserable , mad , mistaking eyes . 
▁ o sweet xxmaj revenge , now do i come to thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and , if one arm 's embracement will content thee , 
▁ i will embrace thee in it by and by . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj this closing with him fits his lunacy . 
▁ xxmaj whate'er i forge to feed his brain - sick humours , 
▁ xxmaj do you uphold and maintain in your speeches , 
▁ xxmaj for now he firmly takes me for xxmaj revenge ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being credulous in this mad thought , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make him send for xxmaj lucius his son , 
▁ xxmaj and whilst i at a banquet hold him sure , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll find some cunning practice out of hand 
▁ xxmaj to scatter and disperse the giddy xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj or , at the least , make them his enemies . 
▁ xxmaj see , here he comes , and i must ply my theme . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup titus , below 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj long have i been forlorn , and all for thee . 
▁ xxmaj welcome , dread xxmaj fury , to my woeful house . 
▁ xxmaj rapine and xxmaj murder , you are welcome too . 
▁ xxmaj how like the xxmaj empress and her sons you are ! 
▁ xxmaj well are you fitted , had you but a xxmaj moor . 
▁ xxmaj could not all hell afford you such a devil ? 
▁ xxmaj for well i wot the xxmaj empress never wags 
▁ xxmaj but in her company there is a xxmaj moor ; 
▁ xxmaj and , would you represent our queen aright , 
▁ xxmaj it were convenient you had such a devil . 
▁ xxmaj but welcome as you are . xxmaj what shall we do ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj what wouldst thou have us do , xxmaj andronicus ? 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj show me a murderer , xxmaj i 'll deal with him . 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj show me a villain that hath done a rape , 
▁ xxmaj and i am sent to be reveng'd on him . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj show me a thousand that hath done thee wrong , 
▁ xxmaj and i will be revenged on them all . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj look round about the wicked streets of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and when thou find'st a man that 's like thyself , 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj murder , stab him ; he 's a murderer . 
▁ xxmaj go thou with him , and when it is thy hap 
▁ xxmaj to find another that is like to thee , 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj rapine , stab him ; he is a ravisher . 
▁ xxmaj go thou with them ; and in the xxmaj emperor 's court 
▁ xxmaj there is a queen , attended by a xxmaj moor ; 
▁ xxmaj well shalt thou know her by thine own proportion , 
▁ xxmaj for up and down she doth resemble thee . 
▁ i pray thee , do on them some violent death ; 
▁ xxmaj they have been violent to me and mine . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj well hast thou lesson'd us ; this shall we do . 
▁ xxmaj but would it please thee , good xxmaj andronicus , 
▁ xxmaj to send for xxmaj lucius , thy thrice - valiant son , 
▁ xxmaj who leads towards xxmaj rome a band of warlike xxmaj goths , 
▁ xxmaj and bid him come and banquet at thy house ; 
▁ xxmaj when he is here , even at thy solemn feast , 
▁ i will bring in the xxmaj empress and her sons , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj emperor himself , and all thy foes ; 
▁ xxmaj and at thy mercy shall they stoop and kneel , 
▁ xxmaj and on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart . 
▁ xxmaj what says xxmaj andronicus to this device ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj marcus , my brother ! ' tis sad xxmaj titus calls . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup marcus 

▁ xxmaj go , gentle xxmaj marcus , to thy nephew xxmaj lucius ; 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt inquire him out among the xxmaj goths . 
▁ xxmaj bid him repair to me , and bring with him 
▁ xxmaj some of the chiefest princes of the xxmaj goths ; 
▁ xxmaj bid him encamp his soldiers where they are . 
▁ xxmaj tell him the xxmaj emperor and the xxmaj empress too 
▁ xxmaj feast at my house , and he shall feast with them . 
▁ xxmaj this do thou for my love ; and so let him , 
▁ xxmaj as he regards his aged father 's life . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj this will i do , and soon return again . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj now will i hence about thy business , 
▁ xxmaj and take my ministers along with me . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj nay , nay , let xxmaj rape and xxmaj murder stay with me , 
▁ xxmaj or else xxmaj i 'll call my brother back again , 
▁ xxmaj and cleave to no revenge but xxmaj lucius . 
▁ xxup tamora . [ aside to her sons ] xxmaj what say you , boys ? xxmaj will you abide 
▁ with him , 
▁ xxmaj whiles i go tell my lord the xxmaj emperor 
▁ xxmaj how i have govern'd our determin'd jest ? 
▁ xxmaj yield to his humour , smooth and speak him fair , 
▁ xxmaj and tarry with him till i turn again . 
▁ xxup titus . [ aside ] i knew them all , though they suppos'd me mad , 
▁ xxmaj and will o'er reach them in their own devices , 
▁ a pair of cursed hell - hounds and their dam . 
▁ xxup demetrius . xxmaj madam , depart at pleasure ; leave us here . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj farewell , xxmaj andronicus , xxmaj revenge now goes 
▁ xxmaj to lay a complot to betray thy foes . 
▁ xxup titus . i know thou dost ; and , sweet xxmaj revenge , farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup tamora 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj tell us , old man , how shall we be employ'd ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj tut , i have work enough for you to do . 
▁ xxmaj publius , come hither , xxmaj caius , and xxmaj valentine . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup publius , xxup caius , and xxup valentine 

▁ xxup publius . xxmaj what is your will ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj know you these two ? 
▁ xxup publius . xxmaj the xxmaj empress ' sons , i take them : xxmaj chiron , xxmaj demetrius . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj fie , xxmaj publius , fie ! thou art too much deceiv'd . 
▁ xxmaj the one is xxmaj murder , and xxmaj rape is the other 's name ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore bind them , gentle xxmaj publius- 
▁ xxmaj caius and xxmaj valentine , lay hands on them . 
▁ xxmaj oft have you heard me wish for such an hour , 
▁ xxmaj and now i find it ; therefore bind them sure , 
▁ xxmaj and stop their mouths if they begin to cry . xxmaj exit 
▁ [ they lay hold on xxup chiron and xxup demetrius ] 
▁ xxup chiron . xxmaj villains , forbear ! we are the xxmaj empress ' sons . 
▁ xxup publius . xxmaj and therefore do we what we are commanded . 
▁ xxmaj stop close their mouths , let them not speak a word . 
▁ xxmaj is he sure bound ? xxmaj look that you bind them fast . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup titus xxup andronicus 
▁ with a knife , and xxup lavinia , with a basin 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj come , come , xxmaj lavinia ; look , thy foes are bound . 
▁ xxmaj sirs , stop their mouths , let them not speak to me ; 
▁ xxmaj but let them hear what fearful words i utter . 
▁ o villains , xxmaj chiron and xxmaj demetrius ! 
▁ xxmaj here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud ; 
▁ xxmaj this goodly summer with your winter mix'd . 
▁ xxmaj you kill'd her husband ; and for that vile fault 
▁ xxmaj two of her brothers were condemn'd to death , 
▁ xxmaj my hand cut off and made a merry jest ; 
▁ xxmaj both her sweet hands , her tongue , and that more dear 
▁ xxmaj than hands or tongue , her spotless chastity , 
▁ xxmaj inhuman traitors , you constrain'd and forc'd . 
▁ xxmaj what would you say , if i should let you speak ? 
▁ xxmaj villains , for shame you could not beg for grace . 
▁ xxmaj hark , wretches ! how i mean to martyr you . 
▁ xxmaj this one hand yet is left to cut your throats , 
▁ xxmaj whiles that xxmaj lavinia ' tween her stumps doth hold 
▁ xxmaj the basin that receives your guilty blood . 
▁ xxmaj you know your mother means to feast with me , 
▁ xxmaj and calls herself xxmaj revenge , and thinks me mad . 
▁ xxmaj hark , villains ! i will grind your bones to dust , 
▁ xxmaj and with your blood and it xxmaj i 'll make a paste ; 
▁ xxmaj and of the paste a coffin i will rear , 
▁ xxmaj and make two pasties of your shameful heads ; 
▁ xxmaj and bid that strumpet , your unhallowed dam , 
▁ xxmaj like to the earth , swallow her own increase . 
▁ xxmaj this is the feast that i have bid her to , 
▁ xxmaj and this the banquet she shall surfeit on ; 
▁ xxmaj for worse than xxmaj philomel you us'd my daughter , 
▁ xxmaj and worse than xxmaj progne i will be reveng'd . 
▁ xxmaj and now prepare your throats . xxmaj lavinia , come , 
▁ xxmaj receive the blood ; and when that they are dead , 
▁ xxmaj let me go grind their bones to powder small , 
▁ xxmaj and with this hateful liquor temper it ; 
▁ xxmaj and in that paste let their vile heads be bak'd . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , be every one officious 
▁ xxmaj to make this banquet , which i wish may prove 
▁ xxmaj more stern and bloody than the xxmaj centaurs ' feast . 
▁ [ he cuts their throats ] 
▁ xxmaj so . 
▁ xxmaj now bring them in , for i will play the cook , 
▁ xxmaj and see them ready against their mother comes . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt , bearing the dead bodies 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the court of xxup titus ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj lucius , xxup marcus , and the xxup goths , with xxup aaron prisoner , 
 and his xxup child in the arms of an attendant 

▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj uncle xxmaj marcus , since ' tis my father 's mind 
▁ xxmaj that i repair to xxmaj rome , i am content . 
▁ xxup first xxup goth . xxmaj and ours with thine , befall what fortune will . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj good uncle , take you in this barbarous xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj this ravenous tiger , this accursed devil ; 
▁ xxmaj let him receive no sust'nance , fetter him , 
▁ xxmaj till he be brought unto the xxmaj empress ' face 
▁ xxmaj for testimony of her foul proceedings . 
▁ xxmaj and see the ambush of our friends be strong ; 
▁ i fear the xxmaj emperor means no good to us . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj some devil whisper curses in my ear , 
▁ xxmaj and prompt me that my tongue may utter forth 
▁ xxmaj the venomous malice of my swelling heart ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj away , inhuman dog , unhallowed slave ! 
▁ xxmaj sirs , help our uncle to convey him in . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup goths with xxup aaron . xxmaj flourish within 
▁ xxmaj the trumpets show the xxmaj emperor is at hand . 

▁ xxmaj sound trumpets . xxmaj enter xxup saturninus and 
▁ xxup tamora , with xxup aemilius , xxup tribunes , xxup senators , and others 

▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj what , hath the firmament more suns than one ? 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj what boots it thee to can thyself a sun ? 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj rome 's xxmaj emperor , and nephew , break the parle ; 
▁ xxmaj these quarrels must be quietly debated . 
▁ xxmaj the feast is ready which the careful xxmaj titus 
▁ xxmaj hath ordain'd to an honourable end , 
▁ xxmaj for peace , for love , for league , and good to xxmaj rome . 
▁ xxmaj please you , therefore , draw nigh and take your places . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj marcus , we will . 
▁ [ a table brought in . xxmaj the company sit down ] 

▁ xxmaj trumpets sounding , enter xxup titus 
▁ like a cook , placing the dishes , and xxup lavinia 
▁ with a veil over her face ; also xxup young xxup lucius , and others 

▁ xxup titus . xxmaj welcome , my lord ; welcome , dread xxmaj queen ; 
▁ xxmaj welcome , ye warlike xxmaj goths ; welcome , xxmaj lucius ; 
▁ xxmaj and welcome all . xxmaj although the cheer be poor , 
▁ ' twill fill your stomachs ; please you eat of it . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj why art thou thus attir'd , xxmaj andronicus ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj because i would be sure to have all well 
▁ xxmaj to entertain your xxmaj highness and your xxmaj empress . 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj we are beholding to you , good xxmaj andronicus . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj an if your xxmaj highness knew my heart , you were . 
▁ xxmaj my lord the xxmaj emperor , resolve me this : 
▁ xxmaj was it well done of rash xxmaj virginius 
▁ xxmaj to slay his daughter with his own right hand , 
▁ xxmaj because she was enforc'd , stain'd , and deflower'd ? 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj it was , xxmaj andronicus . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj your reason , mighty lord . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj because the girl should not survive her shame , 
▁ xxmaj and by her presence still renew his sorrows . 
▁ xxup titus . a reason mighty , strong , and effectual ; 
▁ a pattern , precedent , and lively warrant 
▁ xxmaj for me , most wretched , to perform the like . 
▁ xxmaj die , die , xxmaj lavinia , and thy shame with thee ; [ he kills her ] 
▁ xxmaj and with thy shame thy father 's sorrow die ! 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj what hast thou done , unnatural and unkind ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj kill'd her for whom my tears have made me blind . 
▁ i am as woeful as xxmaj virginius was , 
▁ xxmaj and have a thousand times more cause than he 
▁ xxmaj to do this outrage ; and it now is done . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj what , was she ravish'd ? xxmaj tell who did the deed . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj will't please you eat ? xxmaj will't please your xxmaj highness feed ? 
▁ xxup tamora . xxmaj why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus ? 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj not xxup i ; ' twas xxmaj chiron and xxmaj demetrius . 
▁ xxmaj they ravish'd her , and cut away her tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj and they , ' twas they , that did her all this wrong . 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj go , fetch them hither to us presently . 
▁ xxup titus . xxmaj why , there they are , both baked in this pie , 
▁ xxmaj whereof their mother daintily hath fed , 
▁ xxmaj eating the flesh that she herself hath bred . 
▁ ' tis true , ' tis true : witness my knife 's sharp point . 
▁ [ he stabs the xxup empress ] 
▁ xxup saturninus . xxmaj die , frantic wretch , for this accursed deed ! 
▁ [ he stabs xxup titus ] 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj can the son 's eye behold his father bleed ? 
▁ xxmaj there 's meed for meed , death for a deadly deed . 
▁ [ he stabs xxup saturninus . a great tumult . xxup lucius , 
▁ xxup marcus , and their friends go up into the balcony ] 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj you sad - fac'd men , people and sons of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj by uproars sever'd , as a flight of fowl 
▁ xxmaj scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusts ? 
▁ xxup o , let me teach you how to knit again 
▁ xxmaj this scattered corn into one mutual sheaf , 
▁ xxmaj these broken limbs again into one body ; 
▁ xxmaj lest xxmaj rome herself be bane unto herself , 
▁ xxmaj and she whom mighty kingdoms curtsy to , 
▁ xxmaj like a forlorn and desperate castaway , 
▁ xxmaj do shameful execution on herself . 
▁ xxmaj but if my frosty signs and chaps of age , 
▁ xxmaj grave witnesses of true experience , 
▁ xxmaj can not induce you to attend my words , 
▁ [ to xxmaj lucius ] xxmaj speak , xxmaj rome 's dear friend , as erst our ancestor , 
▁ xxmaj when with his solemn tongue he did discourse 
▁ xxmaj to love - sick xxmaj dido 's sad attending ear 
▁ xxmaj the story of that baleful burning night , 
▁ xxmaj when subtle xxmaj greeks surpris'd xxmaj king xxmaj priam 's xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxmaj tell us what xxmaj sinon hath bewitch'd our ears , 
▁ xxmaj or who hath brought the fatal engine in 
▁ xxmaj that gives our xxmaj troy , our xxmaj rome , the civil wound . 
▁ xxmaj my heart is not compact of flint nor steel ; 
▁ xxmaj nor can i utter all our bitter grief , 
▁ xxmaj but floods of tears will drown my oratory 
▁ xxmaj and break my utt'rance , even in the time 
▁ xxmaj when it should move ye to attend me most , 
▁ xxmaj and force you to commiseration . 
▁ xxmaj here 's xxmaj rome 's young xxmaj captain , let him tell the tale ; 
▁ xxmaj while i stand by and weep to hear him speak . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj then , gracious auditory , be it known to you 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj chiron and the damn'd xxmaj demetrius 
▁ xxmaj were they that murd'red our xxmaj emperor 's brother ; 
▁ xxmaj and they it were that ravished our sister . 
▁ xxmaj for their fell faults our brothers were beheaded , 
▁ xxmaj our father 's tears despis'd , and basely cozen'd 
▁ xxmaj of that true hand that fought xxmaj rome 's quarrel out 
▁ xxmaj and sent her enemies unto the grave . 
▁ xxmaj lastly , myself unkindly banished , 
▁ xxmaj the gates shut on me , and turn'd weeping out , 
▁ xxmaj to beg relief among xxmaj rome 's enemies ; 
▁ xxmaj who drown'd their enmity in my true tears , 
▁ xxmaj and op'd their arms to embrace me as a friend . 
▁ i am the turned forth , be it known to you , 
▁ xxmaj that have preserv'd her welfare in my blood 
▁ xxmaj and from her bosom took the enemy 's point , 
▁ xxmaj sheathing the steel in my advent'rous body . 
▁ xxmaj alas ! you know i am no vaunter , xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj my scars can witness , dumb although they are , 
▁ xxmaj that my report is just and full of truth . 
▁ xxmaj but , soft ! methinks i do digress too much , 
▁ xxmaj citing my worthless praise . xxup o , pardon me ! 
▁ xxmaj for when no friends are by , men praise themselves . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj now is my turn to speak . xxmaj behold the child . 
▁ [ pointing to the xxup child in an attendant 's arms ] 
▁ xxmaj of this was xxmaj tamora delivered , 
▁ xxmaj the issue of an irreligious xxmaj moor , 
▁ xxmaj chief architect and plotter of these woes . 
▁ xxmaj the villain is alive in xxmaj titus ' house , 
▁ xxmaj damn'd as he is , to witness this is true . 
▁ xxmaj now judge what cause had xxmaj titus to revenge 
▁ xxmaj these wrongs unspeakable , past patience , 
▁ xxmaj or more than any living man could bear . 
▁ xxmaj now have you heard the truth : what say you , xxmaj romans ? 
▁ xxmaj have we done aught amiss , show us wherein , 
▁ xxmaj and , from the place where you behold us pleading , 
▁ xxmaj the poor remainder of xxmaj andronici 
▁ xxmaj will , hand in hand , all headlong hurl ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj and on the ragged stones beat forth our souls , 
▁ xxmaj and make a mutual closure of our house . 
▁ xxmaj speak , xxmaj romans , speak ; and if you say we shall , 
▁ xxmaj lo , hand in hand , xxmaj lucius and i will fall . 
▁ xxup aemilius . xxmaj come , come , thou reverend man of xxmaj rome , 
▁ xxmaj and bring our xxmaj emperor gently in thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj lucius our xxmaj emperor ; for well i know 
▁ xxmaj the common voice do cry it shall be so . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj lucius , all hail , xxmaj rome 's royal xxmaj emperor ! 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj go , go into old xxmaj titus ' sorrowful house , 
▁ xxmaj and hither hale that misbelieving xxmaj moor 
▁ xxmaj to be adjudg'd some direful slaught'ring death , 
▁ xxmaj as punishment for his most wicked life . xxmaj exeunt some 
▁ attendants . xxup lucius , xxup marcus , and the others descend 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj lucius , all hail , xxmaj rome 's gracious governor ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj thanks , gentle xxmaj romans ! xxmaj may i govern so 
▁ xxmaj to heal xxmaj rome 's harms and wipe away her woe ! 
▁ xxmaj but , gentle people , give me aim awhile , 
▁ xxmaj for nature puts me to a heavy task . 
▁ xxmaj stand all aloof ; but , uncle , draw you near 
▁ xxmaj to shed obsequious tears upon this trunk . 
▁ xxup o , take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips . [ kisses xxup titus ] 
▁ xxmaj these sorrowful drops upon thy blood - stain'd face , 
▁ xxmaj the last true duties of thy noble son ! 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj tear for tear and loving kiss for kiss 
▁ xxmaj thy brother xxmaj marcus tenders on thy lips . 
▁ xxup o , were the sum of these that i should pay 
▁ xxmaj countless and infinite , yet would i pay them ! 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj come hither , boy ; come , come , come , and learn of us 
▁ xxmaj to melt in showers . xxmaj thy grandsire lov'd thee well ; 
▁ xxmaj many a time he danc'd thee on his knee , 
▁ xxmaj sung thee asleep , his loving breast thy pillow ; 
▁ xxmaj many a story hath he told to thee , 
▁ xxmaj and bid thee bear his pretty tales in mind 
▁ xxmaj and talk of them when he was dead and gone . 
▁ xxup marcus . xxmaj how many thousand times hath these poor lips , 
▁ xxmaj when they were living , warm'd themselves on thine !