xxbos xxup o , now , sweet boy , give them their latest kiss ! 
▁ xxmaj bid him farewell ; commit him to the grave ; 
▁ xxmaj do them that kindness , and take leave of them . 
▁ xxup boy . o grandsire , grandsire ! ev'n with all my heart 
▁ xxmaj would i were dead , so you did live again ! 
▁ o xxmaj lord , i can not speak to him for weeping ; 
▁ xxmaj my tears will choke me , if i ope my mouth . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter attendants with xxup aaron 
▁
▁ a xxup roman . xxmaj you sad xxmaj andronici , have done with woes ; 
▁ xxmaj give sentence on the execrable wretch 
▁ xxmaj that hath been breeder of these dire events . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj set him breast - deep in earth , and famish him ; 
▁ xxmaj there let him stand and rave and cry for food . 
▁ xxmaj if any one relieves or pities him , 
▁ xxmaj for the offence he dies . xxmaj this is our doom . 
▁ xxmaj some stay to see him fast'ned in the earth . 
▁ xxup aaron . xxmaj ah , why should wrath be mute and fury dumb ? 
▁ i am no baby , xxup i , that with base prayers 
▁ i should repent the evils i have done ; 
▁ xxmaj ten thousand worse than ever yet i did 
▁ xxmaj would i perform , if i might have my will . 
▁ xxmaj if one good deed in all my life i did , 
▁ i do repent it from my very soul . 
▁ xxup lucius . xxmaj some loving friends convey the xxmaj emperor hence , 
▁ xxmaj and give him burial in his father 's grave . 
▁ xxmaj my father and xxmaj lavinia shall forthwith 
▁ xxmaj be closed in our household 's monument . 
▁ xxmaj as for that ravenous tiger , xxmaj tamora , 
▁ xxmaj no funeral rite , nor man in mourning weed , 
▁ xxmaj no mournful bell shall ring her burial ; 
▁ xxmaj but throw her forth to beasts and birds to prey . 
▁ xxmaj her life was beastly and devoid of pity , 
▁ xxmaj and being dead , let birds on her take pity . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1602 

 xxup the xxup history xxup of xxup troilus xxup and xxup cressida 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 


 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup priam , xxmaj king of xxmaj troy 

▁ xxmaj his sons : 
▁ xxup hector 
▁ xxup troilus 
▁ xxup paris 
▁ xxup deiphobus 
▁ xxup helenus 

▁ xxup margarelon , a bastard son of xxmaj priam 

▁ xxmaj trojan commanders : 
▁ xxup aeneas 
▁ xxup antenor 

▁ xxup calchas , a xxmaj trojan priest , taking part with the xxmaj greeks 
▁ xxup pandarus , uncle to xxmaj cressida 
▁ xxup agamemnon , the xxmaj greek general 
▁ xxup menelaus , his brother 
▁
▁ xxmaj greek commanders : 
▁ xxup achilles 
▁ xxup ajax 
▁ xxup ulysses 
▁ xxup nestor 
▁ xxup diomedes 
▁ xxup patroclus 

▁ xxup thersites , a deformed and scurrilous xxmaj greek 
▁ xxup alexander , servant to xxmaj cressida 
▁ xxup servant to xxmaj troilus 
▁ xxup servant to xxmaj paris 
▁ xxup servant to xxmaj diomedes 

▁ xxup helen , wife to xxmaj menelaus 
▁ xxup andromache , wife to xxmaj hector 
▁ xxup cassandra , daughter to xxmaj priam , a prophetess 
▁ xxup cressida , daughter to xxmaj calchas 

▁ xxmaj trojan and xxmaj greek xxmaj soldiers , and xxmaj attendants 

▁ xxup scene : 
▁ xxmaj troy and the xxmaj greek camp before it 

 xxup prologue 
▁ xxup troilus xxup and xxup cressida 
▁ xxup prologue 

▁ xxmaj in xxmaj troy , there lies the scene . xxmaj from isles of xxmaj greece 
▁ xxmaj the princes orgillous , their high blood chaf'd , 
▁ xxmaj have to the port of xxmaj athens sent their ships 
▁ xxmaj fraught with the ministers and instruments 
▁ xxmaj of cruel war . xxmaj sixty and nine that wore 
▁ xxmaj their crownets regal from th ' xxmaj athenian bay 
▁ xxmaj put forth toward xxmaj phrygia ; and their vow is made 
▁ xxmaj to ransack xxmaj troy , within whose strong immures 
▁ xxmaj the ravish'd xxmaj helen , xxmaj menelaus ' queen , 
▁ xxmaj with wanton xxmaj paris sleeps - and that 's the quarrel . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj tenedos they come , 
▁ xxmaj and the deep - drawing barks do there disgorge 
▁ xxmaj their war - like fraughtage . xxmaj now on xxmaj dardan plains 
▁ xxmaj the fresh and yet unbruised xxmaj greeks do pitch 
▁ xxmaj their brave pavilions : xxmaj priam 's six - gated city , 
▁ xxmaj dardan , and xxmaj tymbria , xxmaj helias , xxmaj chetas , xxmaj troien , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj antenorides , with massy staples 
▁ xxmaj and corresponsive and fulfilling bolts , 
▁ xxmaj sperr up the sons of xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxmaj now expectation , tickling skittish spirits 
▁ xxmaj on one and other side , xxmaj troyan and xxmaj greek , 
▁ xxmaj sets all on hazard - and hither am i come 
▁ a xxmaj prologue arm'd , but not in confidence 
▁ xxmaj of author 's pen or actor 's voice , but suited 
▁ xxmaj in like conditions as our argument , 
▁ xxmaj to tell you , fair beholders , that our play 
▁ xxmaj leaps o'er the vaunt and firstlings of those broils , 
▁ xxmaj beginning in the middle ; starting thence away , 
▁ xxmaj to what may be digested in a play . 
▁ xxmaj like or find fault ; do as your pleasures are ; 
▁ xxmaj now good or bad , ' tis but the chance of war . 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxmaj before xxup priam 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup troilus armed , and xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj call here my varlet ; xxmaj i 'll unarm again . 
▁ xxmaj why should i war without the walls of xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj that find such cruel battle here within ? 
▁ xxmaj each xxmaj troyan that is master of his heart , 
▁ xxmaj let him to field ; xxmaj troilus , alas , hath none ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj will this gear ne'er be mended ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj the xxmaj greeks are strong , and skilful to their strength , 
▁ xxmaj fierce to their skill , and to their fierceness valiant ; 
▁ xxmaj but i am weaker than a woman 's tear , 
▁ xxmaj tamer than sleep , fonder than ignorance , 
▁ xxmaj less valiant than the virgin in the night , 
▁ xxmaj and skilless as unpractis'd infancy . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj well , i have told you enough of this ; for my part , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not meddle nor make no farther . xxmaj he that will have a cake 
▁ out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj have i not tarried ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , the grinding ; but you must tarry the bolting . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj have i not tarried ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , the bolting ; but you must tarry the leavening . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj still have i tarried . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , to the leavening ; but here 's yet in the word 
▁ ' hereafter ' the kneading , the making of the cake , the heating 
▁ of the oven , and the baking ; nay , you must stay the cooling too , 
▁ or you may chance to burn your lips . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj patience herself , what goddess e'er she be , 
▁ xxmaj doth lesser blench at suff'rance than i do . 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj priam 's royal table do i sit ; 
▁ xxmaj and when fair xxmaj cressid comes into my thoughts- 
▁ xxmaj so , traitor , then she comes when she is thence . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj well , she look'd yesternight fairer than ever i saw her 
▁ look , or any woman else . 
▁ xxup troilus . i was about to tell thee : when my heart , 
▁ xxmaj as wedged with a sigh , would rive in twain , 
▁ xxmaj lest xxmaj hector or my father should perceive me , 
▁ i have , as when the sun doth light a storm , 
▁ xxmaj buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile . 
▁ xxmaj but sorrow that is couch'd in seeming gladness 
▁ xxmaj is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj an her hair were not somewhat darker than xxmaj helen's- well , 
▁ go to- there were no more comparison between the women . xxmaj but , for 
▁ my part , she is my kinswoman ; i would not , as they term it , 
▁ praise her , but i would somebody had heard her talk yesterday , as 
▁ i did . i will not dispraise your sister xxmaj cassandra 's wit ; but- 
▁ xxup troilus . o xxmaj pandarus ! i tell thee , xxmaj pandarus- 
▁ xxmaj when i do tell thee there my hopes lie drown'd , 
▁ xxmaj reply not in how many fathoms deep 
▁ xxmaj they lie indrench'd . i tell thee i am mad 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj cressid 's love . xxmaj thou answer'st ' she is fair'- 
▁ xxmaj pourest in the open ulcer of my heart- 
▁ xxmaj her eyes , her hair , her cheek , her gait , her voice , 
▁ xxmaj handlest in thy discourse . xxup o , that her hand , 
▁ xxmaj in whose comparison all whites are ink 
▁ xxmaj writing their own reproach ; to whose soft seizure 
▁ xxmaj the cygnet 's down is harsh , and spirit of sense 
▁ xxmaj hard as the palm of ploughman ! xxmaj this thou tell'st me , 
▁ xxmaj as true thou tell'st me , when i say i love her ; 
▁ xxmaj but , saying thus , instead of oil and balm , 
▁ xxmaj thou lay'st in every gash that love hath given me 
▁ xxmaj the knife that made it . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i speak no more than truth . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj thou dost not speak so much . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj faith , xxmaj i 'll not meddle in it . xxmaj let her be as she is : if 
▁ she be fair , ' tis the better for her ; an she be not , she has the 
▁ mends in her own hands . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj good xxmaj pandarus ! xxmaj how now , xxmaj pandarus ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . i have had my labour for my travail , ill thought on of 
▁ her and ill thought on of you ; gone between and between , but 
▁ small thanks for my labour . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj what , art thou angry , xxmaj pandarus ? xxmaj what , with me ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj because she 's kin to me , therefore she 's not so fair as 
▁ xxmaj helen . xxmaj an she were not kin to me , she would be as fair a xxmaj friday 
▁ as xxmaj helen is on xxmaj sunday . xxmaj but what care xxup i ? i care not an she were a 
▁ blackamoor ; ' tis all one to me . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj say i she is not fair ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . i do not care whether you do or no . xxmaj she 's a fool to stay 
▁ behind her father . xxmaj let her to the xxmaj greeks ; and so xxmaj i 'll tell her 
▁ the next time i see her . xxmaj for my part , xxmaj i 'll meddle nor make no 
▁ more i ' th ' matter . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj pandarus ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj sweet xxmaj pandarus ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj pray you , speak no more to me : i will leave all 
▁ as i found it , and there an end . xxmaj exit . xxmaj sound alarum 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj peace , you ungracious clamours ! xxmaj peace , rude sounds ! 
▁ xxmaj fools on both sides ! xxmaj helen must needs be fair , 
▁ xxmaj when with your blood you daily paint her thus . 
▁ i can not fight upon this argument ; 
▁ xxmaj it is too starv'd a subject for my sword . 
▁ xxmaj but pandarus - o gods , how do you plague me ! 
▁ i can not come to xxmaj cressid but by xxmaj pandar ; 
▁ xxmaj and he 's as tetchy to be woo'd to woo 
▁ xxmaj as she is stubborn - chaste against all suit . 
▁ xxmaj tell me , xxmaj apollo , for thy xxmaj daphne 's love , 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj cressid is , what xxmaj pandar , and what we ? 
▁ xxmaj her bed is xxmaj india ; there she lies , a pearl ; 
▁ xxmaj between our xxmaj ilium and where she resides 
▁ xxmaj let it be call'd the wild and wand'ring flood ; 
▁ xxmaj ourself the merchant , and this sailing xxmaj pandar 
▁ xxmaj our doubtful hope , our convoy , and our bark . 

▁ xxmaj alarum . xxmaj enter xxup aeneas 

▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj how now , xxmaj prince xxmaj troilus ! xxmaj wherefore not afield ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj because not there . xxmaj this woman 's answer sorts , 
▁ xxmaj for womanish it is to be from thence . 
▁ xxmaj what news , xxmaj aeneas , from the field to - day ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj that xxmaj paris is returned home , and hurt . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj by whom , xxmaj aeneas ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj troilus , by xxmaj menelaus . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj let xxmaj paris bleed : ' tis but a scar to scorn ; 
▁ xxmaj paris is gor'd with xxmaj menelaus ' horn . [ alarum ] 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj hark what good sport is out of town to - day ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj better at home , if ' would i might ' were ' may . ' 
▁ xxmaj but to the sport abroad . xxmaj are you bound thither ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj in all swift haste . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj come , go we then together . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj troy . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup cressida and her man xxup alexander 

▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj who were those went by ? 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj queen xxmaj hecuba and xxmaj helen . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj and whither go they ? 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj up to the eastern tower , 
▁ xxmaj whose height commands as subject all the vale , 
▁ xxmaj to see the battle . xxmaj hector , whose patience 
▁ xxmaj is as a virtue fix'd , to - day was mov'd . 
▁ xxmaj he chid xxmaj andromache , and struck his armourer ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like as there were husbandry in war , 
▁ xxmaj before the sun rose he was harness'd light , 
▁ xxmaj and to the field goes he ; where every flower 
▁ xxmaj did as a prophet weep what it foresaw 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj hector 's wrath . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj what was his cause of anger ? 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj the noise goes , this : there is among the xxmaj greeks 
▁ a lord of xxmaj troyan blood , nephew to xxmaj hector ; 
▁ xxmaj they call him xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj good ; and what of him ? 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj they say he is a very man per se , 
▁ xxmaj and stands alone . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj so do all men , unless they are drunk , sick , or have no 
▁ legs . 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj this man , lady , hath robb'd many beasts of their 
▁ particular additions : he is as valiant as a lion , churlish as the 
▁ bear , slow as the elephant - a man into whom nature hath so crowded 
▁ humours that his valour is crush'd into folly , his folly sauced 
▁ with discretion . xxmaj there is no man hath a virtue that he hath not a 
▁ glimpse of , nor any man an attaint but he carries some stain of 
▁ it ; he is melancholy without cause and merry against the hair ; he 
▁ hath the joints of every thing ; but everything so out of joint 
▁ that he is a gouty xxmaj briareus , many hands and no use , or purblind 
▁ xxmaj argus , all eyes and no sight . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj but how should this man , that makes me smile , make xxmaj hector 
▁ angry ? 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj they say he yesterday cop'd xxmaj hector in the battle and 
▁ struck him down , the disdain and shame whereof hath ever since 
▁ kept xxmaj hector fasting and waking . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj who comes here ? 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj madam , your uncle xxmaj pandarus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj hector 's a gallant man . 
▁ xxup alexander . xxmaj as may be in the world , lady . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what 's that ? xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj good morrow , uncle xxmaj pandarus . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj good morrow , cousin xxmaj cressid . xxmaj what do you talk of?- xxmaj good 
▁ morrow , alexander.-how do you , cousin ? xxmaj when were you at xxmaj ilium ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj this morning , uncle . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what were you talking of when i came ? xxmaj was xxmaj hector arm'd 
▁ and gone ere you came to xxmaj ilium ? xxmaj helen was not up , was she ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj hector was gone ; but xxmaj helen was not up . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj e'en so . xxmaj hector was stirring early . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj that were we talking of , and of his anger . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj was he angry ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj so he says here . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj true , he was so ; i know the cause too ; he 'll lay about 
▁ him today , i can tell them that . xxmaj and there 's xxmaj troilus will not 
▁ come far behind him ; let them take heed of xxmaj troilus , i can tell 
▁ them that too . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj what , is he angry too ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj who , xxmaj troilus ? xxmaj troilus is the better man of the two . 
▁ xxup cressida . o xxmaj jupiter ! there 's no comparison . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what , not between xxmaj troilus and xxmaj hector ? xxmaj do you know a man 
▁ if you see him ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj ay , if i ever saw him before and knew him . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj well , i say xxmaj troilus is xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj then you say as i say , for i am sure he is not xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj no , nor xxmaj hector is not xxmaj troilus in some degrees . 
▁ xxup cressida . ' tis just to each of them : he is himself . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj himself ! xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj troilus ! i would he were ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj so he is . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj condition i had gone barefoot to xxmaj india . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj he is not xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj himself ! no , he 's not himself . xxmaj would ' a were himself ! 
▁ xxmaj well , the gods are above ; time must friend or end . xxmaj well , xxmaj troilus , 
▁ well ! i would my heart were in her body ! xxmaj no , xxmaj hector is not a 
▁ better man than xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj excuse me . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj he is elder . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj pardon me , pardon me . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj th ' other 's not come to't ; you shall tell me another tale 
▁ when th ' other 's come to't . xxmaj hector shall not have his wit this 
▁ year . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj he shall not need it if he have his own . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj nor his qualities . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj no matter . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj nor his beauty . 
▁ xxup cressida . ' twould not become him : his own 's better . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxup you have no judgment , niece . xxmaj helen herself swore th ' 
▁ other day that xxmaj troilus , for a brown favour , for so ' tis , i must 
▁ confess- not brown neither- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj no , but brown . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj faith , to say truth , brown and not brown . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj to say the truth , true and not true . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj she prais'd his complexion above xxmaj paris . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj why , xxmaj paris hath colour enough . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj so he has . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj then xxmaj troilus should have too much . xxmaj if she prais'd him 
▁ above , his complexion is higher than his ; he having colour 
▁ enough , and the other higher , is too flaming praise for a good 
▁ complexion . i had as lief xxmaj helen 's golden tongue had commended 
▁ xxmaj troilus for a copper nose . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i swear to you i think xxmaj helen loves him better than xxmaj paris . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj then she 's a merry xxmaj greek indeed . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj nay , i am sure she does . xxmaj she came to him th ' other day 
▁ into the compass'd window - and you know he has not past three or 
▁ four hairs on his chin- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj indeed a tapster 's arithmetic may soon bring his 
▁ particulars therein to a total . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj why , he is very young , and yet will he within three pound 
▁ lift as much as his brother xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj is he so young a man and so old a lifter ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj but to prove to you that xxmaj helen loves him : she came and 
▁ puts me her white hand to his cloven chin- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj juno have mercy ! xxmaj how came it cloven ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj why , you know , ' tis dimpled . i think his smiling becomes 
▁ him better than any man in all xxmaj phrygia . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxup o , he smiles valiantly ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj does he not ? 
▁ xxup cressida . o yes , an ' twere a cloud in autumn ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj why , go to , then ! xxmaj but to prove to you that xxmaj helen loves 
▁ xxmaj troilus- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj troilus will stand to the proof , if you 'll prove it so . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj troilus ! xxmaj why , he esteems her no more than i esteem an 
▁ addle egg . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj if you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle 
▁ head , you would eat chickens i ' th ' shell . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i can not choose but laugh to think how she tickled his 
▁ chin . xxmaj indeed , she has a marvell 's white hand , i must needs 
▁ confess . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj without the rack . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj and she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj alas , poor chin ! xxmaj many a wart is richer . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj but there was such laughing ! xxmaj queen xxmaj hecuba laugh'd that 
▁ her eyes ran o'er . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj with millstones . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj and xxmaj cassandra laugh'd . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj but there was a more temperate fire under the pot of her 
▁ eyes . xxmaj did her eyes run o'er too ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj and xxmaj hector laugh'd . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj at what was all this laughing ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj marry , at the white hair that xxmaj helen spied on xxmaj troilus ' 
▁ chin . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj an't had been a green hair i should have laugh'd too . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj they laugh'd not so much at the hair as at his pretty 
▁ answer . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj what was his answer ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj quoth she ' here 's but two and fifty hairs on your chin , 
▁ and one of them is white . ' 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj this is her question . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj that 's true ; make no question of that . ' two and fifty 
▁ hairs , ' quoth he ' and one white . xxmaj that white hair is my father , 
▁ and all the rest are his sons . ' ' jupiter ! ' quoth she ' which of 
▁ these hairs is xxmaj paris my husband ? ' ' the forked one , ' quoth he , 
▁ ' pluck't out and give it him . ' xxmaj but there was such laughing ! and 
▁ xxmaj helen so blush'd , and xxmaj paris so chaf'd ; and all the rest so 
▁ laugh'd that it pass'd . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj so let it now ; for it has been a great while going by . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj well , cousin , i told you a thing yesterday ; think on't . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj so i do . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj i 'll be sworn ' tis true ; he will weep you , and ' twere a 
▁ man born in xxmaj april . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll spring up in his tears , an ' twere a nettle 
▁ against xxmaj may . [ sound a retreat ] 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj hark ! they are coming from the field . xxmaj shall we stand up 
▁ here and see them as they pass toward xxmaj ilium ? xxmaj good niece , do , 
▁ sweet niece xxmaj cressida . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj at your pleasure . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj here , here , here 's an excellent place ; here we may see 
▁ most bravely . xxmaj i 'll tell you them all by their names as they pass 
▁ by ; but mark xxmaj troilus above the rest . 

▁ xxup aeneas passes 

▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj speak not so loud . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj that 's xxmaj aeneas . xxmaj is not that a brave man ? xxmaj he 's one of the 
▁ flowers of xxmaj troy , i can tell you . xxmaj but mark xxmaj troilus ; you shall see 
▁ anon . 

▁ xxup antenor passes 

▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj who 's that ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj that 's xxmaj antenor . xxmaj he has a shrewd wit , i can tell you ; and 
▁ he 's a man good enough ; he 's one o ' th ' soundest judgments in 
▁ xxmaj troy , whosoever , and a proper man of person . xxmaj when comes xxmaj troilus ? 
▁ xxmaj i 'll show you xxmaj troilus anon . xxmaj if he see me , you shall see him nod 
▁ at me . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj will he give you the nod ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you shall see . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj if he do , the rich shall have more . 

▁ xxup hector passes 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj that 's xxmaj hector , that , that , look you , that ; there 's a 
▁ fellow ! xxmaj go thy way , xxmaj hector ! xxmaj there 's a brave man , niece . o brave 
▁ xxmaj hector ! xxmaj look how he looks . xxmaj there 's a countenance ! xxmaj is't not a 
▁ brave man ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxup o , a brave man ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj is ' a not ? xxmaj it does a man 's heart good . xxmaj look you what 
▁ hacks are on his helmet ! xxmaj look you yonder , do you see ? xxmaj look you 
▁ there . xxmaj there 's no jesting ; there 's laying on ; take't off who 
▁ will , as they say . xxmaj there be hacks . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj be those with swords ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj swords ! anything , he cares not ; an the devil come to him , 
▁ it 's all one . xxmaj by xxmaj god 's lid , it does one 's heart good . xxmaj yonder 
▁ comes xxmaj paris , yonder comes xxmaj paris . 

▁ xxup paris passes 

▁ xxmaj look ye yonder , niece ; is't not a gallant man too , is't not ? xxmaj why , 
▁ this is brave now . xxmaj who said he came hurt home to - day ? xxmaj he 's not 
▁ hurt . xxmaj why , this will do xxmaj helen 's heart good now , ha ! xxmaj would i could 
▁ see xxmaj troilus now ! xxmaj you shall see xxmaj troilus anon . 

▁ xxup helenus passes 
▁
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj who 's that ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj that 's xxmaj helenus . i marvel where xxmaj troilus is . xxmaj that 's 
▁ xxmaj helenus . i think he went not forth to - day . xxmaj that 's xxmaj helenus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj can xxmaj helenus fight , uncle ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj helenus ! no . xxmaj yes , he 'll fight indifferent well . i marvel 
▁ where xxmaj troilus is . xxmaj hark ! do you not hear the people cry ' troilus ' ? 
▁ xxmaj helenus is a priest . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj what sneaking fellow comes yonder ? 

▁ xxup troilus passes 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj where ? yonder ? xxmaj that 's xxmaj deiphobus . ' tis xxmaj troilus . xxmaj there 's a 
▁ man , niece . xxmaj hem ! xxmaj brave xxmaj troilus , the prince of chivalry ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj peace , for shame , peace ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj mark him ; note him . o brave xxmaj troilus ! xxmaj look well upon him , 
▁ niece ; look you how his sword is bloodied , and his helm more 
▁ hack'd than xxmaj hector 's ; and how he looks , and how he goes ! o 
▁ admirable youth ! he never saw three and twenty . xxmaj go thy way , 
▁ xxmaj troilus , go thy way . xxmaj had i a sister were a grace or a daughter a 
▁ goddess , he should take his choice . o admirable man ! xxmaj paris ? xxmaj paris 
▁ is dirt to him ; and , i warrant , xxmaj helen , to change , would give an 
▁ eye to boot . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj here comes more . 

▁ xxmaj common soldiers pass 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj asses , fools , dolts ! chaff and bran , chaff and bran ! 
▁ porridge after meat ! i could live and die in the eyes of xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxmaj ne'er look , ne'er look ; the eagles are gone . xxmaj crows and daws , 
▁ crows and daws ! i had rather be such a man as xxmaj troilus than 
▁ xxmaj agamemnon and all xxmaj greece . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj there is amongst the xxmaj greeks xxmaj achilles , a better man than 
▁ xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj achilles ? a drayman , a porter , a very camel ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj well , well . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj well , well ! xxmaj why , have you any discretion ? xxmaj have you any 
▁ eyes ? xxmaj do you know what a man is ? xxmaj is not birth , beauty , good 
▁ shape , discourse , manhood , learning , gentleness , virtue , youth , 
▁ liberality , and such like , the spice and salt that season a man ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj ay , a minc'd man ; and then to be bak'd with no date in 
▁ the pie , for then the man 's date is out . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you are such a woman ! a man knows not at what ward you 
▁ lie . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj upon my back , to defend my belly ; upon my wit , to defend 
▁ my wiles ; upon my secrecy , to defend mine honesty ; my mask , to 
▁ defend my beauty ; and you , to defend all these ; and at all these 
▁ wards i lie at , at a thousand watches . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj say one of your watches . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll watch you for that ; and that 's one of the 
▁ chiefest of them too . xxmaj if i can not ward what i would not have hit , 
▁ i can watch you for telling how i took the blow ; unless it swell 
▁ past hiding , and then it 's past watching 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you are such another ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus ' xxup boy 

▁ xxup boy . xxmaj sir , my lord would instantly speak with you . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj where ? 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj at your own house ; there he unarms him . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj good boy , tell him i come . xxmaj exit xxmaj boy 
▁ i doubt he be hurt . xxmaj fare ye well , good niece . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj adieu , uncle . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i will be with you , niece , by and by . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj to bring , uncle . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , a token from xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj by the same token , you are a bawd . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup pandarus 
▁ xxmaj words , vows , gifts , tears , and love 's full sacrifice , 
▁ xxmaj he offers in another 's enterprise ; 
▁ xxmaj but more in xxmaj troilus thousand - fold i see 
▁ xxmaj than in the glass of xxmaj pandar 's praise may be , 
▁ xxmaj yet hold i off . xxmaj women are angels , wooing : 
▁ xxmaj things won are done ; joy 's soul lies in the doing . 
▁ xxmaj that she belov'd knows nought that knows not this : 
▁ xxmaj men prize the thing ungain'd more than it is . 
▁ xxmaj that she was never yet that ever knew 
▁ xxmaj love got so sweet as when desire did sue ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore this maxim out of love i teach : 
▁ xxmaj achievement is command ; ungain'd , beseech . 
▁ xxmaj then though my heart 's content firm love doth bear , 
▁ xxmaj nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear . xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj grecian camp . xxmaj before xxup agamemnon 's tent 

 xxmaj sennet . xxmaj enter xxup agamemnon , xxup nestor , xxup ulysses , xxup diomedes , xxup menelaus , and others 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj princes , 
▁ xxmaj what grief hath set these jaundies o'er your cheeks ? 
▁ xxmaj the ample proposition that hope makes 
▁ xxmaj in all designs begun on earth below 
▁ xxmaj fails in the promis'd largeness ; checks and disasters 
▁ xxmaj grow in the veins of actions highest rear'd , 
▁ xxmaj as knots , by the conflux of meeting sap , 
▁ xxmaj infects the sound pine , and diverts his grain 
▁ xxmaj tortive and errant from his course of growth . 
▁ xxmaj nor , princes , is it matter new to us 
▁ xxmaj that we come short of our suppose so far 
▁ xxmaj that after seven years ' siege yet xxmaj troy walls stand ; 
▁ xxmaj sith every action that hath gone before , 
▁ xxmaj whereof we have record , trial did draw 
▁ xxmaj bias and thwart , not answering the aim , 
▁ xxmaj and that unbodied figure of the thought 
▁ xxmaj that gave't surmised shape . xxmaj why then , you princes , 
▁ xxmaj do you with cheeks abash'd behold our works 
▁ xxmaj and call them shames , which are , indeed , nought else 
▁ xxmaj but the protractive trials of great xxmaj jove 
▁ xxmaj to find persistive constancy in men ; 
▁ xxmaj the fineness of which metal is not found 
▁ xxmaj in fortune 's love ? xxmaj for then the bold and coward , 
▁ xxmaj the wise and fool , the artist and unread , 
▁ xxmaj the hard and soft , seem all affin'd and kin . 
▁ xxmaj but in the wind and tempest of her frown 
▁ xxmaj distinction , with a broad and powerful fan , 
▁ xxmaj puffing at all , winnows the light away ; 
▁ xxmaj and what hath mass or matter by itself 
▁ xxmaj lies rich in virtue and unmingled . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj with due observance of thy godlike seat , 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj agamemnon , xxmaj nestor shall apply 
▁ xxmaj thy latest words . xxmaj in the reproof of chance 
▁ xxmaj lies the true proof of men . xxmaj the sea being smooth , 
▁ xxmaj how many shallow bauble boats dare sail 
▁ xxmaj upon her patient breast , making their way 
▁ xxmaj with those of nobler bulk ! 
▁ xxmaj but let the ruffian xxmaj boreas once enrage 
▁ xxmaj the gentle xxmaj thetis , and anon behold 
▁ xxmaj the strong - ribb'd bark through liquid mountains cut , 
▁ xxmaj bounding between the two moist elements 
▁ xxmaj like xxmaj perseus ' horse . xxmaj where 's then the saucy boat , 
▁ xxmaj whose weak untimber'd sides but even now 
▁ xxmaj co - rivall'd greatness ? xxmaj either to harbour fled 
▁ xxmaj or made a toast for xxmaj neptune . xxmaj even so 
▁ xxmaj doth valour 's show and valour 's worth divide 
▁ xxmaj in storms of fortune ; for in her ray and brightness 
▁ xxmaj the herd hath more annoyance by the breeze 
▁ xxmaj than by the tiger ; but when the splitting wind 
▁ xxmaj makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks , 
▁ xxmaj and flies fled under shade - why , then the thing of courage 
▁ xxmaj as rous'd with rage , with rage doth sympathise , 
▁ xxmaj and with an accent tun'd in self - same key 
▁ xxmaj retorts to chiding fortune . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj agamemnon , 
▁ xxmaj thou great commander , nerve and bone of xxmaj greece , 
▁ xxmaj heart of our numbers , soul and only spirit 
▁ xxmaj in whom the tempers and the minds of all 
▁ xxmaj should be shut up - hear what xxmaj ulysses speaks . 
▁ xxmaj besides the applause and approbation 
▁ xxmaj the which , [ to xxup agamemnon ] most mighty , for thy place and sway , 
▁ [ to xxup nestor ] xxmaj and , thou most reverend , for thy stretch'd - out life , 
▁ i give to both your speeches- which were such 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj agamemnon and the hand of xxmaj greece 
▁ xxmaj should hold up high in brass ; and such again 
▁ xxmaj as venerable xxmaj nestor , hatch'd in silver , 
▁ xxmaj should with a bond of air , strong as the axle - tree 
▁ xxmaj on which heaven rides , knit all the xxmaj greekish ears 
▁ xxmaj to his experienc'd tongue - yet let it please both , 
▁ xxmaj thou great , and wise , to hear xxmaj ulysses speak . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj speak , xxmaj prince of xxmaj ithaca ; and be't of less expect 
▁ xxmaj that matter needless , of importless burden , 
▁ xxmaj divide thy lips than we are confident , 
▁ xxmaj when rank xxmaj thersites opes his mastic jaws , 
▁ xxmaj we shall hear music , wit , and oracle . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj troy , yet upon his basis , had been down , 
▁ xxmaj and the great xxmaj hector 's sword had lack'd a master , 
▁ xxmaj but for these instances : 
▁ xxmaj the specialty of rule hath been neglected ; 
▁ xxmaj and look how many xxmaj grecian tents do stand 
▁ xxmaj hollow upon this plain , so many hollow factions . 
▁ xxmaj when that the general is not like the hive , 
▁ xxmaj to whom the foragers shall all repair , 
▁ xxmaj what honey is expected ? xxmaj degree being vizarded , 
▁ xxmaj th ' unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask . 
▁ xxmaj the heavens themselves , the planets , and this centre , 
▁ xxmaj observe degree , priority , and place , 
▁ xxmaj insisture , course , proportion , season , form , 
▁ xxmaj office , and custom , in all line of order ; 
▁ xxmaj and therefore is the glorious planet xxmaj sol 
▁ xxmaj in noble eminence enthron'd and spher'd 
▁ xxmaj amidst the other , whose med'cinable eye 
▁ xxmaj corrects the ill aspects of planets evil , 
▁ xxmaj and posts , like the commandment of a king , 
▁ xxmaj sans check , to good and bad . xxmaj but when the planets 
▁ xxmaj in evil mixture to disorder wander , 
▁ xxmaj what plagues and what portents , what mutiny , 
▁ xxmaj what raging of the sea , shaking of earth , 
▁ xxmaj commotion in the winds ! xxmaj frights , changes , horrors , 
▁ xxmaj divert and crack , rend and deracinate , 
▁ xxmaj the unity and married calm of states 
▁ xxmaj quite from their fixture ! xxup o , when degree is shak'd , 
▁ xxmaj which is the ladder of all high designs , 
▁ xxmaj the enterprise is sick ! xxmaj how could communities , 
▁ xxmaj degrees in schools , and brotherhoods in cities , 
▁ xxmaj peaceful commerce from dividable shores , 
▁ xxmaj the primogenity and due of birth , 
▁ xxmaj prerogative of age , crowns , sceptres , laurels , 
▁ xxmaj but by degree , stand in authentic place ? 
▁ xxmaj take but degree away , untune that string , 
▁ xxmaj and hark what discord follows ! xxmaj each thing melts 
▁ xxmaj in mere oppugnancy : the bounded waters 
▁ xxmaj should lift their bosoms higher than the shores , 
▁ xxmaj and make a sop of all this solid globe ; 
▁ xxmaj strength should be lord of imbecility , 
▁ xxmaj and the rude son should strike his father dead ; 
▁ xxmaj force should be right ; or , rather , right and wrong- 
▁ xxmaj between whose endless jar justice resides- 
▁ xxmaj should lose their names , and so should justice too . 
▁ xxmaj then everything includes itself in power , 
▁ xxmaj power into will , will into appetite ; 
▁ xxmaj and appetite , an universal wolf , 
▁ xxmaj so doubly seconded with will and power , 
▁ xxmaj must make perforce an universal prey , 
▁ xxmaj and last eat up himself . xxmaj great xxmaj agamemnon , 
▁ xxmaj this chaos , when degree is suffocate , 
▁ xxmaj follows the choking . 
▁ xxmaj and this neglection of degree it is 
▁ xxmaj that by a pace goes backward , with a purpose 
▁ xxmaj it hath to climb . xxmaj the general 's disdain'd 
▁ xxmaj by him one step below , he by the next , 
▁ xxmaj that next by him beneath ; so ever step , 
▁ xxmaj exampl'd by the first pace that is sick 
▁ xxmaj of his superior , grows to an envious fever 
▁ xxmaj of pale and bloodless emulation . 
▁ xxmaj and ' tis this fever that keeps xxmaj troy on foot , 
▁ xxmaj not her own sinews . xxmaj to end a tale of length , 
▁ xxmaj troy in our weakness stands , not in her strength . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj most wisely hath xxmaj ulysses here discover'd 
▁ xxmaj the fever whereof all our power is sick . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj the nature of the sickness found , xxmaj ulysses , 
▁ xxmaj what is the remedy ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj the great xxmaj achilles , whom opinion crowns 
▁ xxmaj the sinew and the forehand of our host , 
▁ xxmaj having his ear full of his airy fame , 
▁ xxmaj grows dainty of his worth , and in his tent 
▁ xxmaj lies mocking our designs ; with him xxmaj patroclus 
▁ xxmaj upon a lazy bed the livelong day 
▁ xxmaj breaks scurril jests ; 
▁ xxmaj and with ridiculous and awkward action- 
▁ xxmaj which , slanderer , he imitation calls- 
▁ xxmaj he pageants us . xxmaj sometime , great xxmaj agamemnon , 
▁ xxmaj thy topless deputation he puts on ; 
▁ xxmaj and like a strutting player whose conceit 
▁ xxmaj lies in his hamstring , and doth think it rich 
▁ xxmaj to hear the wooden dialogue and sound 
▁ ' twixt his stretch'd footing and the scaffoldage- 
▁ xxmaj such to - be - pitied and o'er - wrested seeming 
▁ xxmaj he acts thy greatness in ; and when he speaks 
▁ ' tis like a chime a - mending ; with terms unsquar'd , 
▁ xxmaj which , from the tongue of roaring xxmaj typhon dropp'd , 
▁ xxmaj would seem hyperboles . xxmaj at this fusty stuff 
▁ xxmaj the large xxmaj achilles , on his press'd bed lolling , 
▁ xxmaj from his deep chest laughs out a loud applause ; 
▁ xxmaj cries ' excellent ! ' tis xxmaj agamemnon just . 
▁ xxmaj now play me xxmaj nestor ; hem , and stroke thy beard , 
▁ xxmaj as he being drest to some oration . ' 
▁ xxmaj that 's done - as near as the extremest ends 
▁ xxmaj of parallels , as like xxmaj vulcan and his wife ; 
▁ xxmaj yet god xxmaj achilles still cries ' excellent ! 
▁ ' tis xxmaj nestor right . xxmaj now play him me , xxmaj patroclus , 
▁ xxmaj arming to answer in a night alarm . ' 
▁ xxmaj and then , forsooth , the faint defects of age 
▁ xxmaj must be the scene of mirth : to cough and spit 
▁ xxmaj and , with a palsy - fumbling on his gorget , 
▁ xxmaj shake in and out the rivet . xxmaj and at this sport 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj valour dies ; cries ' o , enough , xxmaj patroclus ; 
▁ xxmaj or give me ribs of steel ! i shall split all 
▁ xxmaj in pleasure of my spleen . ' xxmaj and in this fashion 
▁ xxmaj all our abilities , gifts , natures , shapes , 
▁ xxmaj severals and generals of grace exact , 
▁ xxmaj achievements , plots , orders , preventions , 
▁ xxmaj excitements to the field or speech for truce , 
▁ xxmaj success or loss , what is or is not , serves 
▁ xxmaj as stuff for these two to make paradoxes . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj and in the imitation of these twain- 
▁ xxmaj who , as xxmaj ulysses says , opinion crowns 
▁ xxmaj with an imperial voice - many are infect . 
▁ xxmaj ajax is grown self - will'd and bears his head 
▁ xxmaj in such a rein , in full as proud a place 
▁ xxmaj as broad xxmaj achilles ; keeps his tent like him ; 
▁ xxmaj makes factious feasts ; rails on our state of war 
▁ xxmaj bold as an oracle , and sets xxmaj thersites , 
▁ a slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint , 
▁ xxmaj to match us in comparisons with dirt , 
▁ xxmaj to weaken and discredit our exposure , 
▁ xxmaj how rank soever rounded in with danger . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj they tax our policy and call it cowardice , 
▁ xxmaj count wisdom as no member of the war , 
▁ xxmaj forestall prescience , and esteem no act 
▁ xxmaj but that of hand . xxmaj the still and mental parts 
▁ xxmaj that do contrive how many hands shall strike 
▁ xxmaj when fitness calls them on , and know , by measure 
▁ xxmaj of their observant toil , the enemies ' weight- 
▁ xxmaj why , this hath not a finger 's dignity : 
▁ xxmaj they call this bed - work , mapp'ry , closet - war ; 
▁ xxmaj so that the ram that batters down the wall , 
▁ xxmaj for the great swinge and rudeness of his poise , 
▁ xxmaj they place before his hand that made the engine , 
▁ xxmaj or those that with the fineness of their souls 
▁ xxmaj by reason guide his execution . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj let this be granted , and xxmaj achilles ' horse 
▁ xxmaj makes many xxmaj thetis ' sons . [ tucket ] 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what trumpet ? xxmaj look , xxmaj menelaus . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj from xxmaj troy . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup aeneas 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what would you fore our tent ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj is this great xxmaj agamemnon 's tent , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj even this . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj may one that is a herald and a prince 
▁ xxmaj do a fair message to his kingly eyes ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj with surety stronger than xxmaj achilles ' an 
▁ xxmaj fore all the xxmaj greekish heads , which with one voice 
▁ xxmaj call xxmaj agamemnon head and general . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj fair leave and large security . xxmaj how may 
▁ a stranger to those most imperial looks 
▁ xxmaj know them from eyes of other mortals ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj how ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj ay ; 
▁ i ask , that i might waken reverence , 
▁ xxmaj and bid the cheek be ready with a blush 
▁ xxmaj modest as xxmaj morning when she coldly eyes 
▁ xxmaj the youthful xxmaj phoebus . 
▁ xxmaj which is that god in office , guiding men ? 
▁ xxmaj which is the high and mighty xxmaj agamemnon ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj this xxmaj troyan scorns us , or the men of xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj are ceremonious courtiers . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj courtiers as free , as debonair , unarm'd , 
▁ xxmaj as bending angels ; that 's their fame in peace . 
▁ xxmaj but when they would seem soldiers , they have galls , 
▁ xxmaj good arms , strong joints , true swords ; and , xxmaj jove 's accord , 
▁ xxmaj nothing so full of heart . xxmaj but peace , xxmaj aeneas , 
▁ xxmaj peace , xxmaj troyan ; lay thy finger on thy lips . 
▁ xxmaj the worthiness of praise distains his worth , 
▁ xxmaj if that the prais'd himself bring the praise forth ; 
▁ xxmaj but what the repining enemy commends , 
▁ xxmaj that breath fame blows ; that praise , sole pure , transcends . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj sir , you of xxmaj troy , call you yourself xxmaj aeneas ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj ay , xxmaj greek , that is my name . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what 's your affair , i pray you ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj sir , pardon ; ' tis for xxmaj agamemnon 's ears . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj he hears nought privately that comes from xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj nor i from xxmaj troy come not to whisper with him ; 
▁ i bring a trumpet to awake his ear , 
▁ xxmaj to set his sense on the attentive bent , 
▁ xxmaj and then to speak . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj speak frankly as the wind ; 
▁ xxmaj it is not xxmaj agamemnon 's sleeping hour . 
▁ xxmaj that thou shalt know , xxmaj troyan , he is awake , 
▁ xxmaj he tells thee so himself . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj trumpet , blow loud , 
▁ xxmaj send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents ; 
▁ xxmaj and every xxmaj greek of mettle , let him know 
▁ xxmaj what xxmaj troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud . 
▁ [ sound trumpet ] 
▁ xxmaj we have , great xxmaj agamemnon , here in xxmaj troy 
▁ a prince called hector - priam is his father- 
▁ xxmaj who in this dull and long - continued truce 
▁ xxmaj is resty grown ; he bade me take a trumpet 
▁ xxmaj and to this purpose speak : xxmaj kings , princes , lords ! 
▁ xxmaj if there be one among the fair'st of xxmaj greece 
▁ xxmaj that holds his honour higher than his ease , 
▁ xxmaj that seeks his praise more than he fears his peril , 
▁ xxmaj that knows his valour and knows not his fear , 
▁ xxmaj that loves his mistress more than in confession 
▁ xxmaj with truant vows to her own lips he loves , 
▁ xxmaj and dare avow her beauty and her worth 
▁ xxmaj in other arms than hers - to him this challenge . 
▁ xxmaj hector , in view of xxmaj troyans and of xxmaj greeks , 
▁ xxmaj shall make it good or do his best to do it : 
▁ xxmaj he hath a lady wiser , fairer , truer , 
▁ xxmaj than ever xxmaj greek did couple in his arms ; 
▁ xxmaj and will to - morrow with his trumpet call 
▁ xxmaj mid - way between your tents and walls of xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj to rouse a xxmaj grecian that is true in love . 
▁ xxmaj if any come , xxmaj hector shall honour him ; 
▁ xxmaj if none , he 'll say in xxmaj troy , when he retires , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth 
▁ xxmaj the splinter of a lance . xxmaj even so much . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj this shall be told our lovers , xxmaj lord xxmaj aeneas . 
▁ xxmaj if none of them have soul in such a kind , 
▁ xxmaj we left them all at home . xxmaj but we are soldiers ; 
▁ xxmaj and may that soldier a mere recreant prove 
▁ xxmaj that means not , hath not , or is not in love . 
▁ xxmaj if then one is , or hath , or means to be , 
▁ xxmaj that one meets xxmaj hector ; if none else , i am he . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj tell him of xxmaj nestor , one that was a man 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj hector 's grandsire suck'd . xxmaj he is old now ; 
▁ xxmaj but if there be not in our xxmaj grecian mould 
▁ xxmaj one noble man that hath one spark of fire 
▁ xxmaj to answer for his love , tell him from me 
▁ xxmaj i 'll hide my silver beard in a gold beaver , 
▁ xxmaj and in my vantbrace put this wither'd brawn , 
▁ xxmaj and , meeting him , will tell him that my lady 
▁ xxmaj was fairer than his grandame , and as chaste 
▁ xxmaj as may be in the world . xxmaj his youth in flood , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll prove this truth with my three drops of blood . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj now heavens forfend such scarcity of youth ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj fair xxmaj lord xxmaj aeneas , let me touch your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj to our pavilion shall i lead you , first . 
▁ xxmaj achilles shall have word of this intent ; 
▁ xxmaj so shall each lord of xxmaj greece , from tent to tent . 
▁ xxmaj yourself shall feast with us before you go , 
▁ xxmaj and find the welcome of a noble foe . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup ulysses and xxup nestor 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj nestor ! 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj what says xxmaj ulysses ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . i have a young conception in my brain ; 
▁ xxmaj be you my time to bring it to some shape . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj what is't ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj this ' tis : 
▁ xxmaj blunt wedges rive hard knots . xxmaj the seeded pride 
▁ xxmaj that hath to this maturity blown up 
▁ xxmaj in rank xxmaj achilles must or now be cropp'd 
▁ xxmaj or , shedding , breed a nursery of like evil 
▁ xxmaj to overbulk us all . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj well , and how ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj this challenge that the gallant xxmaj hector sends , 
▁ xxmaj however it is spread in general name , 
▁ xxmaj relates in purpose only to xxmaj achilles . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj true . xxmaj the purpose is perspicuous even as substance 
▁ xxmaj whose grossness little characters sum up ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in the publication , make no strain 
▁ xxmaj but that xxmaj achilles , were his brain as barren 
▁ xxmaj as banks of xxmaj libya - though , xxmaj apollo knows , 
▁ ' tis dry enough - will with great speed of judgment , 
▁ xxmaj ay , with celerity , find xxmaj hector 's purpose 
▁ xxmaj pointing on him . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj and wake him to the answer , think you ? 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj why , ' tis most meet . xxmaj who may you else oppose 
▁ xxmaj that can from xxmaj hector bring those honours off , 
▁ xxmaj if not xxmaj achilles ? xxmaj though ' t be a sportful combat , 
▁ xxmaj yet in this trial much opinion dwells ; 
▁ xxmaj for here the xxmaj troyans taste our dear'st repute 
▁ xxmaj with their fin'st palate ; and trust to me , xxmaj ulysses , 
▁ xxmaj our imputation shall be oddly pois'd 
▁ xxmaj in this vile action ; for the success , 
▁ xxmaj although particular , shall give a scantling 
▁ xxmaj of good or bad unto the general ; 
▁ xxmaj and in such indexes , although small pricks 
▁ xxmaj to their subsequent volumes , there is seen 
▁ xxmaj the baby figure of the giant mas 
▁ xxmaj of things to come at large . xxmaj it is suppos'd 
▁ xxmaj he that meets xxmaj hector issues from our choice ; 
▁ xxmaj and choice , being mutual act of all our souls , 
▁ xxmaj makes merit her election , and doth boil , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere from forth us all , a man distill'd 
▁ xxmaj out of our virtues ; who miscarrying , 
▁ xxmaj what heart receives from hence a conquering part , 
▁ xxmaj to steel a strong opinion to themselves ? 
▁ xxmaj which entertain'd , limbs are his instruments , 
▁ xxmaj in no less working than are swords and bows 
▁ xxmaj directive by the limbs . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj give pardon to my speech . 
▁ xxmaj therefore ' tis meet xxmaj achilles meet not xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxmaj let us , like merchants , show our foulest wares 
▁ xxmaj and think perchance they 'll sell ; if not , the lustre 
▁ xxmaj of the better yet to show shall show the better , 
▁ xxmaj by showing the worst first . xxmaj do not consent 
▁ xxmaj that ever xxmaj hector and xxmaj achilles meet ; 
▁ xxmaj for both our honour and our shame in this 
▁ xxmaj are dogg'd with two strange followers . 
▁ xxup nestor . i see them not with my old eyes . xxmaj what are they ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj what glory our xxmaj achilles shares from xxmaj hector , 
▁ xxmaj were he not proud , we all should wear with him ; 
▁ xxmaj but he already is too insolent ; 
▁ xxmaj and it were better parch in xxmaj afric sun 
▁ xxmaj than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes , 
▁ xxmaj should he scape xxmaj hector fair . xxmaj if he were foil'd , 
▁ xxmaj why , then we do our main opinion crush 
▁ xxmaj in taint of our best man . xxmaj no , make a lott'ry ; 
▁ xxmaj and , by device , let blockish xxmaj ajax draw 
▁ xxmaj the sort to fight with xxmaj hector . xxmaj among ourselves 
▁ xxmaj give him allowance for the better man ; 
▁ xxmaj for that will physic the great xxmaj myrmidon , 
▁ xxmaj who broils in loud applause , and make him fall 
▁ xxmaj his crest , that prouder than blue xxmaj iris bends . 
▁ xxmaj if the dull brainless xxmaj ajax come safe off , 
▁ xxmaj we 'll dress him up in voices ; if he fail , 
▁ xxmaj yet go we under our opinion still 
▁ xxmaj that we have better men . xxmaj but , hit or miss , 
▁ xxmaj our project 's life this shape of sense assumes- 
▁ xxmaj ajax employ'd plucks down xxmaj achilles ' plumes . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj now , xxmaj ulysses , i begin to relish thy advice ; 
▁ xxmaj and i will give a taste thereof forthwith 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj agamemnon . xxmaj go we to him straight . 
▁ xxmaj two curs shall tame each other : pride alone 
▁ xxmaj must tarre the mastiffs on , as ' twere their bone . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is