xxbos xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj grecian camp 

 xxmaj enter xxmaj ajax and xxup thersites 

▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj thersites ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj agamemnon - how if he had boils full , an over , generally ? 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj thersites ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj and those boils did run - say so . xxmaj did not the general run 
▁ then ? xxmaj were not that a botchy core ? 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj dog ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj then there would come some matter from him ; 
▁ i see none now . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj thou bitch - wolf 's son , canst thou not hear ? xxmaj feel , then . 
▁ [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj the plague of xxmaj greece upon thee , thou mongrel beef - witted 
▁ lord ! 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj speak , then , thou whinid'st leaven , speak . i will beat thee 
▁ into handsomeness . 
▁ xxup thersites . i shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness ; but i 
▁ think thy horse will sooner con an oration than thou learn a 
▁ prayer without book . xxmaj thou canst strike , canst thou ? a red murrain 
▁ o ' thy jade 's tricks ! 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj toadstool , learn me the proclamation . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj dost thou think i have no sense , thou strikest me thus ? 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj the proclamation ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj thou art proclaim'd , a fool , i think . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj do not , porpentine , do not ; my fingers itch . 
▁ xxup thersites . i would thou didst itch from head to foot and i had the 
▁ scratching of thee ; i would make thee the loathsomest scab in 
▁ xxmaj greece . xxmaj when thou art forth in the incursions , thou strikest as 
▁ slow as another . 
▁ xxup ajax . i say , the proclamation . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj thou grumblest and railest every hour on xxmaj achilles ; and 
▁ thou art as full of envy at his greatness as xxmaj cerberus is at 
▁ xxmaj proserpina 's beauty - ay , that thou bark'st at him . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj mistress xxmaj thersites ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj thou shouldst strike him . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj cobloaf ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj he would pun thee into shivers with his fist , as a 
▁ sailor breaks a biscuit . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj you whoreson cur ! [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj do , do . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj thou stool for a witch ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj ay , do , do ; thou sodden - witted lord ! xxmaj thou hast no more 
▁ brain than i have in mine elbows ; an assinico may tutor thee . xxmaj you 
▁ scurvy valiant ass ! xxmaj thou art here but to thrash xxmaj troyans , and thou 
▁ art bought and sold among those of any wit like a barbarian 
▁ slave . xxmaj if thou use to beat me , i will begin at thy heel and tell 
▁ what thou art by inches , thou thing of no bowels , thou ! 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj you dog ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj you scurvy lord ! 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj you cur ! [ strikes him ] 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj mars his idiot ! xxmaj do , rudeness ; do , camel ; do , do . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup achilles and xxup patroclus 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj why , how now , xxmaj ajax ! xxmaj wherefore do you thus ? 
▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj thersites ! xxmaj what 's the matter , man ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj you see him there , do you ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj ay ; what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj nay , look upon him . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj so i do . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj nay , but regard him well . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj well ! why , so i do . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj but yet you look not well upon him ; for who some ever 
▁ you take him to be , he is xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup achilles . i know that , fool . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj ay , but that fool knows not himself . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj therefore i beat thee . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj lo , lo , lo , lo , what modicums of wit he utters ! xxmaj his 
▁ evasions have ears thus long . i have bobb'd his brain more than 
▁ he has beat my bones . i will buy nine sparrows for a penny , and 
▁ his pia mater is not worth the ninth part of a sparrow . xxmaj this 
▁ lord , xxmaj achilles , xxmaj ajax - who wears his wit in his belly and his guts 
▁ in his head - i'll tell you what i say of him . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup thersites . i say this xxmaj ajax- [ ajax offers to strike him ] 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj nay , good xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj has not so much wit- 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj nay , i must hold you . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj as will stop the eye of xxmaj helen 's needle , for whom he 
▁ comes to fight . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj peace , fool . 
▁ xxup thersites . i would have peace and quietness , but the fool will not- 
▁ he there ; that he ; look you there . 
▁ xxup ajax . o thou damned cur ! i shall- 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj will you set your wit to a fool 's ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj no , i warrant you , the fool 's will shame it . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj good words , xxmaj thersites . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what 's the quarrel ? 
▁ xxup ajax . i bade the vile owl go learn me the tenour of the 
▁ proclamation , and he rails upon me . 
▁ xxup thersites . i serve thee not . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj well , go to , go to . 
▁ xxup thersites . i serve here voluntary . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj your last service was suff'rance ; ' twas not voluntary . xxmaj no 
▁ man is beaten voluntary . xxmaj ajax was here the voluntary , and you as 
▁ under an impress . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj e'en so ; a great deal of your wit too lies in your 
▁ sinews , or else there be liars . xxmaj hector shall have a great catch 
▁ an he knock out either of your brains : ' a were as good crack a 
▁ fusty nut with no kernel . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what , with me too , xxmaj thersites ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj there 's xxmaj ulysses and old xxmaj nestor - whose wit was mouldy ere 
▁ your grandsires had nails on their toes - yoke you like draught 
▁ oxen , and make you plough up the wars . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what , what ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj yes , good sooth . xxmaj to xxmaj achilles , to xxmaj ajax , to- 
▁ xxup ajax . i shall cut out your tongue . 
▁ xxup thersites . ' tis no matter ; i shall speak as much as thou 
▁ afterwards . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj no more words , xxmaj thersites ; peace ! 
▁ xxup thersites . i will hold my peace when xxmaj achilles ' brach bids me , shall 
▁ xxup i ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj there 's for you , xxmaj patroclus . 
▁ xxup thersites . i will see you hang'd like clotpoles ere i come any more 
▁ to your tents . i will keep where there is wit stirring , and leave 
▁ the faction of fools . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup patroclus . a good riddance . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj marry , this , sir , is proclaim'd through all our host , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj hector , by the fifth hour of the sun , 
▁ xxmaj will with a trumpet ' twixt our tents and xxmaj troy , 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow morning , call some knight to arms 
▁ xxmaj that hath a stomach ; and such a one that dare 
▁ xxmaj maintain i know not what ; ' tis trash . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj who shall answer him ? 
▁ xxup achilles . i know not ; ' tis put to lott'ry . xxmaj otherwise . xxmaj he knew his 
▁ man . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxup o , meaning you ! i will go learn more of it . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxup priam 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup priam , xxup hector , xxup troilus , xxup paris , and xxup helenus 

▁ xxup priam . xxmaj after so many hours , lives , speeches , spent , 
▁ xxmaj thus once again says xxmaj nestor from the xxmaj greeks : 
▁ ' deliver xxmaj helen , and all damage else- 
▁ xxmaj as honour , loss of time , travail , expense , 
▁ xxmaj wounds , friends , and what else dear that is consum'd 
▁ xxmaj in hot digestion of this cormorant war- 
▁ xxmaj shall be struck off . ' xxmaj hector , what say you to't ? 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj though no man lesser fears the xxmaj greeks than xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj as far as toucheth my particular , 
▁ xxmaj yet , dread xxmaj priam , 
▁ xxmaj there is no lady of more softer bowels , 
▁ xxmaj more spongy to suck in the sense of fear , 
▁ xxmaj more ready to cry out ' who knows what follows ? ' 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj hector is . xxmaj the wound of peace is surety , 
▁ xxmaj surety secure ; but modest doubt is call'd 
▁ xxmaj the beacon of the wise , the tent that searches 
▁ xxmaj to th ' bottom of the worst . xxmaj let xxmaj helen go . 
▁ xxmaj since the first sword was drawn about this question , 
▁ xxmaj every tithe soul ' mongst many thousand dismes 
▁ xxmaj hath been as dear as helen - i mean , of ours . 
▁ xxmaj if we have lost so many tenths of ours 
▁ xxmaj to guard a thing not ours , nor worth to us , 
▁ xxmaj had it our name , the value of one ten , 
▁ xxmaj what merit 's in that reason which denies 
▁ xxmaj the yielding of her up ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj fie , fie , my brother ! 
▁ xxmaj weigh you the worth and honour of a king , 
▁ xxmaj so great as our dread father 's , in a scale 
▁ xxmaj of common ounces ? xxmaj will you with counters sum 
▁ xxmaj the past - proportion of his infinite , 
▁ xxmaj and buckle in a waist most fathomless 
▁ xxmaj with spans and inches so diminutive 
▁ xxmaj as fears and reasons ? xxmaj fie , for godly shame ! 
▁ xxup helenus . xxmaj no marvel though you bite so sharp at reasons , 
▁ xxmaj you are so empty of them . xxmaj should not our father 
▁ xxmaj bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons , 
▁ xxmaj because your speech hath none that tells him so ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj you are for dreams and slumbers , brother priest ; 
▁ xxmaj you fur your gloves with reason . xxmaj here are your reasons : 
▁ xxmaj you know an enemy intends you harm ; 
▁ xxmaj you know a sword employ'd is perilous , 
▁ xxmaj and reason flies the object of all harm . 
▁ xxmaj who marvels , then , when xxmaj helenus beholds 
▁ a xxmaj grecian and his sword , if he do set 
▁ xxmaj the very wings of reason to his heels 
▁ xxmaj and fly like chidden xxmaj mercury from xxmaj jove , 
▁ xxmaj or like a star disorb'd ? xxmaj nay , if we talk of reason , 
▁ xxmaj let 's shut our gates and sleep . xxmaj manhood and honour 
▁ xxmaj should have hare hearts , would they but fat their thoughts 
▁ xxmaj with this cramm'd reason . xxmaj reason and respect 
▁ xxmaj make livers pale and lustihood deject . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj brother , she is not worth what she doth , cost 
▁ xxmaj the keeping . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj what 's aught but as ' tis valued ? 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj but value dwells not in particular will : 
▁ xxmaj it holds his estimate and dignity 
▁ xxmaj as well wherein ' tis precious of itself 
▁ xxmaj as in the prizer . ' tis mad idolatry 
▁ xxmaj to make the service greater than the god - i 
▁ xxmaj and the will dotes that is attributive 
▁ xxmaj to what infectiously itself affects , 
▁ xxmaj without some image of th ' affected merit . 
▁ xxup troilus . i take to - day a wife , and my election 
▁ xxmaj is led on in the conduct of my will ; 
▁ xxmaj my will enkindled by mine eyes and ears , 
▁ xxmaj two traded pilots ' twixt the dangerous shores 
▁ xxmaj of will and judgment : how may i avoid , 
▁ xxmaj although my will distaste what it elected , 
▁ xxmaj the wife i chose ? xxmaj there can be no evasion 
▁ xxmaj to blench from this and to stand firm by honour . 
▁ xxmaj we turn not back the silks upon the merchant 
▁ xxmaj when we have soil'd them ; nor the remainder viands 
▁ xxmaj we do not throw in unrespective sieve , 
▁ xxmaj because we now are full . xxmaj it was thought meet 
▁ xxmaj paris should do some vengeance on the xxmaj greeks ; 
▁ xxmaj your breath with full consent benied his sails ; 
▁ xxmaj the seas and winds , old wranglers , took a truce , 
▁ xxmaj and did him service . xxmaj he touch'd the ports desir'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and for an old aunt whom the xxmaj greeks held captive 
▁ xxmaj he brought a xxmaj grecian queen , whose youth and freshness 
▁ xxmaj wrinkles xxmaj apollo 's , and makes stale the morning . 
▁ xxmaj why keep we her ? xxmaj the xxmaj grecians keep our aunt . 
▁ xxmaj is she worth keeping ? xxmaj why , she is a pearl 
▁ xxmaj whose price hath launch'd above a thousand ships , 
▁ xxmaj and turn'd crown'd kings to merchants . 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll avouch ' twas wisdom xxmaj paris went- 
▁ xxmaj as you must needs , for you all cried ' go , go'- 
▁ xxmaj if you 'll confess he brought home worthy prize- 
▁ xxmaj as you must needs , for you all clapp'd your hands , 
▁ xxmaj and cried ' inestimable ! ' -why do you now 
▁ xxmaj the issue of your proper wisdoms rate , 
▁ xxmaj and do a deed that never fortune did- 
▁ xxmaj beggar the estimation which you priz'd 
▁ xxmaj richer than sea and land ? o theft most base , 
▁ xxmaj that we have stol'n what we do fear to keep ! 
▁ xxmaj but thieves unworthy of a thing so stol'n 
▁ xxmaj that in their country did them that disgrace 
▁ xxmaj we fear to warrant in our native place ! 
▁ xxup cassandra . [ within ] xxmaj cry , xxmaj troyans , cry . 
▁ xxup priam . xxmaj what noise , what shriek is this ? 
▁ xxup troilus . ' tis our mad sister ; i do know her voice . 
▁ xxup cassandra . [ within ] xxmaj cry , xxmaj troyans . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj it is xxmaj cassandra . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cassandra , raving 

▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj cry , xxmaj troyans , cry . xxmaj lend me ten thousand eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and i will fill them with prophetic tears . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj peace , sister , peace . 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj virgins and boys , mid - age and wrinkled eld , 
▁ xxmaj soft infancy , that nothing canst but cry , 
▁ xxmaj add to my clamours . xxmaj let us pay betimes 
▁ a moiety of that mass of moan to come . 
▁ xxmaj cry , xxmaj troyans , cry . xxmaj practise your eyes with tears . 
▁ xxmaj troy must not be , nor goodly xxmaj ilion stand ; 
▁ xxmaj our firebrand brother , xxmaj paris , burns us all . 
▁ xxmaj cry , xxmaj troyans , cry , a xxmaj helen and a woe ! 
▁ xxmaj cry , cry . xxmaj troy burns , or else let xxmaj helen go . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj now , youthful xxmaj troilus , do not these high strains 
▁ xxmaj of divination in our sister work 
▁ xxmaj some touches of remorse , or is your blood 
▁ xxmaj so madly hot that no discourse of reason , 
▁ xxmaj nor fear of bad success in a bad cause , 
▁ xxmaj can qualify the same ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj why , brother xxmaj hector , 
▁ xxmaj we may not think the justness of each act 
▁ xxmaj such and no other than event doth form it ; 
▁ xxmaj nor once deject the courage of our minds 
▁ xxmaj because xxmaj cassandra 's mad . xxmaj her brain - sick raptures 
▁ xxmaj can not distaste the goodness of a quarrel 
▁ xxmaj which hath our several honours all engag'd 
▁ xxmaj to make it gracious . xxmaj for my private part , 
▁ i am no more touch'd than all xxmaj priam 's sons ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj jove forbid there should be done amongst us 
▁ xxmaj such things as might offend the weakest spleen 
▁ xxmaj to fight for and maintain . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj else might the world convince of levity 
▁ xxmaj as well my undertakings as your counsels ; 
▁ xxmaj but i attest the gods , your full consent 
▁ xxmaj gave wings to my propension , and cut of 
▁ xxmaj all fears attending on so dire a project . 
▁ xxmaj for what , alas , can these my single arms ? 
▁ xxmaj what propugnation is in one man 's valour 
▁ xxmaj to stand the push and enmity of those 
▁ xxmaj this quarrel would excite ? xxmaj yet , i protest , 
▁ xxmaj were i alone to pass the difficulties , 
▁ xxmaj and had as ample power as i have will , 
▁ xxmaj paris should ne'er retract what he hath done 
▁ xxmaj nor faint in the pursuit . 
▁ xxup priam . xxmaj paris , you speak 
▁ xxmaj like one besotted on your sweet delights . 
▁ xxmaj you have the honey still , but these the gall ; 
▁ xxmaj so to be valiant is no praise at all . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj sir , i propose not merely to myself 
▁ xxmaj the pleasures such a beauty brings with it ; 
▁ xxmaj but i would have the soil of her fair rape 
▁ xxmaj wip'd off in honourable keeping her . 
▁ xxmaj what treason were it to the ransack'd queen , 
▁ xxmaj disgrace to your great worths , and shame to me , 
▁ xxmaj now to deliver her possession up 
▁ xxmaj on terms of base compulsion ! xxmaj can it be 
▁ xxmaj that so degenerate a strain as this 
▁ xxmaj should once set footing in your generous bosoms ? 
▁ xxmaj there 's not the meanest spirit on our party 
▁ xxmaj without a heart to dare or sword to draw 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj helen is defended ; nor none so noble 
▁ xxmaj whose life were ill bestow'd or death unfam'd 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj helen is the subject . xxmaj then , i say , 
▁ xxmaj well may we fight for her whom we know well 
▁ xxmaj the world 's large spaces can not parallel . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj paris and xxmaj troilus , you have both said well ; 
▁ xxmaj and on the cause and question now in hand 
▁ xxmaj have gloz'd , but superficially ; not much 
▁ xxmaj unlike young men , whom xxmaj aristode thought 
▁ xxmaj unfit to hear moral philosophy . 
▁ xxmaj the reasons you allege do more conduce 
▁ xxmaj to the hot passion of distemp'red blood 
▁ xxmaj than to make up a free determination 
▁ ' twixt right and wrong ; for pleasure and revenge 
▁ xxmaj have ears more deaf than adders to the voice 
▁ xxmaj of any true decision . xxmaj nature craves 
▁ xxmaj all dues be rend'red to their owners . xxmaj now , 
▁ xxmaj what nearer debt in all humanity 
▁ xxmaj than wife is to the husband ? xxmaj if this law 
▁ xxmaj of nature be corrupted through affection ; 
▁ xxmaj and that great minds , of partial indulgence 
▁ xxmaj to their benumbed wills , resist the same ; 
▁ xxmaj there is a law in each well - order'd nation 
▁ xxmaj to curb those raging appetites that are 
▁ xxmaj most disobedient and refractory . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj helen , then , be wife to xxmaj sparta 's king- 
▁ xxmaj as it is known she is - these moral laws 
▁ xxmaj of nature and of nations speak aloud 
▁ xxmaj to have her back return'd . xxmaj thus to persist 
▁ xxmaj in doing wrong extenuates not wrong , 
▁ xxmaj but makes it much more heavy . xxmaj hector 's opinion 
▁ xxmaj is this , in way of truth . xxmaj yet , ne'er the less , 
▁ xxmaj my spritely brethren , i propend to you 
▁ xxmaj in resolution to keep xxmaj helen still ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis a cause that hath no mean dependence 
▁ xxmaj upon our joint and several dignities . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj why , there you touch'd the life of our design . 
▁ xxmaj were it not glory that we more affected 
▁ xxmaj than the performance of our heaving spleens , 
▁ i would not wish a drop of xxmaj troyan blood 
▁ xxmaj spent more in her defence . xxmaj but , worthy xxmaj hector , 
▁ xxmaj she is a theme of honour and renown , 
▁ a spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds , 
▁ xxmaj whose present courage may beat down our foes , 
▁ xxmaj and fame in time to come canonize us ; 
▁ xxmaj for i presume brave xxmaj hector would not lose 
▁ xxmaj so rich advantage of a promis'd glory 
▁ xxmaj as smiles upon the forehead of this action 
▁ xxmaj for the wide world 's revenue . 
▁ xxup hector . i am yours , 
▁ xxmaj you valiant offspring of great xxmaj priamus . 
▁ i have a roisting challenge sent amongst 
▁ xxmaj the dull and factious nobles of the xxmaj greeks 
▁ xxmaj will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits . 
▁ i was advertis'd their great general slept , 
▁ xxmaj whilst emulation in the army crept . 
▁ xxmaj this , i presume , will wake him . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj grecian camp . xxmaj before the tent of xxup achilles 

 xxmaj enter xxup thersites , solus 

▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj how now , xxmaj thersites ! xxmaj what , lost in the labyrinth of thy 
▁ fury ? xxmaj shall the elephant xxmaj ajax carry it thus ? xxmaj he beats me , and i 
▁ rail at him . o worthy satisfaction ! xxmaj would it were otherwise : that 
▁ i could beat him , whilst he rail'd at me ! ' sfoot , xxmaj i 'll learn to 
▁ conjure and raise devils , but xxmaj i 'll see some issue of my spiteful 
▁ execrations . xxmaj then there 's xxmaj achilles , a rare engineer ! xxmaj if xxmaj troy be 
▁ not taken till these two undermine it , the walls will stand till 
▁ they fall of themselves . o thou great thunder - darter of xxmaj olympus , 
▁ forget that thou art xxmaj jove , the king of gods , and , xxmaj mercury , lose 
▁ all the serpentine craft of thy caduceus , if ye take not that 
▁ little little less - than - little wit from them that they have ! 
▁ which short - arm'd ignorance itself knows is so abundant scarce , 
▁ it will not in circumvention deliver a fly from a spider without 
▁ drawing their massy irons and cutting the web . xxmaj after this , the 
▁ vengeance on the whole camp ! or , rather , the xxmaj neapolitan 
▁ bone - ache ! for that , methinks , is the curse depending on those 
▁ that war for a placket . i have said my prayers ; and devil xxmaj envy 
▁ say ' amen . ' xxmaj what ho ! my xxmaj lord xxmaj achilles ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup patroclus 

▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj thersites ! xxmaj good xxmaj thersites , come in and 
▁ rail . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj if i could ' a rememb'red a gilt counterfeit , thou 
▁ wouldst not have slipp'd out of my contemplation ; but it is no 
▁ matter ; thyself upon thyself ! xxmaj the common curse of mankind , folly 
▁ and ignorance , be thine in great revenue ! xxmaj heaven bless thee from 
▁ a tutor , and discipline come not near thee ! xxmaj let thy blood be thy 
▁ direction till thy death . xxmaj then if she that lays thee out says 
▁ thou art a fair corse , xxmaj i 'll be sworn and sworn upon't she never 
▁ shrouded any but lazars . xxmaj amen . xxmaj where 's xxmaj achilles ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj what , art thou devout ? xxmaj wast thou in prayer ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj ay , the heavens hear me ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj amen . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup achilles 
▁
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj thersites , my lord . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj where , where ? xxup o , where ? xxmaj art thou come ? xxmaj why , my cheese , my 
▁ digestion , why hast thou not served thyself in to my table so 
▁ many meals ? xxmaj come , what 's xxmaj agamemnon ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj thy commander , xxmaj achilles . xxmaj then tell me , xxmaj patroclus , what 's 
▁ xxmaj achilles ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj thy lord , xxmaj thersites . xxmaj then tell me , i pray thee , what 's 
▁ xxmaj thersites ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj thy knower , xxmaj patroclus . xxmaj then tell me , xxmaj patroclus , what art 
▁ thou ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj thou must tell that knowest . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxup o , tell , tell , 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj i 'll decline the whole question . xxmaj agamemnon commands 
▁ xxmaj achilles ; xxmaj achilles is my lord ; i am xxmaj patroclus ' knower ; and 
▁ xxmaj patroclus is a fool . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj you rascal ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj peace , fool ! i have not done . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj he is a privileg'd man . xxmaj proceed , xxmaj thersites . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj agamemnon is a fool ; xxmaj achilles is a fool ; xxmaj thersites is a 
▁ fool ; and , as aforesaid , xxmaj patroclus is a fool . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj derive this ; come . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj agamemnon is a fool to offer to command xxmaj achilles ; 
▁ xxmaj achilles is a fool to be commanded of xxmaj agamemnon ; xxmaj thersites is a 
▁ fool to serve such a fool ; and this xxmaj patroclus is a fool positive . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj why am i a fool ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj make that demand of the xxmaj creator . xxmaj it suffices me thou 
▁ art . xxmaj look you , who comes here ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj come , xxmaj patroclus , xxmaj i 'll speak with nobody . xxmaj come in with me , 
▁ xxmaj thersites . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj here is such patchery , such juggling , and such knavery . 
▁ xxmaj all the argument is a whore and a cuckold - a good quarrel to draw 
▁ emulous factions and bleed to death upon . xxmaj now the dry serpigo on 
▁ the subject , and war and lechery confound all ! xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup agamemnon , xxup ulysses , xxup nestor , xxup diomedes , 
▁ xxup ajax , and xxup calchas 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj where is xxmaj achilles ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj within his tent ; but ill - dispos'd , my lord . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj let it be known to him that we are here . 
▁ xxmaj he shent our messengers ; and we lay by 
▁ xxmaj our appertainings , visiting of him . 
▁ xxmaj let him be told so ; lest , perchance , he think 
▁ xxmaj we dare not move the question of our place 
▁ xxmaj or know not what we are . 
▁ xxup patroclus . i shall say so to him . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj we saw him at the opening of his tent . 
▁ xxmaj he is not sick . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj yes , lion - sick , sick of proud heart . xxmaj you may call it 
▁ melancholy , if you will favour the man ; but , by my head , ' tis 
▁ pride . xxmaj but why , why ? xxmaj let him show us a cause . a word , my lord . 
▁ [ takes xxup agamemnon aside ] 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj what moves xxmaj ajax thus to bay at him ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj achilles hath inveigled his fool from him . 
▁ nestor.who , xxmaj thersites ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj he . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj then will xxmaj ajax lack matter , if he have lost his argument 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj no ; you see he is his argument that has his argument- 
▁ xxmaj achilles . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj all the better ; their fraction is more our wish than their 
▁ faction . xxmaj but it was a strong composure a fool could disunite ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj the amity that wisdom knits not , folly may easily untie . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup patroclus 

▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj patroclus . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj no xxmaj achilles with him . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj the elephant hath joints , but none for courtesy ; his legs 
▁ are legs for necessity , not for flexure . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj achilles bids me say he is much sorry 
▁ xxmaj if any thing more than your sport and pleasure 
▁ xxmaj did move your greatness and this noble state 
▁ xxmaj to call upon him ; he hopes it is no other 
▁ xxmaj but for your health and your digestion sake , 
▁ xxmaj an after - dinner 's breath . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj hear you , xxmaj patroclus . 
▁ xxmaj we are too well acquainted with these answers ; 
▁ xxmaj but his evasion , wing'd thus swift with scorn , 
▁ xxmaj can not outfly our apprehensions . 
▁ xxmaj much attribute he hath , and much the reason 
▁ xxmaj why we ascribe it to him . xxmaj yet all his virtues , 
▁ xxmaj not virtuously on his own part beheld , 
▁ xxmaj do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish , 
▁ xxmaj are like to rot untasted . xxmaj go and tell him 
▁ xxmaj we come to speak with him ; and you shall not sin 
▁ xxmaj if you do say we think him over - proud 
▁ xxmaj and under - honest , in self - assumption greater 
▁ xxmaj than in the note of judgment ; and worthier than himself 
▁ xxmaj here tend the savage strangeness he puts on , 
▁ xxmaj disguise the holy strength of their command , 
▁ xxmaj and underwrite in an observing kind 
▁ xxmaj his humorous predominance ; yea , watch 
▁ xxmaj his pettish lunes , his ebbs , his flows , as if 
▁ xxmaj the passage and whole carriage of this action 
▁ xxmaj rode on his tide . xxmaj go tell him this , and ad 
▁ xxmaj that if he overhold his price so much 
▁ xxmaj we 'll none of him , but let him , like an engine 
▁ xxmaj not portable , lie under this report : 
▁ xxmaj bring action hither ; this can not go to war . 
▁ a stirring dwarf we do allowance give 
▁ xxmaj before a sleeping giant . xxmaj tell him so . 
▁ xxup patroclus . i shall , and bring his answer presently . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj in second voice we 'll not be satisfied ; 
▁ xxmaj we come to speak with him . xxmaj ulysses , enter you . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup ulysses 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj what is he more than another ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj no more than what he thinks he is . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj is he so much ? xxmaj do you not think he thinks himself a better 
▁ man than i am ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj no question . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj will you subscribe his thought and say he is ? 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj no , noble xxmaj ajax ; you are as strong , as valiant , as wise , 
▁ no less noble , much more gentle , and altogether more tractable . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj why should a man be proud ? xxmaj how doth pride grow ? i know not 
▁ what pride is . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj your mind is the clearer , xxmaj ajax , and your virtues the 
▁ fairer . xxmaj he that is proud eats up himself . xxmaj pride is his own glass , 
▁ his own trumpet , his own chronicle ; and whatever praises itself 
▁ but in the deed devours the deed in the praise . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup ulysses 

▁ xxup ajax . i do hate a proud man as i do hate the engend'ring of toads . 
▁ xxup nestor . [ aside ] xxmaj and yet he loves himself : is't not strange ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj achilles will not to the field to - morrow . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what 's his excuse ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj he doth rely on none ; 
▁ xxmaj but carries on the stream of his dispose , 
▁ xxmaj without observance or respect of any , 
▁ xxmaj in will peculiar and in self - admission . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj why will he not , upon our fair request , 
▁ xxmaj untent his person and share the air with us ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj things small as nothing , for request 's sake only , 
▁ xxmaj he makes important ; possess'd he is with greatness , 
▁ xxmaj and speaks not to himself but with a pride 
▁ xxmaj that quarrels at self - breath . xxmaj imagin'd worth 
▁ xxmaj holds in his blood such swol'n and hot discourse 
▁ xxmaj that ' twixt his mental and his active parts 
▁ xxmaj kingdom'd xxmaj achilles in commotion rages , 
▁ xxmaj and batters down himself . xxmaj what should i say ? 
▁ xxmaj he is so plaguy proud that the death tokens of it 
▁ xxmaj cry ' no recovery . ' 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj let xxmaj ajax go to him . 
▁ xxmaj dear lord , go you and greet him in his tent . 
▁ ' tis said he holds you well ; and will be led 
▁ xxmaj at your request a little from himself . 
▁ xxup ulysses . o xxmaj agamemnon , let it not be so ! 
▁ xxmaj we 'll consecrate the steps that xxmaj ajax makes 
▁ xxmaj when they go from xxmaj achilles . xxmaj shall the proud lord 
▁ xxmaj that bastes his arrogance with his own seam 
▁ xxmaj and never suffers matter of the world 
▁ xxmaj enter his thoughts , save such as doth revolve 
▁ xxmaj and ruminate himself - shall he be worshipp'd 
▁ xxmaj of that we hold an idol more than he ? 
▁ xxmaj no , this thrice - worthy and right valiant lord 
▁ xxmaj shall not so stale his palm , nobly acquir'd , 
▁ xxmaj nor , by my will , assubjugate his merit , 
▁ xxmaj as amply titled as xxmaj achilles is , 
▁ xxmaj by going to xxmaj achilles . 
▁ xxmaj that were to enlard his fat - already pride , 
▁ xxmaj and add more coals to xxmaj cancer when he burns 
▁ xxmaj with entertaining great xxmaj hyperion . 
▁ xxmaj this lord go to him ! xxmaj jupiter forbid , 
▁ xxmaj and say in thunder ' achilles go to him . ' 
▁ xxup nestor . [ aside ] xxup o , this is well ! xxmaj he rubs the vein of him . 
▁ xxup diomedes . [ aside ] xxmaj and how his silence drinks up this applause ! 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj if i go to him , with my armed fist xxmaj i 'll pash him o'er the 
▁ face . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxup o , no , you shall not go . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj an ' a be proud with me xxmaj i 'll pheeze his pride . 
▁ xxmaj let me go to him . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel . 
▁ xxup ajax . a paltry , insolent fellow ! 
▁ xxup nestor . [ aside ] xxmaj how he describes himself ! 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj can he not be sociable ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . [ aside ] xxmaj the raven chides blackness . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj i 'll let his humours blood . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . [ aside ] xxmaj he will be the physician that should be the 
▁ patient . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj an all men were a my mind- 
▁ xxup ulysses . [ aside ] xxmaj wit would be out of fashion . 
▁ xxup ajax . ' a should not bear it so , ' a should eat 's words first . 
▁ xxmaj shall pride carry it ? 
▁ xxup nestor . [ aside ] xxmaj an ' twould , you 'd carry half . 
▁ xxup ulysses . [ aside ] ' a would have ten shares . 
▁ xxup ajax . i will knead him , xxmaj i 'll make him supple . 
▁ xxup nestor . [ aside ] xxmaj he 's not yet through warm . xxmaj force him with praises ; 
▁ pour in , pour in ; his ambition is dry . 
▁ xxup ulysses . [ to xxup agamemnon ] xxmaj my lord , you feed too much on this dislike . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj our noble general , do not do so . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj you must prepare to fight without xxmaj achilles . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj why ' tis this naming of him does him harm . 
▁ xxmaj here is a man - but ' tis before his face ; 
▁ i will be silent . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj wherefore should you so ? 
▁ xxmaj he is not emulous , as xxmaj achilles is . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj know the whole world , he is as valiant . 
▁ xxup ajax . a whoreson dog , that shall palter with us thus ! 
▁ xxmaj would he were a xxmaj troyan ! 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj what a vice were it in xxmaj ajax now- 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj if he were proud . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj or covetous of praise . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj ay , or surly borne . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj or strange , or self - affected . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj thank the heavens , lord , thou art of sweet composure 
▁ xxmaj praise him that gat thee , she that gave thee suck ; 
▁ xxmaj fam'd be thy tutor , and thy parts of nature 
▁ xxmaj thrice - fam'd beyond , beyond all erudition ; 
▁ xxmaj but he that disciplin'd thine arms to fight- 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj mars divide eternity in twain 
▁ xxmaj and give him half ; and , for thy vigour , 
▁ xxmaj bull - bearing xxmaj milo his addition yield 
▁ xxmaj to sinewy xxmaj ajax . i will not praise thy wisdom , 
▁ xxmaj which , like a bourn , a pale , a shore , confines 
▁ xxmaj thy spacious and dilated parts . xxmaj here 's xxmaj nestor , 
▁ xxmaj instructed by the antiquary times- 
▁ xxmaj he must , he is , he can not but be wise ; 
▁ xxmaj but pardon , father xxmaj nestor , were your days 
▁ xxmaj as green as xxmaj ajax ' and your brain so temper'd , 
▁ xxmaj you should not have the eminence of him , 
▁ xxmaj but be as xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj shall i call you father ? 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj ay , my good son . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj be rul'd by him , xxmaj lord xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj there is no tarrying here ; the hart xxmaj achilles 
▁ xxmaj keeps thicket . xxmaj please it our great general 
▁ xxmaj to call together all his state of war ; 
▁ xxmaj fresh kings are come to xxmaj troy . xxmaj to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj we must with all our main of power stand fast ; 
▁ xxmaj and here 's a lord - come knights from east to west 
▁ xxmaj and cull their flower , xxmaj ajax shall cope the best . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj go we to council . xxmaj let xxmaj achilles sleep . 
▁ xxmaj light boats sail swift , though greater hulks draw deep . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxup priam 's palace 

 xxmaj music sounds within . xxmaj enter xxup pandarus and a xxup servant 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj friend , you - pray you , a word . xxmaj do you not follow the young 
▁ xxmaj lord xxmaj paris ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj ay , sir , when he goes before me . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you depend upon him , i mean ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj sir , i do depend upon the lord . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you depend upon a notable gentleman ; i must needs praise 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj the lord be praised ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you know me , do you not ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj faith , sir , superficially . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj friend , know me better : i am the xxmaj lord xxmaj pandarus . 
▁ xxup servant . i hope i shall know your honour better . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i do desire it . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj you are in the state of grace . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj grace ! xxmaj not so , friend ; honour and lordship are my titles . 
▁ xxmaj what music is this ? 
▁ xxup servant . i do but partly know , sir ; it is music in parts . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj know you the musicians ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj wholly , sir . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj who play they to ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj to the hearers , sir . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj at whose pleasure , friend ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj at mine , sir , and theirs that love music . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj command , i mean , friend . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj who shall i command , sir ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj friend , we understand not one another : i am to courtly , 
▁ and thou art too cunning . xxmaj at whose request do these men play ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj that 's to't , indeed , sir . xxmaj marry , sir , at the request of 
▁ xxmaj paris my lord , who is there in person ; with him the mortal xxmaj venus , 
▁ the heart - blood of beauty , love 's invisible soul- 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj who , my cousin , xxmaj cressida ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj no , sir , xxmaj helen . xxmaj could not you find out that by her 
▁ attributes ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj it should seem , fellow , that thou hast not seen the xxmaj lady 
▁ xxmaj cressida . i come to speak with xxmaj paris from the xxmaj prince xxmaj troilus ; i 
▁ will make a complimental assault upon him , for my business 
▁ seethes . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj sodden business ! xxmaj there 's a stew'd phrase indeed ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup paris and xxup helen , attended 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj fair be to you , my lord , and to all this fair company ! 
▁ xxmaj fair desires , in all fair measure , fairly guide them- especially 
▁ to you , fair queen ! xxmaj fair thoughts be your fair pillow . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj dear lord , you are full of fair words . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you speak your fair pleasure , sweet queen . xxmaj fair prince , 
▁ here is good broken music . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj you have broke it , cousin ; and by my life , you shall make it 
▁ whole again ; you shall piece it out with a piece of your 
▁ performance . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj he is full of harmony . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj truly , lady , no . 
▁ xxup helen . xxup o , sir- 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj rude , in sooth ; in good sooth , very rude . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj well said , my lord . xxmaj well , you say so in fits . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i have business to my lord , dear queen . xxmaj my lord , will you 
▁ vouchsafe me a word ? 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj nay , this shall not hedge us out . xxmaj we 'll hear you sing , 
▁ certainly- 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj well sweet queen , you are pleasant with me . xxmaj but , marry , 
▁ thus , my lord : my dear lord and most esteemed friend , your 
▁ brother xxmaj troilus- 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj pandarus , honey - sweet lord- 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj go to , sweet queen , go to - commends himself most 
▁ affectionately to you- 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj you shall not bob us out of our melody . xxmaj if you do , our 
▁ melancholy upon your head ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj sweet queen , sweet queen ; that 's a sweet queen , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj and to make a sweet lady sad is a sour offence . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj nay , that shall not serve your turn ; that shall it not , 
▁ in truth , la . xxmaj nay , i care not for such words ; no , no . -and , my 
▁ lord , he desires you that , if the xxmaj king call for him at supper , 
▁ you will make his excuse . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj pandarus ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what says my sweet queen , my very very sweet queen ? 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj what exploit 's in hand ? xxmaj where sups he to - night ? 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj nay , but , my lord- 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what says my sweet queen?-my cousin will fall out with 
▁ you . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj you must not know where he sups . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj i 'll lay my life , with my disposer xxmaj cressida . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj no , no , no such matter ; you are wide . xxmaj come , your disposer 
▁ is sick . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll make 's excuse . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , good my lord . xxmaj why should you say xxmaj cressida ? 
▁ xxmaj no , your poor disposer 's sick . 
▁ xxup paris . i spy . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj you spy ! xxmaj what do you spy?-come , give me an instrument . 
▁ xxmaj now , sweet queen . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj why , this is kindly done . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj my niece is horribly in love with a thing you have , sweet 
▁ queen . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj she shall have it , my lord , if it be not my xxmaj lord xxmaj paris . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj he ! xxmaj no , she 'll none of him ; they two are twain . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj falling in , after falling out , may make them three . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj come , come . xxmaj i 'll hear no more of this ; xxmaj i 'll sing you a 
▁ song now . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj ay , ay , prithee now . xxmaj by my troth , sweet lord , thou hast a 
▁ fine forehead . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , you may , you may . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj let thy song be love . xxmaj this love will undo us all . o xxmaj cupid , 
▁ xxmaj cupid , xxmaj cupid ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj love ! xxmaj ay , that it shall , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj ay , good now , love , love , nothing but love . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj in good troth , it begins so . [ sings ] 

▁ xxmaj love , love , nothing but love , still love , still more ! 
▁ xxmaj for , oh , love 's bow 
▁ xxmaj shoots buck and doe ; 
▁ xxmaj the shaft confounds 
▁ xxmaj not that it wounds , 
▁ xxmaj but tickles still the sore . 
▁ xxmaj these lovers cry , o ho , they die ! 
▁ xxmaj yet that which seems the wound to kill 
▁ xxmaj doth turn o ho ! to ha ! ha ! he ! 
▁ xxmaj so dying love lives still . 
▁ o ho ! a while , but ha ! ha ! ha ! 
▁ o ho ! groans out for ha ! ha ! ha!-hey ho ! 

▁ xxup helen . xxmaj in love , i ' faith , to the very tip of the nose . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj he eats nothing but doves , love ; and that breeds hot blood , 
▁ and hot blood begets hot thoughts , and hot thoughts beget hot 
▁ deeds , and hot deeds is love . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj is this the generation of love : hot blood , hot thoughts , 
▁ and hot deeds ? xxmaj why , they are vipers . xxmaj is love a generation of 
▁ vipers ? xxmaj sweet lord , who 's a - field today ? 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj hector , xxmaj deiphobus , xxmaj helenus , xxmaj antenor , and all the gallantry 
▁ of xxmaj troy . i would fain have arm'd to - day , but my xxmaj nell would not 
▁ have it so . xxmaj how chance my brother xxmaj troilus went not ? 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj he hangs the lip at something . xxmaj you know all , xxmaj lord xxmaj pandarus . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj not xxup i , honey - sweet queen . i long to hear how they spend 
▁ to - day . xxmaj you 'll remember your brother 's excuse ? 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj to a hair . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj farewell , sweet queen . 
▁ xxup helen . xxmaj commend me to your niece . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i will , sweet queen . xxmaj exit . xxmaj sound a retreat 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj they 're come from the field . xxmaj let us to xxmaj priam 's hall 
▁ xxmaj to greet the warriors . xxmaj sweet xxmaj helen , i must woo you 
▁ xxmaj to help unarm our xxmaj hector . xxmaj his stubborn buckles , 
▁ xxmaj with these your white enchanting fingers touch'd , 
▁ xxmaj shall more obey than to the edge of steel 
▁ xxmaj or force of xxmaj greekish sinews ; you shall do more 
▁ xxmaj than all the island kings - disarm great xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup helen . ' twill make us proud to be his servant , xxmaj paris ; 
▁ xxmaj yea , what he shall receive of us in duty 
▁ xxmaj gives us more palm in beauty than we have , 
▁ xxmaj yea , overshines ourself . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj sweet , above thought i love thee . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxup pandarus ' orchard 

 xxmaj enter xxup pandarus and xxup troilus ' xxup boy , meeting 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj where 's thy master ? xxmaj at my cousin xxmaj cressida 's ? 
▁ xxup boy . xxmaj no , sir ; he stays for you to conduct him thither . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxup o , here he comes . xxmaj how now , how now ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj sirrah , walk off . xxmaj exit xxmaj boy 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj have you seen my cousin ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj no , xxmaj pandarus . i stalk about her door 
▁ xxmaj like a strange soul upon the xxmaj stygian banks 
▁ xxmaj staying for waftage . xxup o , be thou my xxmaj charon , 
▁ xxmaj and give me swift transportance to these fields 
▁ xxmaj where i may wallow in the lily beds 
▁ xxmaj propos'd for the deserver ! o gentle xxmaj pandar , 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj cupid 's shoulder pluck his painted wings , 
▁ xxmaj and fly with me to xxmaj cressid ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj walk here i ' th ' orchard , xxmaj i 'll bring her straight . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup troilus . i am giddy ; expectation whirls me round . 
▁ xxmaj th ' imaginary relish is so sweet 
▁ xxmaj that it enchants my sense ; what will it be 
▁ xxmaj when that the wat'ry palate tastes indeed 
▁ xxmaj love 's thrice - repured nectar ? xxmaj death , i fear me ; 
▁ xxmaj swooning destruction ; or some joy too fine , 
▁ xxmaj too subtle - potent , tun'd too sharp in sweetness , 
▁ xxmaj for the capacity of my ruder powers . 
▁ i fear it much ; and i do fear besides 
▁ xxmaj that i shall lose distinction in my joys ; 
▁ xxmaj as doth a battle , when they charge on heaps 
▁ xxmaj the enemy flying . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj she 's making her ready , she 'll come straight ; you must be 
▁ witty now . xxmaj she does so blush , and fetches her wind so short , as 
▁ if she were fray'd with a sprite . xxmaj i 'll fetch her . xxmaj it is the 
▁ prettiest villain ; she fetches her breath as short as a new - ta'en 
▁ sparrow . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj even such a passion doth embrace my bosom . 
▁ xxmaj my heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse , 
▁ xxmaj and all my powers do their bestowing lose , 
▁ xxmaj like vassalage at unawares encount'ring 
▁ xxmaj the eye of majesty . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pandarus xxmaj with xxup cressida 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj come , come , what need you blush ? xxmaj shame 's a baby.-here she 
▁ is now ; swear the oaths now to her that you have sworn to me.- 
▁ xxmaj what , are you gone again ? xxmaj you must be watch'd ere you be made 
▁ tame , must you ? xxmaj come your ways , come your ways ; an you draw 
▁ backward , we 'll put you i ' th ' fills.-why do you not speak to 
▁ her?-come , draw this curtain and let 's see your picture . 
▁ xxmaj alas the day , how loath you are to offend daylight ! xxmaj an ' twere 
▁ dark , you 'd close sooner . xxmaj so , so ; rub on , and kiss the mistress 
▁ xxmaj how now , a kiss in fee - farm ! xxmaj build there , carpenter ; the air is 
▁ sweet . xxmaj nay , you shall fight your hearts out ere i part you . xxmaj the 
▁ falcon as the tercel , for all the ducks i ' th ' river . xxmaj go to , go 
▁ to . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj you have bereft me of all words , lady . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj words pay no debts , give her deeds ; but she 'll bereave 
▁ you o ' th ' deeds too , if she call your activity in question . 
▁ xxmaj what , billing again ? xxmaj here 's ' in witness whereof the parties 
▁ interchangeably . ' xxmaj come in , come in ; xxmaj i 'll go get a fire . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj will you walk in , my lord ? 
▁ xxup troilus . o xxmaj cressid , how often have i wish'd me thus ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj wish'd , my lord ! xxmaj the gods grant - o my lord ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj what should they grant ? xxmaj what makes this pretty abruption ? 
▁ xxmaj what too curious dreg espies my sweet lady in the fountain of our 
▁ love ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj more dregs than water , if my fears have eyes . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj fears make devils of cherubims ; they never see truly . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj blind fear , that seeing reason leads , finds safer footing 
▁ than blind reason stumbling without fear . xxmaj to fear the worst oft 
▁ cures the worse . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxup o , let my lady apprehend no fear ! xxmaj in all xxmaj cupid 's pageant 
▁ there is presented no monster . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj nor nothing monstrous neither ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj nothing , but our undertakings when we vow to weep seas , 
▁ live in fire , cat rocks , tame tigers ; thinking it harder for our 
▁ mistress to devise imposition enough than for us to undergo any 
▁ difficulty imposed . xxmaj this is the monstruosity in love , lady , that 
▁ the will is infinite , and the execution confin'd ; that the desire 
▁ is boundless , and the act a slave to limit . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj they say all lovers swear more performance than they are 
▁ able , and yet reserve an ability that they never perform ; vowing 
▁ more than the perfection of ten , and discharging less than the 
▁ tenth part of one . xxmaj they that have the voice of lions and the act 
▁ of hares , are they not monsters ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj are there such ? xxmaj such are not we . xxmaj praise us as we are 
▁ tasted , allow us as we prove ; our head shall go bare till merit 
▁ crown it . xxmaj no perfection in reversion shall have a praise in 
▁ present . xxmaj we will not name desert before his birth ; and , being 
▁ born , his addition shall be humble . xxmaj few words to fair faith : 
▁ xxmaj troilus shall be such to xxmaj cressid as what envy can say worst shall 
▁ be a mock for his truth ; and what truth can speak truest not 
▁ truer than xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj will you walk in , my lord ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what , blushing still ? xxmaj have you not done talking yet ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj well , uncle , what folly i commit , i dedicate to you . 
▁ xxup pandarus . i thank you for that ; if my lord get a boy of you , you 'll 
▁ give him me . xxmaj be true to my lord ; if he flinch , chide me for it . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj you know now your hostages : your uncle 's word and my firm 
▁ faith . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll give my word for her too : our kindred , though 
▁ they be long ere they are wooed , they are constant being won ; 
▁ they are burs , i can tell you ; they 'll stick where they are 
▁ thrown . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj boldness comes to me now and brings me heart . 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj troilus , i have lov'd you night and day 
▁ xxmaj for many weary months . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj why was my xxmaj cressid then so hard to win ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj hard to seem won ; but i was won , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj with the first glance that ever - pardon me . 
▁ xxmaj if i confess much , you will play the tyrant . 
▁ i love you now ; but till now not so much 
▁ xxmaj but i might master it . xxmaj in faith , i lie ; 
▁ xxmaj my thoughts were like unbridled children , grown 
▁ xxmaj too headstrong for their mother . xxmaj see , we fools ! 
▁ xxmaj why have i blabb'd ? xxmaj who shall be true to us , 
▁ xxmaj when we are so unsecret to ourselves ? 
▁ xxmaj but , though i lov'd you well , i woo'd you not ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , good faith , i wish'd myself a man , 
▁ xxmaj or that we women had men 's privilege 
▁ xxmaj of speaking first . xxmaj sweet , bid me hold my tongue , 
▁ xxmaj for in this rapture i shall surely speak 
▁ xxmaj the thing i shall repent . xxmaj see , see , your silence , 
▁ xxmaj cunning in dumbness , from my weakness draws 
▁ xxmaj my very soul of counsel . xxmaj stop my mouth . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj and shall , albeit sweet music issues thence . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj pretty , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj my lord , i do beseech you , pardon me ; 
▁ ' twas not my purpose thus to beg a kiss . 
▁ i am asham'd . o heavens ! what have i done ? 
▁ xxmaj for this time will i take my leave , my lord . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj your leave , sweet xxmaj cressid ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj leave ! xxmaj an you take leave till to - morrow morning- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj pray you , content you . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj what offends you , lady ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj sir , mine own company . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj you can not shun yourself . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj let me go and try . 
▁ i have a kind of self resides with you ; 
▁ xxmaj but an unkind self , that itself will leave 
▁ xxmaj to be another 's fool . i would be gone . 
▁ xxmaj where is my wit ? i know not what i speak . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj well know they what they speak that speak so wisely . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj perchance , my lord , i show more craft than love ; 
▁ xxmaj and fell so roundly to a large confession 
▁ xxmaj to angle for your thoughts ; but you are wise- 
▁ xxmaj or else you love not ; for to be wise and love 
▁ xxmaj exceeds man 's might ; that dwells with gods above . 
▁ xxup troilus . o that i thought it could be in a woman- 
▁ xxmaj as , if it can , i will presume in you- 
▁ xxmaj to feed for aye her lamp and flames of love ; 
▁ xxmaj to keep her constancy in plight and youth , 
▁ xxmaj outliving beauty 's outward , with a mind 
▁ xxmaj that doth renew swifter than blood decays ! 
▁ xxmaj or that persuasion could but thus convince me 
▁ xxmaj that my integrity and truth to you 
▁ xxmaj might be affronted with the match and weight 
▁ xxmaj of such a winnowed purity in love . 
▁ xxmaj how were i then uplifted ! but , alas , 
▁ i am as true as truth 's simplicity , 
▁ xxmaj and simpler than the infancy of truth . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj in that xxmaj i 'll war with you . 
▁ xxup troilus . o virtuous fight , 
▁ xxmaj when right with right wars who shall be most right !