xxbos xxmaj true swains in love shall in the world to come 
▁ xxmaj approve their truth by xxmaj troilus , when their rhymes , 
▁ xxmaj full of protest , of oath , and big compare , 
▁ xxmaj want similes , truth tir'd with iteration- 
▁ xxmaj as true as steel , as plantage to the moon , 
▁ xxmaj as sun to day , as turtle to her mate , 
▁ xxmaj as iron to adamant , as earth to th ' centre- 
▁ xxmaj yet , after all comparisons of truth , 
▁ xxmaj as truth 's authentic author to be cited , 
▁ ' as true as xxmaj troilus ' shall crown up the verse 
▁ xxmaj and sanctify the numbers . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj prophet may you be ! 
▁ xxmaj if i be false , or swerve a hair from truth , 
▁ xxmaj when time is old and hath forgot itself , 
▁ xxmaj when waterdrops have worn the stones of xxmaj troy , 
▁ xxmaj and blind oblivion swallow'd cities up , 
▁ xxmaj and mighty states characterless are grated 
▁ xxmaj to dusty nothing - yet let memory 
▁ xxmaj from false to false , among false maids in love , 
▁ xxmaj upbraid my falsehood when th ' have said ' as false 
▁ xxmaj as air , as water , wind , or sandy earth , 
▁ xxmaj as fox to lamb , or wolf to heifer 's calf , 
▁ xxmaj pard to the hind , or stepdame to her son'- 
▁ xxmaj yea , let them say , to stick the heart of falsehood , 
▁ ' as false as xxmaj cressid . ' 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj go to , a bargain made ; seal it , seal it ; xxmaj i 'll be the 
▁ witness . xxmaj here i hold your hand ; here my cousin 's . xxmaj if ever you 
▁ prove false one to another , since i have taken such pains to 
▁ bring you together , let all pitiful goers- between be call'd to 
▁ the world 's end after my name - call them all xxmaj pandars ; let all 
▁ constant men be xxmaj troiluses , all false women xxmaj cressids , and all 
▁ brokers between xxmaj pandars . xxmaj say ' amen . ' 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj amen . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj amen . xxmaj whereupon i will show you a chamber 
▁ and a bed ; which bed , because it shall not speak of your 
▁ pretty encounters , press it to death . xxmaj away ! 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj cupid grant all tongue - tied maidens here , 
▁ xxmaj bed , chamber , pander , to provide this gear ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj greek camp 

 xxmaj flourish . xxmaj enter xxup agamemnon , xxup ulysses , xxup diomedes , xxup nestor , xxup ajax , xxup menelaus , 
 and xxup calchas 

▁ xxup calchas . xxmaj now , xxmaj princes , for the service i have done , 
▁ xxmaj th ' advantage of the time prompts me aloud 
▁ xxmaj to call for recompense . xxmaj appear it to your mind 
▁ xxmaj that , through the sight i bear in things to come , 
▁ i have abandon'd xxmaj troy , left my possession , 
▁ xxmaj incurr'd a traitor 's name , expos'd myself 
▁ xxmaj from certain and possess'd conveniences 
▁ xxmaj to doubtful fortunes , sequest'ring from me all 
▁ xxmaj that time , acquaintance , custom , and condition , 
▁ xxmaj made tame and most familiar to my nature ; 
▁ xxmaj and here , to do you service , am become 
▁ xxmaj as new into the world , strange , unacquainted- 
▁ i do beseech you , as in way of taste , 
▁ xxmaj to give me now a little benefit 
▁ xxmaj out of those many regist'red in promise , 
▁ xxmaj which you say live to come in my behalf . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what wouldst thou of us , xxmaj troyan ? xxmaj make demand . 
▁ xxup calchas . xxmaj you have a xxmaj troyan prisoner call'd xxmaj antenor , 
▁ xxmaj yesterday took ; xxmaj troy holds him very dear . 
▁ xxmaj oft have you - often have you thanks therefore- 
▁ xxmaj desir'd my xxmaj cressid in right great exchange , 
▁ xxmaj whom xxmaj troy hath still denied ; but this xxmaj antenor , 
▁ i know , is such a wrest in their affairs 
▁ xxmaj that their negotiations all must slack 
▁ xxmaj wanting his manage ; and they will almost 
▁ xxmaj give us a prince of blood , a son of xxmaj priam , 
▁ xxmaj in change of him . xxmaj let him be sent , great xxmaj princes , 
▁ xxmaj and he shall buy my daughter ; and her presence 
▁ xxmaj shall quite strike off all service i have done 
▁ xxmaj in most accepted pain . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj let xxmaj diomedes bear him , 
▁ xxmaj and bring us xxmaj cressid hither . xxmaj calchas shall have 
▁ xxmaj what he requests of us . xxmaj good xxmaj diomed , 
▁ xxmaj furnish you fairly for this interchange ; 
▁ xxmaj withal , bring word if xxmaj hector will to - morrow 
▁ xxmaj be answer'd in his challenge . xxmaj ajax is ready . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj this shall i undertake ; and ' tis a burden 
▁ xxmaj which i am proud to bear . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup diomedes and xxup calchas 

▁ xxup achilles and xxup patroclus stand in their tent 

▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj achilles stands i ' th ' entrance of his tent . 
▁ xxmaj please it our general pass strangely by him , 
▁ xxmaj as if he were forgot ; and , xxmaj princes all , 
▁ xxmaj lay negligent and loose regard upon him . 
▁ i will come last . ' tis like he 'll question me 
▁ xxmaj why such unplausive eyes are bent , why turn'd on him ? 
▁ xxmaj if so , i have derision med'cinable 
▁ xxmaj to use between your strangeness and his pride , 
▁ xxmaj which his own will shall have desire to drink . 
▁ xxmaj it may do good . xxmaj pride hath no other glass 
▁ xxmaj to show itself but pride ; for supple knees 
▁ xxmaj feed arrogance and are the proud man 's fees . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj we 'll execute your purpose , and put on 
▁ a form of strangeness as we pass along . 
▁ xxmaj so do each lord ; and either greet him not , 
▁ xxmaj or else disdainfully , which shall shake him more 
▁ xxmaj than if not look'd on . i will lead the way . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what comes the general to speak with me ? 
▁ xxmaj you know my mind . xxmaj i 'll fight no more ' gainst xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what says xxmaj achilles ? xxmaj would he aught with us ? 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj would you , my lord , aught with the general ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj nothing , my lord . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj the better . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup agamemnon and xxup nestor 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj good day , good day . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj how do you ? xxmaj how do you ? xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what , does the cuckold scorn me ? 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj how now , xxmaj patroclus ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj ha ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj good morrow . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj ay , and good next day too . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what mean these fellows ? xxmaj know they not xxmaj achilles ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj they pass by strangely . xxmaj they were us'd to bend , 
▁ xxmaj to send their smiles before them to xxmaj achilles , 
▁ xxmaj to come as humbly as they us'd to creep 
▁ xxmaj to holy altars . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what , am i poor of late ? 
▁ ' tis certain , greatness , once fall'n out with fortune , 
▁ xxmaj must fall out with men too . xxmaj what the declin'd is , 
▁ xxmaj he shall as soon read in the eyes of others 
▁ xxmaj as feel in his own fall ; for men , like butterflies , 
▁ xxmaj show not their mealy wings but to the summer ; 
▁ xxmaj and not a man for being simply man 
▁ xxmaj hath any honour , but honour for those honours 
▁ xxmaj that are without him , as place , riches , and favour , 
▁ xxmaj prizes of accident , as oft as merit ; 
▁ xxmaj which when they fall , as being slippery standers , 
▁ xxmaj the love that lean'd on them as slippery too , 
▁ xxmaj doth one pluck down another , and together 
▁ xxmaj die in the fall . xxmaj but ' tis not so with me : 
▁ xxmaj fortune and i are friends ; i do enjoy 
▁ xxmaj at ample point all that i did possess 
▁ xxmaj save these men 's looks ; who do , methinks , find out 
▁ xxmaj something not worth in me such rich beholding 
▁ xxmaj as they have often given . xxmaj here is xxmaj ulysses . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll interrupt his reading . 
▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj ulysses ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj now , great xxmaj thetis ' son ! 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what are you reading ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . a strange fellow here 
▁ xxmaj writes me that man - how dearly ever parted , 
▁ xxmaj how much in having , or without or in- 
▁ xxmaj can not make boast to have that which he hath , 
▁ xxmaj nor feels not what he owes , but by reflection ; 
▁ xxmaj as when his virtues shining upon others 
▁ xxmaj heat them , and they retort that heat again 
▁ xxmaj to the first giver . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj this is not strange , xxmaj ulysses . 
▁ xxmaj the beauty that is borne here in the face 
▁ xxmaj the bearer knows not , but commends itself 
▁ xxmaj to others ' eyes ; nor doth the eye itself- 
▁ xxmaj that most pure spirit of sense - behold itself , 
▁ xxmaj not going from itself ; but eye to eye opposed 
▁ xxmaj salutes each other with each other 's form ; 
▁ xxmaj for speculation turns not to itself 
▁ xxmaj till it hath travell'd , and is mirror'd there 
▁ xxmaj where it may see itself . xxmaj this is not strange at all . 
▁ xxup ulysses . i do not strain at the position- 
▁ xxmaj it is familiar - but at the author 's drift ; 
▁ xxmaj who , in his circumstance , expressly proves 
▁ xxmaj that no man is the lord of anything , 
▁ xxmaj though in and of him there be much consisting , 
▁ xxmaj till he communicate his parts to others ; 
▁ xxmaj nor doth he of himself know them for aught 
▁ xxmaj till he behold them formed in th ' applause 
▁ xxmaj where th ' are extended ; who , like an arch , reverb'rate 
▁ xxmaj the voice again ; or , like a gate of steel 
▁ xxmaj fronting the sun , receives and renders back 
▁ xxmaj his figure and his heat . i was much rapt in this ; 
▁ xxmaj and apprehended here immediately 
▁ xxmaj th ' unknown xxmaj ajax . xxmaj heavens , what a man is there ! 
▁ a very horse that has he knows not what ! 
▁ xxmaj nature , what things there are 
▁ xxmaj most abject in regard and dear in use ! 
▁ xxmaj what things again most dear in the esteem 
▁ xxmaj and poor in worth ! xxmaj now shall we see to - morrow- 
▁ xxmaj an act that very chance doth throw upon him- 
▁ xxmaj ajax renown'd . o heavens , what some men do , 
▁ xxmaj while some men leave to do ! 
▁ xxmaj how some men creep in skittish xxmaj fortune's - hall , 
▁ xxmaj whiles others play the idiots in her eyes ! 
▁ xxmaj how one man eats into another 's pride , 
▁ xxmaj while pride is fasting in his wantonness ! 
▁ xxmaj to see these xxmaj grecian lords!-why , even already 
▁ xxmaj they clap the lubber xxmaj ajax on the shoulder , 
▁ xxmaj as if his foot were on brave xxmaj hector 's breast , 
▁ xxmaj and great xxmaj troy shrinking . 
▁ xxup achilles . i do believe it ; for they pass'd by me 
▁ xxmaj as misers do by beggars - neither gave to me 
▁ xxmaj good word nor look . xxmaj what , are my deeds forgot ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj time hath , my lord , a wallet at his back , 
▁ xxmaj wherein he puts alms for oblivion , 
▁ a great - siz'd monster of ingratitudes . 
▁ xxmaj those scraps are good deeds past , which are devour'd 
▁ xxmaj as fast as they are made , forgot as soon 
▁ xxmaj as done . xxmaj perseverance , dear my lord , 
▁ xxmaj keeps honour bright . xxmaj to have done is to hang 
▁ xxmaj quite out of fashion , like a rusty mail 
▁ xxmaj in monumental mock'ry . xxmaj take the instant way ; 
▁ xxmaj for honour travels in a strait so narrow - 
▁ xxmaj where one but goes abreast . xxmaj keep then the path , 
▁ xxmaj for emulation hath a thousand sons 
▁ xxmaj that one by one pursue ; if you give way , 
▁ xxmaj or hedge aside from the direct forthright , 
▁ xxmaj like to an ent'red tide they all rush by 
▁ xxmaj and leave you hindmost ; 
▁ xxmaj or , like a gallant horse fall'n in first rank , 
▁ xxmaj lie there for pavement to the abject rear , 
▁ xxmaj o'er - run and trampled on . xxmaj then what they do in present , 
▁ xxmaj though less than yours in past , must o'ertop yours ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj time is like a fashionable host , 
▁ xxmaj that slightly shakes his parting guest by th ' hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and with his arms out - stretch'd , as he would fly , 
▁ xxmaj grasps in the corner . xxmaj the welcome ever smiles , 
▁ xxmaj and farewell goes out sighing . xxup o , let not virtue seek 
▁ xxmaj remuneration for the thing it was ; 
▁ xxmaj for beauty , wit , 
▁ xxmaj high birth , vigour of bone , desert in service , 
▁ xxmaj love , friendship , charity , are subjects all 
▁ xxmaj to envious and calumniating xxmaj time . 
▁ xxmaj one touch of nature makes the whole world kin- 
▁ xxmaj that all with one consent praise new - born gawds , 
▁ xxmaj though they are made and moulded of things past , 
▁ xxmaj and give to dust that is a little gilt 
▁ xxmaj more laud than gilt o'er - dusted . 
▁ xxmaj the present eye praises the present object . 
▁ xxmaj then marvel not , thou great and complete man , 
▁ xxmaj that all the xxmaj greeks begin to worship xxmaj ajax , 
▁ xxmaj since things in motion sooner catch the eye 
▁ xxmaj than what stirs not . xxmaj the cry went once on thee , 
▁ xxmaj and still it might , and yet it may again , 
▁ xxmaj if thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive 
▁ xxmaj and case thy reputation in thy tent , 
▁ xxmaj whose glorious deeds but in these fields of late 
▁ xxmaj made emulous missions ' mongst the gods themselves , 
▁ xxmaj and drave great xxmaj mars to faction . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj of this my privacy 
▁ i have strong reasons . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj but ' gainst your privacy 
▁ xxmaj the reasons are more potent and heroical . 
▁ ' tis known , xxmaj achilles , that you are in love 
▁ xxmaj with one of xxmaj priam 's daughters . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj ha ! known ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj is that a wonder ? 
▁ xxmaj the providence that 's in a watchful state 
▁ xxmaj knows almost every grain of xxmaj plutus ' gold ; 
▁ xxmaj finds bottom in th ' uncomprehensive deeps ; 
▁ xxmaj keeps place with thought , and almost , like the gods , 
▁ xxmaj do thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles . 
▁ xxmaj there is a mystery - with whom relation 
▁ xxmaj durst never meddle - in the soul of state , 
▁ xxmaj which hath an operation more divine 
▁ xxmaj than breath or pen can give expressure to . 
▁ xxmaj all the commerce that you have had with xxmaj troy 
▁ xxmaj as perfectly is ours as yours , my lord ; 
▁ xxmaj and better would it fit xxmaj achilles much 
▁ xxmaj to throw down xxmaj hector than xxmaj polyxena . 
▁ xxmaj but it must grieve young xxmaj pyrrhus now at home , 
▁ xxmaj when fame shall in our island sound her trump , 
▁ xxmaj and all the xxmaj greekish girls shall tripping sing 
▁ ' great xxmaj hector 's sister did xxmaj achilles win ; 
▁ xxmaj but our great xxmaj ajax bravely beat down him . ' 
▁ xxmaj farewell , my lord . i as your lover speak . 
▁ xxmaj the fool slides o'er the ice that you should break . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj to this effect , xxmaj achilles , have i mov'd you . 
▁ a woman impudent and mannish grown 
▁ xxmaj is not more loath'd than an effeminate man 
▁ xxmaj in time of action . i stand condemn'd for this ; 
▁ xxmaj they think my little stomach to the war 
▁ xxmaj and your great love to me restrains you thus . 
▁ xxmaj sweet , rouse yourself ; and the weak wanton xxmaj cupid 
▁ xxmaj shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold , 
▁ xxmaj and , like a dew - drop from the lion 's mane , 
▁ xxmaj be shook to airy air . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj shall xxmaj ajax fight with xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj ay , and perhaps receive much honour by him . 
▁ xxup achilles . i see my reputation is at stake ; 
▁ xxmaj my fame is shrewdly gor'd . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxup o , then , beware : 
▁ xxmaj those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves ; 
▁ xxmaj omission to do what is necessary 
▁ xxmaj seals a commission to a blank of danger ; 
▁ xxmaj and danger , like an ague , subtly taints 
▁ xxmaj even then when they sit idly in the sun . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj go call xxmaj thersites hither , sweet xxmaj patroclus . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll send the fool to xxmaj ajax , and desire him 
▁ xxup t ' invite the xxmaj troyan lords , after the combat , 
▁ xxmaj to see us here unarm'd . i have a woman 's longing , 
▁ xxmaj an appetite that i am sick withal , 
▁ xxmaj to see great xxmaj hector in his weeds of peace ; 
▁ xxmaj to talk with him , and to behold his visage , 
▁ xxmaj even to my full of view . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup thersites 

▁ a labour sav'd ! 
▁ xxup thersites . a wonder ! 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj ajax goes up and down the field asking for himself . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj how so ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj he must fight singly to - morrow with xxmaj hector , and is so 
▁ prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he raves in 
▁ saying nothing . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj how can that be ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj why , ' a stalks up and down like a peacock - a stride and a 
▁ stand ; ruminaies like an hostess that hath no arithmetic but her 
▁ brain to set down her reckoning , bites his lip with a politic 
▁ regard , as who should say ' there were wit in this head , an 
▁ ' twould out ' ; and so there is ; but it lies as coldly in him as 
▁ fire in a flint , which will not show without knocking . xxmaj the man 's 
▁ undone for ever ; for if xxmaj hector break not his neck i ' th ' combat , 
▁ he 'll break't himself in vainglory . xxmaj he knows not me . i said ' good 
▁ morrow , xxmaj ajax ' ; and he replies ' thanks , xxmaj agamemnon . ' xxmaj what think you 
▁ of this man that takes me for the general ? xxmaj he 's grown a very land 
▁ fish , languageless , a monster . a plague of opinion ! a man may 
▁ wear it on both sides , like leather jerkin . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj thou must be my ambassador to him , xxmaj thersites . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj who , xxup i ? xxmaj why , he 'll answer nobody ; he professes not 
▁ answering . xxmaj speaking is for beggars : he wears his tongue in 's 
▁ arms . i will put on his presence . xxmaj let xxmaj patroclus make his demands 
▁ to me , you shall see the pageant of xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj to him , xxmaj patroclus . xxmaj tell him i humbly desire the valiant 
▁ xxmaj ajax to invite the most valorous xxmaj hector to come unarm'd to my 
▁ tent ; and to procure safe conduct for his person of the 
▁ magnanimous and most illustrious six - or - seven - times - honour'd 
▁ xxmaj captain xxmaj general of the xxmaj grecian army , et cetera , xxmaj agamemnon . xxmaj do 
▁ this . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj jove bless great xxmaj ajax ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj hum ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . i come from the worthy xxmaj achilles- 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj who most humbly desires you to invite xxmaj hector to his 
▁ tent- 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj hum ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj and to procure safe conduct from xxmaj agamemnon . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj agamemnon ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj ay , my lord . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj what you say to't ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj god buy you , with all my heart . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj your answer , sir . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj if to - morrow be a fair day , by eleven of the clock it 
▁ will go one way or other . xxmaj howsoever , he shall pay for me ere he 
▁ has me . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj your answer , sir . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj fare ye well , with all my heart . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj why , but he is not in this tune , is he ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj no , but he 's out a tune thus . xxmaj what music will be in him 
▁ when xxmaj hector has knock'd out his brains i know not ; but , i am sure , 
▁ none ; unless the fiddler xxmaj apollo get his sinews to make catlings 
▁ on . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj come , thou shalt bear a letter to him straight . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj let me carry another to his horse ; for that 's the more 
▁ capable creature . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj my mind is troubled , like a fountain stirr'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and i myself see not the bottom of it . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup achilles and xxup patroclus 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj would the fountain of your mind were clear again , that i 
▁ might water an ass at it . i had rather be a tick in a sheep than 
▁ such a valiant ignorance . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj troy . a street 

 xxmaj enter , at one side , xxup aeneas , and servant with a torch ; at another , 
 xxup paris , xxup deiphobus , xxup antenor , xxup diomedes the xxmaj grecian , and others , with torches 

▁ xxup paris . xxmaj see , ho ! xxmaj who is that there ? 
▁ xxup deiphobus . xxmaj it is the xxmaj lord xxmaj aeneas . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj is the xxmaj prince there in person ? 
▁ xxmaj had i so good occasion to lie long 
▁ xxmaj as you , xxmaj prince xxmaj paris , nothing but heavenly business 
▁ xxmaj should rob my bed - mate of my company . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj that 's my mind too . xxmaj good morrow , xxmaj lord xxmaj aeneas . 
▁ xxup paris . a valiant xxmaj greek , xxmaj aeneas -take his hand : 
▁ xxmaj witness the process of your speech , wherein 
▁ xxmaj you told how xxmaj diomed , a whole week by days , 
▁ xxmaj did haunt you in the field . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj health to you , valiant sir , 
▁ xxmaj during all question of the gentle truce ; 
▁ xxmaj but when i meet you arm'd , as black defiance 
▁ xxmaj as heart can think or courage execute . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj the one and other xxmaj diomed embraces . 
▁ xxmaj our bloods are now in calm ; and so long health ! 
▁ xxmaj but when contention and occasion meet , 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj jove , xxmaj i 'll play the hunter for thy life 
▁ xxmaj with all my force , pursuit , and policy . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj and thou shalt hunt a lion , that will fly 
▁ xxmaj with his face backward . xxmaj in humane gentleness , 
▁ xxmaj welcome to xxmaj troy ! now , by xxmaj anchises ' life , 
▁ xxmaj welcome indeed ! xxmaj by xxmaj venus ' hand i swear 
▁ xxmaj no man alive can love in such a sort 
▁ xxmaj the thing he means to kill , more excellently . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj we sympathise . xxmaj jove let xxmaj aeneas live , 
▁ xxmaj if to my sword his fate be not the glory , 
▁ a thousand complete courses of the sun ! 
▁ xxmaj but in mine emulous honour let him die 
▁ xxmaj with every joint a wound , and that to - morrow ! 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj we know each other well . 
▁ diomedes.we do ; and long to know each other worse . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj this is the most despiteful'st gentle greeting 
▁ xxmaj the noblest hateful love , that e'er i heard of . 
▁ xxmaj what business , lord , so early ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . i was sent for to the xxmaj king ; but why , i know not . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj his purpose meets you : ' twas to bring this xxmaj greek 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj calchas ' house , and there to render him , 
▁ xxmaj for the enfreed xxmaj antenor , the fair xxmaj cressid . 
▁ xxmaj let 's have your company ; or , if you please , 
▁ xxmaj haste there before us . i constantly believe- 
▁ xxmaj or rather call my thought a certain knowledge- 
▁ xxmaj my brother xxmaj troilus lodges there to - night . 
▁ xxmaj rouse him and give him note of our approach , 
▁ xxmaj with the whole quality wherefore ; i fear 
▁ xxmaj we shall be much unwelcome . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj that i assure you : 
▁ xxmaj troilus had rather xxmaj troy were borne to xxmaj greece 
▁ xxmaj than xxmaj cressid borne from xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj there is no help ; 
▁ xxmaj the bitter disposition of the time 
▁ xxmaj will have it so . xxmaj on , lord ; we 'll follow you . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj good morrow , all . xxmaj exit with servant 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj and tell me , noble xxmaj diomed - faith , tell me true , 
▁ xxmaj even in the soul of sound good - fellowship- 
▁ xxmaj who in your thoughts deserves fair xxmaj helen best , 
▁ xxmaj myself or xxmaj menelaus ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj both alike : 
▁ xxmaj he merits well to have her that doth seek her , 
▁ xxmaj not making any scruple of her soilure , 
▁ xxmaj with such a hell of pain and world of charge ; 
▁ xxmaj and you as well to keep her that defend her , 
▁ xxmaj not palating the taste of her dishonour , 
▁ xxmaj with such a costly loss of wealth and friends . 
▁ xxmaj he like a puling cuckold would drink up 
▁ xxmaj the lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece ; 
▁ xxmaj you , like a lecher , out of whorish loins 
▁ xxmaj are pleas'd to breed out your inheritors . 
▁ xxmaj both merits pois'd , each weighs nor less nor more ; 
▁ xxmaj but he as he , the heavier for a whore . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj you are too bitter to your country - woman . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj she 's bitter to her country . xxmaj hear me , xxmaj paris : 
▁ xxmaj for every false drop in her bawdy veins 
▁ a xxmaj grecian 's life hath sunk ; for every scruple 
▁ xxmaj of her contaminated carrion weight 
▁ a xxmaj troyan hath been slain ; since she could speak , 
▁ xxmaj she hath not given so many good words breath 
▁ xxmaj as for her xxmaj greeks and xxmaj troyans suff'red death . 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj fair xxmaj diomed , you do as chapmen do , 
▁ xxmaj dispraise the thing that you desire to buy ; 
▁ xxmaj but we in silence hold this virtue well : 
▁ xxmaj we 'll not commend what we intend to sell . 
▁ xxmaj here lies our way . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxmaj the court of xxup pandarus ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup troilus and xxup cressida 

▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj dear , trouble not yourself ; the morn is cold . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj then , sweet my lord , xxmaj i 'll call mine uncle down ; 
▁ xxmaj he shall unbolt the gates . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj trouble him not ; 
▁ xxmaj to bed , to bed ! xxmaj sleep kill those pretty eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and give as soft attachment to thy senses 
▁ xxmaj as infants ' empty of all thought ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj good morrow , then . 
▁ xxup troilus . i prithee now , to bed . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj are you aweary of me ? 
▁ xxup troilus . o xxmaj cressida ! but that the busy day , 
▁ xxmaj wak'd by the lark , hath rous'd the ribald crows , 
▁ xxmaj and dreaming night will hide our joys no longer , 
▁ i would not from thee . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj night hath been too brief . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj beshrew the witch ! with venomous wights she stays 
▁ xxmaj as tediously as hell , but flies the grasps of love 
▁ xxmaj with wings more momentary - swift than thought . 
▁ xxmaj you will catch cold , and curse me . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj prithee tarry . 
▁ xxmaj you men will never tarry . 
▁ o foolish xxmaj cressid ! i might have still held off , 
▁ xxmaj and then you would have tarried . xxmaj hark ! there 's one up . 
▁ xxup pandarus . [ within ] xxmaj what 's all the doors open here ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj it is your uncle . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup cressida . a pestilence on him ! xxmaj now will he be mocking . 
▁ i shall have such a life ! 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj how now , how now ! xxmaj how go maidenheads ? 
▁ xxmaj here , you maid ! xxmaj where 's my cousin xxmaj cressid ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj go hang yourself , you naughty mocking uncle . 
▁ xxmaj you bring me to do , and then you flout me too . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj to do what ? to do what ? xxmaj let her say what . 
▁ xxmaj what have i brought you to do ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj come , come , beshrew your heart ! xxmaj you 'll ne'er be good , 
▁ xxmaj nor suffer others . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ha , ha ! xxmaj alas , poor wretch ! a poor capocchia ! hast not 
▁ slept to - night ? xxmaj would he not , a naughty man , let it sleep ? a 
▁ bugbear take him ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj did not i tell you ? xxmaj would he were knock'd i ' th ' head ! 
▁ [ one knocks ] 
▁ xxmaj who 's that at door ? xxmaj good uncle , go and see . 
▁ xxmaj my lord , come you again into my chamber . 
▁ xxmaj you smile and mock me , as if i meant naughtily . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj ha ! ha ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj come , you are deceiv'd , i think of no such thing . 
▁ [ knock ] 
▁ xxmaj how earnestly they knock ! xxmaj pray you come in : 
▁ i would not for half xxmaj troy have you seen here . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup troilus and xxup cressida 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj will you beat down the 
▁ door ? xxmaj how now ? xxmaj what 's the matter ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aeneas 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj good morrow , lord , good morrow . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj who 's there ? xxmaj my lord xxmaj aeneas ? xxmaj by my troth , 
▁ i knew you not . xxmaj what news with you so early ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj is not xxmaj prince xxmaj troilus here ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj here ! xxmaj what should he do here ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj come , he is here , my lord ; do not deny him . 
▁ xxmaj it doth import him much to speak with me . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj is he here , say you ? xxmaj it 's more than i know , xxmaj i 'll be 
▁ sworn . xxmaj for my own part , i came in late . xxmaj what should he do here ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj who!-nay , then . xxmaj come , come , you 'll do him wrong ere you are 
▁ ware ; you 'll be so true to him to be false to him . xxmaj do not you 
▁ know of him , but yet go fetch him hither ; go . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup troilus 

▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj my lord , i scarce have leisure to salute you , 
▁ xxmaj my matter is so rash . xxmaj there is at hand 
▁ xxmaj paris your brother , and xxmaj deiphobus , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj grecian xxmaj diomed , and our xxmaj antenor 
▁ xxmaj deliver'd to us ; and for him forthwith , 
▁ xxmaj ere the first sacrifice , within this hour , 
▁ xxmaj we must give up to xxmaj diomedes ' hand 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj lady xxmaj cressida . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj is it so concluded ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj by xxmaj priam , and the general state of xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxmaj they are at hand and ready to effect it . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj how my achievements mock me ! 
▁ i will go meet them ; and , my lord xxmaj aeneas , 
▁ xxmaj we met by chance ; you did not find me here . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj good , good , my lord , the secrets of neighbour xxmaj pandar 
▁ xxmaj have not more gift in taciturnity . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup troilus and xxup aeneas 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj is't possible ? xxmaj no sooner got but lost ? xxmaj the devil take 
▁ xxmaj antenor ! xxmaj the young prince will go mad . a plague upon xxmaj antenor ! i 
▁ would they had broke 's neck . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup cressida 

▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj who was here ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ah , ah ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj why sigh you so profoundly ? xxmaj where 's my lord ? xxmaj gone ? xxmaj tell 
▁ me , sweet uncle , what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj would i were as deep under the earth as i am above ! 
▁ xxup cressida . o the gods ! xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj pray thee , get thee in . xxmaj would thou hadst ne'er been born ! 
▁ i knew thou wouldst be his death ! xxup o , poor gentleman ! a plague 
▁ upon xxmaj antenor ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj good uncle , i beseech you , on my knees i beseech you , 
▁ what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj thou must be gone , wench , thou must be gone ; thou art 
▁ chang'd for xxmaj antenor ; thou must to thy father , and be gone from 
▁ xxmaj troilus . ' twill be his death ; ' twill be his bane ; he can not bear 
▁ it . 
▁ xxup cressida . o you immortal gods ! i will not go . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj thou must . 
▁ xxup cressida . i will not , uncle . i have forgot my father ; 
▁ i know no touch of consanguinity , 
▁ xxmaj no kin , no love , no blood , no soul so near me 
▁ xxmaj as the sweet xxmaj troilus . o you gods divine , 
▁ xxmaj make xxmaj cressid 's name the very crown of falsehood , 
▁ xxmaj if ever she leave xxmaj troilus ! xxmaj time , force , and death , 
▁ xxmaj do to this body what extremes you can , 
▁ xxmaj but the strong base and building of my love 
▁ xxmaj is as the very centre of the earth , 
▁ xxmaj drawing all things to it . xxmaj i 'll go in and weep- 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj do , do . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj tear my bright hair , and scratch my praised cheeks , 
▁ xxmaj crack my clear voice with sobs and break my heart , 
▁ xxmaj with sounding ' troilus . ' i will not go from xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj troy . a street before xxup pandarus ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup paris , xxup troilus , xxup aeneas , xxup deiphobus , xxup antenor , and xxup diomedes 

▁ xxup paris . xxmaj it is great morning ; and the hour prefix'd 
▁ xxmaj for her delivery to this valiant xxmaj greek 
▁ xxmaj comes fast upon . xxmaj good my brother xxmaj troilus , 
▁ xxmaj tell you the lady what she is to do 
▁ xxmaj and haste her to the purpose . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj walk into her house . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bring her to the xxmaj grecian presently ; 
▁ xxmaj and to his hand when i deliver her , 
▁ xxmaj think it an altar , and thy brother xxmaj troilus 
▁ a priest , there off'ring to it his own heart . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup paris . i know what ' tis to love , 
▁ xxmaj and would , as i shall pity , i could help ! 
▁ xxmaj please you walk in , my lords . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxup pandarus ' house 

 xxmaj enter xxup pandarus and xxup cressida 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj be moderate , be moderate . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj why tell you me of moderation ? 
▁ xxmaj the grief is fine , full , perfect , that i taste , 
▁ xxmaj and violenteth in a sense as strong 
▁ xxmaj as that which causeth it . xxmaj how can i moderate it ? 
▁ xxmaj if i could temporize with my affections 
▁ xxmaj or brew it to a weak and colder palate , 
▁ xxmaj the like allayment could i give my grief . 
▁ xxmaj my love admits no qualifying dross ; 
▁ xxmaj no more my grief , in such a precious loss . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj here , here , here he comes . xxmaj ah , sweet ducks ! 
▁ xxup cressida . o xxmaj troilus ! xxmaj troilus ! [ embracing him ] 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj what a pair of spectacles is here ! xxmaj let me embrace too . ' o 
▁ heart , ' as the goodly saying is , 
▁ o heart , heavy heart , 
▁ xxmaj why sigh'st thou without breaking ? 
▁ where he answers again 
▁ xxmaj because thou canst not ease thy smart 
▁ xxmaj by friendship nor by speaking . 
▁ xxmaj there was never a truer rhyme . xxmaj let us cast away nothing , for we 
▁ may live to have need of such a verse . xxmaj we see it , we see it . xxmaj how 
▁ now , lambs ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj cressid , i love thee in so strain'd a purity 
▁ xxmaj that the bless'd gods , as angry with my fancy , 
▁ xxmaj more bright in zeal than the devotion which 
▁ xxmaj cold lips blow to their deities , take thee from me . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj have the gods envy ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj ay , ay , ay ; ' tis too plain a case . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj and is it true that i must go from xxmaj troy ? 
▁ xxup troilus . a hateful truth . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj what , and from xxmaj troilus too ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj from xxmaj troy and xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj and suddenly ; where injury of chance 
▁ xxmaj puts back leave - taking , justles roughly by 
▁ xxmaj all time of pause , rudely beguiles our lips 
▁ xxmaj of all rejoindure , forcibly prevents 
▁ xxmaj our lock'd embrasures , strangles our dear vows 
▁ xxmaj even in the birth of our own labouring breath . 
▁ xxmaj we two , that with so many thousand sighs 
▁ xxmaj did buy each other , must poorly sell ourselves 
▁ xxmaj with the rude brevity and discharge of one . 
▁ xxmaj injurious time now with a robber 's haste 
▁ xxmaj crams his rich thievery up , he knows not how . 
▁ xxmaj as many farewells as be stars in heaven , 
▁ xxmaj with distinct breath and consign'd kisses to them , 
▁ xxmaj he fumbles up into a loose adieu , 
▁ xxmaj and scants us with a single famish'd kiss , 
▁ xxmaj distasted with the salt of broken tears . 
▁ xxup aeneas . [ within ] xxmaj my lord , is the lady ready ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hark ! you are call'd . xxmaj some say the xxmaj genius so 
▁ xxmaj cries ' come ' to him that instantly must die . 
▁ xxmaj bid them have patience ; she shall come anon . 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj where are my tears ? xxmaj rain , to lay this wind , or my heart 
▁ will be blown up by th ' root ? xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup cressida . i must then to the xxmaj grecians ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj no remedy . 
▁ xxup cressida . a woeful xxmaj cressid ' mongst the merry xxmaj greeks ! 
▁ xxmaj when shall we see again ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hear me , my love . xxmaj be thou but true of heart- 
▁ xxup cressida . i true ! how now ! xxmaj what wicked deem is this ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj nay , we must use expostulation kindly , 
▁ xxmaj for it is parting from us . 
▁ i speak not ' be thou true ' as fearing thee , 
▁ xxmaj for i will throw my glove to xxmaj death himself 
▁ xxmaj that there 's no maculation in thy heart ; 
▁ xxmaj but ' be thou true ' say i to fashion in 
▁ xxmaj my sequent protestation : be thou true , 
▁ xxmaj and i will see thee . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxup o , you shall be expos'd , my lord , to dangers 
▁ xxmaj as infinite as imminent ! xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll be true . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll grow friend with danger . xxmaj wear this sleeve . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj and you this glove . xxmaj when shall i see you ? 
▁ xxup troilus . i will corrupt the xxmaj grecian sentinels 
▁ xxmaj to give thee nightly visitation . 
▁ xxmaj but yet be true . 
▁ xxup cressida . o heavens ! ' be true ' again ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hear why i speak it , love . 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj grecian youths are full of quality ; 
▁ xxmaj they 're loving , well compos'd with gifts of nature , 
▁ xxmaj and flowing o'er with arts and exercise . 
▁ xxmaj how novelties may move , and parts with person , 
▁ xxmaj alas , a kind of godly jealousy , 
▁ xxmaj which i beseech you call a virtuous sin , 
▁ xxmaj makes me afeard . 
▁ xxup cressida . o heavens ! you love me not . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj die i a villain , then ! 
▁ xxmaj in this i do not call your faith in question 
▁ xxmaj so mainly as my merit . i can not sing , 
▁ xxmaj nor heel the high lavolt , nor sweeten talk , 
▁ xxmaj nor play at subtle games - fair virtues all , 
▁ xxmaj to which the xxmaj grecians are most prompt and pregnant ; 
▁ xxmaj but i can tell that in each grace of these 
▁ xxmaj there lurks a still and dumb - discoursive devil 
▁ xxmaj that tempts most cunningly . xxmaj but be not tempted . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj do you think i will ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxmaj but something may be done that we will not ; 
▁ xxmaj and sometimes we are devils to ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj when we will tempt the frailty of our powers , 
▁ xxmaj presuming on their changeful potency . 
▁ xxup aeneas . [ within ] xxmaj nay , good my lord ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj come , kiss ; and let us part . 
▁ xxup paris . [ within ] xxmaj brother xxmaj troilus ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj good brother , come you hither ; 
▁ xxmaj and bring xxmaj aeneas and the xxmaj grecian with you . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj my lord , will you be true ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj who , xxup i ? xxmaj alas , it is my vice , my fault ! 
▁ xxmaj whiles others fish with craft for great opinion , 
▁ i with great truth catch mere simplicity ; 
▁ xxmaj whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns , 
▁ xxmaj with truth and plainness i do wear mine bare . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aeneas , xxup paris , xxup antenor , xxup deiphobus , and xxup diomedes 

▁ xxmaj fear not my truth : the moral of my wit 
▁ xxmaj is ' plain and true ' ; there 's all the reach of it . 
▁ xxmaj welcome , xxmaj sir xxmaj diomed ! xxmaj here is the lady 
▁ xxmaj which for xxmaj antenor we deliver you ; 
▁ xxmaj at the port , lord , xxmaj i 'll give her to thy hand , 
▁ xxmaj and by the way possess thee what she is . 
▁ xxmaj entreat her fair ; and , by my soul , fair xxmaj greek , 
▁ xxmaj if e'er thou stand at mercy of my sword , 
▁ xxmaj name xxmaj cressid , and thy life shall be as safe 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj priam is in xxmaj ilion . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj fair xxmaj lady xxmaj cressid , 
▁ xxmaj so please you , save the thanks this prince expects . 
▁ xxmaj the lustre in your eye , heaven in your cheek , 
▁ xxmaj pleads your fair usage ; and to xxmaj diomed 
▁ xxmaj you shall be mistress , and command him wholly . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj grecian , thou dost not use me courteously 
▁ xxmaj to shame the zeal of my petition to the 
▁ xxmaj in praising her . i tell thee , lord of xxmaj greece , 
▁ xxmaj she is as far high - soaring o'er thy praises 
▁ xxmaj as thou unworthy to be call'd her servant . 
▁ i charge thee use her well , even for my charge ; 
▁ xxmaj for , by the dreadful xxmaj pluto , if thou dost not , 
▁ xxmaj though the great bulk xxmaj achilles be thy guard , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll cut thy throat . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxup o , be not mov'd , xxmaj prince xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxmaj let me be privileg'd by my place and message 
▁ xxmaj to be a speaker free : when i am hence 
▁ xxmaj i 'll answer to my lust . xxmaj and know you , lord , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll nothing do on charge : to her own worth 
▁ xxmaj she shall be priz'd . xxmaj but that you say ' be't so , ' 
▁ i speak it in my spirit and honour , ' no . ' 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj come , to the port . xxmaj i 'll tell thee , xxmaj diomed , 
▁ xxmaj this brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head . 
▁ xxmaj lady , give me your hand ; and , as we walk , 
▁ xxmaj to our own selves bend we our needful talk . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup troilus , xxup cressida , and xxup diomedes 
▁ [ sound trumpet ] 
▁ xxup paris . xxmaj hark ! xxmaj hector 's trumpet . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj how have we spent this morning ! 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince must think me tardy and remiss , 
▁ xxmaj that swore to ride before him to the field . 
▁ xxup paris . ' tis xxmaj troilus ' fault . xxmaj come , come to field with him . 
▁ xxup deiphobus . xxmaj let us make ready straight . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj yea , with a bridegroom 's fresh alacrity 
▁ xxmaj let us address to tend on xxmaj hector 's heels . 
▁ xxmaj the glory of our xxmaj troy doth this day lie 
▁ xxmaj on his fair worth and single chivalry . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene 5 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj grecian camp . xxmaj lists set out 

 xxmaj enter xxup ajax , armed ; xxup agamemnon , xxup achilles , xxup patroclus , xxup menelaus , xxup ulysses , 
 xxup nestor , and others 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj here art thou in appointment fresh and fair , 
▁ xxmaj anticipating time with starting courage . 
▁ xxmaj give with thy trumpet a loud note to xxmaj troy , 
▁ xxmaj thou dreadful xxmaj ajax , that the appalled air 
▁ xxmaj may pierce the head of the great combatant , 
▁ xxmaj and hale him hither . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj thou , trumpet , there 's my purse . 
▁ xxmaj now crack thy lungs and split thy brazen pipe ; 
▁ xxmaj blow , villain , till thy sphered bias cheek 
▁ xxmaj out - swell the colic of puff xxmaj aquilon'd . 
▁ xxmaj come , stretch thy chest , and let thy eyes spout blood : 
▁ xxmaj thou blowest for xxmaj hector . [ trumpet sounds ] 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj no trumpet answers . 
▁ xxup achilles . ' tis but early days . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup diomedes , with xxup cressida 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj is not yond xxmaj diomed , with xxmaj calchas ' daughter ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . ' tis he , i ken the manner of his gait : 
▁ xxmaj he rises on the toe . xxmaj that spirit of his 
▁ xxmaj in aspiration lifts him from the earth . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj is this the lady xxmaj cressid ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj even she . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj most dearly welcome to the xxmaj greeks , sweet lady . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj our general doth salute you with a kiss . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj yet is the kindness but particular ; 
▁ ' twere better she were kiss'd in general . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj and very courtly counsel : xxmaj i 'll begin . 
▁ xxmaj so much for xxmaj nestor . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj i 'll take that winter from your lips , fair lady . 
▁ xxmaj achilles bids you welcome . 
▁ xxup menelaus . i had good argument for kissing once . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj but that 's no argument for kissing now ; 
▁ xxmaj for thus popp'd xxmaj paris in his hardiment , 
▁ xxmaj and parted thus you and your argument . 
▁ xxup ulysses . o deadly gall , and theme of all our scorns ! 
▁ xxmaj for which we lose our heads to gild his horns . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj the first was xxmaj menelaus ' kiss ; this , mine- 
▁ [ kisses her again ] 
▁ xxmaj patroclus kisses you . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxup o , this is trim ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj paris and i kiss evermore for him . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj i 'll have my kiss , sir . xxmaj lady , by your leave . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj in kissing , do you render or receive ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj both take and give . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj i 'll make my match to live , 
▁ xxmaj the kiss you take is better than you give ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore no kiss . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj i 'll give you boot ; xxmaj i 'll give you three for one . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj you are an odd man ; give even or give none . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj an odd man , lady ? xxmaj every man is odd . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj no , xxmaj paris is not ; for you know ' tis true 
▁ xxmaj that you are odd , and he is even with you . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj you fillip me o ' th ' head . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll be sworn . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj it were no match , your nail against his horn . 
▁ xxmaj may xxup i , sweet lady , beg a kiss of you ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj you may . 
▁ xxup ulysses . i do desire it . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj why , beg then . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj why then , for xxmaj venus ' sake give me a kiss 
▁ xxmaj when xxmaj helen is a maid again , and his . 
▁ xxup cressida . i am your debtor ; claim it when ' tis due . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj never 's my day , and then a kiss of you . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj lady , a word . xxmaj i 'll bring you to your father . 
▁ xxmaj exit with xxup cressida 
▁ xxup nestor . a woman of quick sense . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj fie , fie upon her ! 
▁ xxmaj there 's language in her eye , her cheek , her lip , 
▁ xxmaj nay , her foot speaks ; her wanton spirits look out 
▁ xxmaj at every joint and motive of her body . 
▁ o these encounters so glib of tongue 
▁ xxmaj that give a coasting welcome ere it comes , 
▁ xxmaj and wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts 
▁ xxmaj to every ticklish reader ! xxmaj set them down 
▁ xxmaj for sluttish spoils of opportunity , 
▁ xxmaj and daughters of the game . [ trumpet within ] 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj the xxmaj troyans ' trumpet . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hector , armed ; xxup aeneas , xxup troilus , xxup paris , xxup helenus , 
▁ and other xxmaj trojans , with attendants 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj yonder comes the troop . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj hail , all the state of xxmaj greece ! xxmaj what shall be done 
▁ xxmaj to him that victory commands ? xxmaj or do you purpose 
▁ a victor shall be known ? xxmaj will you the knights 
▁ xxmaj shall to the edge of all extremity 
▁ xxmaj pursue each other , or shall they be divided 
▁ xxmaj by any voice or order of the field ? 
▁ xxmaj hector bade ask . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj which way would xxmaj hector have it ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj he cares not ; he 'll obey conditions . 
▁ xxup achilles . ' tis done like xxmaj hector ; but securely done , 
▁ a little proudly , and great deal misprizing 
▁ xxmaj the knight oppos'd . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj if not xxmaj achilles , sir , 
▁ xxmaj what is your name ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj if not xxmaj achilles , nothing . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj therefore xxmaj achilles . xxmaj but whate'er , know this : 
▁ xxmaj in the extremity of great and little 
▁ xxmaj valour and pride excel themselves in xxmaj hector ; 
▁ xxmaj the one almost as infinite as all , 
▁ xxmaj the other blank as nothing . xxmaj weigh him well , 
▁ xxmaj and that which looks like pride is courtesy . 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj ajax is half made of xxmaj hector 's blood ; 
▁ xxmaj in love whereof half xxmaj hector stays at home ; 
▁ xxmaj half heart , half hand , half xxmaj hector comes to seek 
▁ xxmaj this blended knight , half xxmaj troyan and half xxmaj greek . 
▁ xxup achilles . a maiden battle then ? xxup o , i perceive you ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup diomedes 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj here is xxmaj sir xxmaj diomed . xxmaj go , gentle knight , 
▁ xxmaj stand by our xxmaj ajax . xxmaj as you and xxmaj lord ] eneas 
▁ xxmaj consent upon the order of their fight , 
▁ xxmaj so be it ; either to the uttermost , 
▁ xxmaj or else a breath . xxmaj the combatants being kin 
▁ xxmaj half stints their strife before their strokes begin . 
▁ [ ajax and xxup hector enter the lists ] 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj they are oppos'd already . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj what xxmaj troyan is that same that looks so heavy ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj the youngest son of xxmaj priam , a true knight ; 
▁ xxmaj not yet mature , yet matchless ; firm of word ; 
▁ xxmaj speaking in deeds and deedless in his tongue ; 
▁ xxmaj not soon provok'd , nor being provok'd soon calm'd ; 
▁ xxmaj his heart and hand both open and both free ; 
▁ xxmaj for what he has he gives , what thinks he shows , 
▁ xxmaj yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty , 
▁ xxmaj nor dignifies an impair thought with breath ; 
▁ xxmaj manly as xxmaj hector , but more dangerous ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes 
▁ xxmaj to tender objects , but he in heat of action 
▁ xxmaj is more vindicative than jealous love . 
▁ xxmaj they call him xxmaj troilus , and on him erect 
▁ a second hope as fairly built as xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxmaj thus says xxmaj aeneas , one that knows the youth 
▁ xxmaj even to his inches , and , with private soul , 
▁ xxmaj did in great xxmaj ilion thus translate him to me . 
▁ [ alarum . xxup hector and xxup ajax fight ] 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj they are in action . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj now , xxmaj ajax , hold thine own ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hector , thou sleep'st ; 
▁ xxmaj awake thee . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj his blows are well dispos'd . xxmaj there , xxmaj ajax ! 
▁ [ trumpets cease ] 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj you must no more . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj princes , enough , so please you . 
▁ xxup ajax . i am not warm yet ; let us fight again . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj as xxmaj hector pleases . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj why , then will i no more . 
▁ xxmaj thou art , great lord , my father 's sister 's son , 
▁ a cousin - german to great xxmaj priam 's seed ; 
▁ xxmaj the obligation of our blood forbids 
▁ a gory emulation ' twixt us twain : 
▁ xxmaj were thy commixtion xxmaj greek and xxmaj troyan so 
▁ xxmaj that thou could'st say ' this hand is xxmaj grecian all , 
▁ xxmaj and this is xxmaj troyan ; the sinews of this leg 
▁ xxmaj all xxmaj greek , and this all xxmaj troy ; my mother 's blood 
▁ xxmaj runs on the dexter cheek , and this sinister 
▁ xxmaj bounds in my father 's ' ; by xxmaj jove multipotent , 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst not bear from me a xxmaj greekish member 
▁ xxmaj wherein my sword had not impressure made 
▁ xxmaj of our rank feud ; but the just gods gainsay 
▁ xxmaj that any drop thou borrow'dst from thy mother , 
▁ xxmaj my sacred aunt , should by my mortal sword 
▁ xxmaj be drained ! xxmaj let me embrace thee , xxmaj ajax . 
▁ xxmaj by him that thunders , thou hast lusty arms ; 
▁ xxmaj hector would have them fall upon him thus . 
▁ xxmaj cousin , all honour to thee ! 
▁ xxup ajax . i thank thee , xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxmaj thou art too gentle and too free a man . 
▁ i came to kill thee , cousin , and bear hence 
▁ a great addition earned in thy death . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj not xxmaj neoptolemus so mirable , 
▁ xxmaj on whose bright crest xxmaj fame with her loud'st xxmaj oyes 
▁ xxmaj cries ' this is he ' could promise to himself 
▁ a thought of added honour torn from xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj there is expectance here from both the sides 
▁ xxmaj what further you will do . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj we 'll answer it :