xxbos xxmaj the issue is embracement . xxmaj ajax , farewell . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj if i might in entreaties find success , 
▁ xxmaj as seld i have the chance , i would desire 
▁ xxmaj my famous cousin to our xxmaj grecian tents . 
▁ xxup diomedes . ' tis xxmaj agamemnon 's wish ; and great xxmaj achilles 
▁ xxmaj doth long to see unarm'd the valiant xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj aeneas , call my brother xxmaj troilus to me , 
▁ xxmaj and signify this loving interview 
▁ xxmaj to the expecters of our xxmaj troyan part ; 
▁ xxmaj desire them home . xxmaj give me thy hand , my cousin ; 
▁ i will go eat with thee , and see your knights . 

▁ xxup agamemnon and the rest of the xxmaj greeks come forward 

▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj great xxmaj agamemnon comes to meet us here . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj the worthiest of them tell me name by name ; 
▁ xxmaj but for xxmaj achilles , my own searching eyes 
▁ xxmaj shall find him by his large and portly size . 
▁ agamemnon.worthy all arms ! as welcome as to one 
▁ xxmaj that would be rid of such an enemy . 
▁ xxmaj but that 's no welcome . xxmaj understand more clear , 
▁ xxmaj what 's past and what 's to come is strew'd with husks 
▁ xxmaj and formless ruin of oblivion ; 
▁ xxmaj but in this extant moment , faith and troth , 
▁ xxmaj strain'd purely from all hollow bias - drawing , 
▁ xxmaj bids thee with most divine integrity , 
▁ xxmaj from heart of very heart , great xxmaj hector , welcome . 
▁ xxup hector . i thank thee , most imperious xxmaj agamemnon . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . [ to xxmaj troilus ] xxmaj my well - fam'd lord of xxmaj troy , no less to you . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj let me confirm my princely brother 's greeting . 
▁ xxmaj you brace of warlike brothers , welcome hither . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj who must we answer ? 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj the noble xxmaj menelaus . 
▁ xxup hector . o you , my lord ? xxmaj by xxmaj mars his gauntlet , thanks ! 
▁ xxmaj mock not that i affect the untraded oath ; 
▁ xxmaj your quondam wife swears still by xxmaj venus ' glove . 
▁ xxmaj she 's well , but bade me not commend her to you . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj name her not now , sir ; she 's a deadly theme . 
▁ xxup hector . xxup o , pardon ; i offend . 
▁ xxup nestor . i have , thou gallant xxmaj troyan , seen thee oft , 
▁ xxmaj labouring for destiny , make cruel way 
▁ xxmaj through ranks of xxmaj greekish youth ; and i have seen thee , 
▁ xxmaj as hot as xxmaj perseus , spur thy xxmaj phrygian steed , 
▁ xxmaj despising many forfeits and subduements , 
▁ xxmaj when thou hast hung thy advanced sword i ' th ' air , 
▁ xxmaj not letting it decline on the declined ; 
▁ xxmaj that i have said to some my standers - by 
▁ ' lo , xxmaj jupiter is yonder , dealing life ! ' 
▁ xxmaj and i have seen thee pause and take thy breath , 
▁ xxmaj when that a ring of xxmaj greeks have hemm'd thee in , 
▁ xxmaj like an xxmaj olympian wrestling . xxmaj this have i seen ; 
▁ xxmaj but this thy countenance , still lock'd in steel , 
▁ i never saw till now . i knew thy grandsire , 
▁ xxmaj and once fought with him . xxmaj he was a soldier good , 
▁ xxmaj but , by great xxmaj mars , the captain of us all , 
▁ xxmaj never like thee . xxup o , let an old man embrace thee ; 
▁ xxmaj and , worthy warrior , welcome to our tents . 
▁ xxup aeneas . ' tis the old xxmaj nestor . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj let me embrace thee , good old chronicle , 
▁ xxmaj that hast so long walk'd hand in hand with time . 
▁ xxmaj most reverend xxmaj nestor , i am glad to clasp thee . 
▁ xxup nestor . i would my arms could match thee in contention 
▁ xxmaj as they contend with thee in courtesy . 
▁ xxup hector . i would they could . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj ha ! 
▁ xxmaj by this white beard , xxmaj i 'd fight with thee to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj well , welcome , welcome ! i have seen the time . 
▁ xxup ulysses . i wonder now how yonder city stands , 
▁ xxmaj when we have here her base and pillar by us . 
▁ xxup hector . i know your favour , xxmaj lord xxmaj ulysses , well . 
▁ xxmaj ah , sir , there 's many a xxmaj greek and xxmaj troyan dead , 
▁ xxmaj since first i saw yourself and xxmaj diomed 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj ilion on your xxmaj greekish embassy . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj sir , i foretold you then what would ensue . 
▁ xxmaj my prophecy is but half his journey yet ; 
▁ xxmaj for yonder walls , that pertly front your town , 
▁ xxmaj yond towers , whose wanton tops do buss the clouds , 
▁ xxmaj must kiss their own feet . 
▁ xxup hector . i must not believe you . 
▁ xxmaj there they stand yet ; and modestly i think 
▁ xxmaj the fall of every xxmaj phrygian stone will cost 
▁ a drop of xxmaj grecian blood . xxmaj the end crowns all ; 
▁ xxmaj and that old common arbitrator , xxmaj time , 
▁ xxmaj will one day end it . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj so to him we leave it . 
▁ xxmaj most gentle and most valiant xxmaj hector , welcome . 
▁ xxmaj after the xxmaj general , i beseech you next 
▁ xxmaj to feast with me and see me at my tent . 
▁ xxup achilles . i shall forestall thee , xxmaj lord xxmaj ulysses , thou ! 
▁ xxmaj now , xxmaj hector , i have fed mine eyes on thee ; 
▁ i have with exact view perus'd thee , xxmaj hector , 
▁ xxmaj and quoted joint by joint . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj is this xxmaj achilles ? 
▁ xxup achilles . i am xxmaj achilles . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj stand fair , i pray thee ; let me look on thee . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj behold thy fill . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj nay , i have done already . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj thou art too brief . i will the second time , 
▁ xxmaj as i would buy thee , view thee limb by limb . 
▁ xxup hector . xxup o , like a book of sport thou'lt read me o'er ; 
▁ xxmaj but there 's more in me than thou understand'st . 
▁ xxmaj why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye ? 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj tell me , you heavens , in which part of his body 
▁ xxmaj shall i destroy him ? xxmaj whether there , or there , or there ? 
▁ xxmaj that i may give the local wound a name , 
▁ xxmaj and make distinct the very breach whereout 
▁ xxmaj hector 's great spirit flew . xxmaj answer me , heavens . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj it would discredit the blest gods , proud man , 
▁ xxmaj to answer such a question . xxmaj stand again . 
▁ xxmaj think'st thou to catch my life so pleasantly 
▁ xxmaj as to prenominate in nice conjecture 
▁ xxmaj where thou wilt hit me dead ? 
▁ xxup achilles . i tell thee yea . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj wert thou an oracle to tell me so , 
▁ xxmaj i 'd not believe thee . xxmaj henceforth guard thee well ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj i 'll not kill thee there , nor there , nor there ; 
▁ xxmaj but , by the forge that stithied xxmaj mars his helm , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll kill thee everywhere , yea , o'er and o'er . 
▁ xxmaj you wisest xxmaj grecians , pardon me this brag . 
▁ xxmaj his insolence draws folly from my lips ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll endeavour deeds to match these words , 
▁ xxmaj or may i never- 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj do not chafe thee , cousin ; 
▁ xxmaj and you , xxmaj achilles , let these threats alone 
▁ xxmaj till accident or purpose bring you to't . 
▁ xxmaj you may have every day enough of xxmaj hector , 
▁ xxmaj if you have stomach . xxmaj the general state , i fear , 
▁ xxmaj can scarce entreat you to be odd with him . 
▁ xxup hector . i pray you let us see you in the field ; 
▁ xxmaj we have had pelting wars since you refus'd 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj grecians ' cause . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj dost thou entreat me , xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow do i meet thee , fell as death ; 
▁ xxmaj to - night all friends . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj thy hand upon that match . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj first , all you peers of xxmaj greece , go to my tent ; 
▁ xxmaj there in the full convive we ; afterwards , 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj hector 's leisure and your bounties shall 
▁ xxmaj concur together , severally entreat him . 
▁ xxmaj beat loud the tambourines , let the trumpets blow , 
▁ xxmaj that this great soldier may his welcome know . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup troilus and xxup ulysses 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj my xxmaj lord xxmaj ulysses , tell me , i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj in what place of the field doth xxmaj calchas keep ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj at xxmaj menelaus ' tent , most princely xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxmaj there xxmaj diomed doth feast with him to - night , 
▁ xxmaj who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth , 
▁ xxmaj but gives all gaze and bent of amorous view 
▁ xxmaj on the fair xxmaj cressid . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj shall xxup i , sweet lord , be bound to you so much , 
▁ xxmaj after we part from xxmaj agamemnon 's tent , 
▁ xxmaj to bring me thither ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj you shall command me , sir . 
▁ xxmaj as gentle tell me of what honour was 
▁ xxmaj this xxmaj cressida in xxmaj troy ? xxmaj had she no lover there 
▁ xxmaj that wails her absence ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxup o , sir , to such as boasting show their scars 
▁ a mock is due . xxmaj will you walk on , my lord ? 
▁ xxmaj she was belov'd , she lov'd ; she is , and doth ; 
▁ xxmaj but still sweet love is food for fortune 's tooth . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 1 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj grecian camp . xxmaj before the tent of xxup achilles 

 xxmaj enter xxup achilles and xxup patroclus 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj i 'll heat his blood with xxmaj greekish wine to - night , 
▁ xxmaj which with my scimitar xxmaj i 'll cool to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj patroclus , let us feast him to the height . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj here comes xxmaj thersites . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup thersites 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj how now , thou core of envy ! 
▁ xxmaj thou crusty batch of nature , what 's the news ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj why , thou picture of what thou seemest , and idol of 
▁ idiot worshippers , here 's a letter for thee . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj from whence , fragment ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj why , thou full dish of fool , from xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj who keeps the tent now ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj the surgeon 's box or the patient 's wound . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj well said , xxmaj adversity ! and what needs these tricks ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj prithee , be silent , boy ; i profit not by thy talk ; thou 
▁ art said to be xxmaj achilles ' male varlet . 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj male varlet , you rogue ! xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj why , his masculine whore . xxmaj now , the rotten diseases of 
▁ the south , the guts - griping ruptures , catarrhs , loads o ' gravel 
▁ in the back , lethargies , cold palsies , raw eyes , dirt - rotten 
▁ livers , wheezing lungs , bladders full of imposthume , sciaticas , 
▁ limekilns i ' th ' palm , incurable bone - ache , and the rivelled fee- 
▁ simple of the tetter , take and take again such preposterous 
▁ discoveries ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj why , thou damnable box of envy , thou , what meanest thou 
▁ to curse thus ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj do i curse thee ? 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj why , no , you ruinous butt ; you whoreson 
▁ indistinguishable cur , no . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj no ! xxmaj why art thou , then , exasperate , thou idle immaterial 
▁ skein of sleid silk , thou green sarcenet flap for a sore eye , 
▁ thou tassel of a prodigal 's purse , thou ? xxmaj ah , how the poor world is 
▁ pest'red with such water - flies - diminutives of nature ! 
▁ xxup patroclus . xxmaj out , gall ! 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj finch egg ! 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj my sweet xxmaj patroclus , i am thwarted quite 
▁ xxmaj from my great purpose in to - morrow 's battle . 
▁ xxmaj here is a letter from xxmaj queen xxmaj hecuba , 
▁ a token from her daughter , my fair love , 
▁ xxmaj both taxing me and gaging me to keep 
▁ xxmaj an oath that i have sworn . i will not break it . 
▁ xxmaj fall xxmaj greeks ; fail fame ; honour or go or stay ; 
▁ xxmaj my major vow lies here , this xxmaj i 'll obey . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , xxmaj thersites , help to trim my tent ; 
▁ xxmaj this night in banqueting must all be spent . 
▁ xxmaj away , xxmaj patroclus ! xxmaj exit with xxup patroclus 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj with too much blood and too little brain these two may 
▁ run mad ; but , if with too much brain and to little blood they do , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be a curer of madmen . xxmaj here 's xxmaj agamemnon , an honest fellow 
▁ enough , and one that loves quails , but he has not so much brain 
▁ as ear - wax ; and the goodly transformation of xxmaj jupiter there , his 
▁ brother , the bull , the primitive statue and oblique memorial of 
▁ cuckolds , a thrifty shoeing - horn in a chain , hanging at his 
▁ brother 's leg - to what form but that he is , should wit larded with 
▁ malice , and malice forced with wit , turn him to ? xxmaj to an ass , were 
▁ nothing : he is both ass and ox . xxmaj to an ox , were nothing : he is both 
▁ ox and ass . xxmaj to be a dog , a mule , a cat , a fitchew , a toad , a 
▁ lizard , an owl , a put - tock , or a herring without a roe , i would 
▁ not care ; but to be xxmaj menelaus , i would conspire against destiny . 
▁ xxmaj ask me not what i would be , if i were not xxmaj thersites ; for i care 
▁ not to be the louse of a lazar , so i were not xxmaj menelaus . xxmaj hey - day ! 
▁ sprites and fires ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hector , xxup troilus , xxup ajax , xxup agamemnon , xxup ulysses , 
▁ xxup nestor , xxup menelaus , and xxup diomedes , with lights 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj we go wrong , we go wrong . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj no , yonder ' tis ; 
▁ xxmaj there , where we see the lights . 
▁ xxup hector . i trouble you . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj no , not a whit . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup achilles 

▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj here comes himself to guide you . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj welcome , brave xxmaj hector ; welcome , xxmaj princes all . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj so now , fair xxmaj prince of xxmaj troy , i bid good night ; 
▁ xxmaj ajax commands the guard to tend on you . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj thanks , and good night to the xxmaj greeks ' general . 
▁ xxup menelaus . xxmaj good night , my lord . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj good night , sweet xxmaj lord xxmaj menelaus . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj sweet draught ! ' sweet ' quoth ' a ? 
▁ xxmaj sweet sink , sweet sewer ! 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj good night and welcome , both at once , to those 
▁ xxmaj that go or tarry . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup agamemnon and xxup menelaus 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj old xxmaj nestor tarries ; and you too , xxmaj diomed , 
▁ xxmaj keep xxmaj hector company an hour or two . 
▁ xxup diomedes . i can not , lord ; i have important business , 
▁ xxmaj the tide whereof is now . xxmaj good night , great xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj give me your hand . 
▁ xxup ulysses . [ aside to xxup troilus ] xxmaj follow his torch ; he goes to 
▁ xxmaj calchas ' tent ; xxmaj i 'll keep you company . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj sweet sir , you honour me . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj and so , good night . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup diomedes ; xxup ulysses and xxup troilus following 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj come , come , enter my tent . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup thersites 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj that same xxmaj diomed 's a false - hearted rogue , a most unjust 
▁ knave ; i will no more trust him when he leers than i will a 
▁ serpent when he hisses . xxmaj he will spend his mouth and promise , like 
▁ xxmaj brabbler the hound ; but when he performs , astronomers foretell 
▁ it : it is prodigious , there will come some change ; the sun 
▁ borrows of the moon when xxmaj diomed keeps his word . i will rather 
▁ leave to see xxmaj hector than not to dog him . xxmaj they say he keeps a 
▁ xxmaj troyan drab , and uses the traitor xxmaj calchas ' tent . xxmaj i 'll after . 
▁ xxmaj nothing but lechery ! xxmaj all incontinent varlets ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 2 . 
 xxmaj the xxmaj grecian camp . xxmaj before xxup calchas ' tent 

 xxmaj enter xxup diomedes 

▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj what , are you up here , ho ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxup calchas . [ within ] xxmaj who calls ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj diomed . xxmaj calchas , i think . xxmaj where 's your daughter ? 
▁ xxup calchas . [ within ] xxmaj she comes to you . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus and xxup ulysses , at a distance ; after them 
▁ xxup thersites 

▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj stand where the torch may not discover us . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cressida 

▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj cressid comes forth to him . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj how now , my charge ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj now , my sweet guardian ! xxmaj hark , a word with you . 
 [ whispers ] 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj yea , so familiar ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj she will sing any man at first sight . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj and any man may sing her , if he can take her cliff ; 
▁ she 's noted . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj will you remember ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj remember ? xxmaj yes . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj nay , but do , then ; 
▁ xxmaj and let your mind be coupled with your words . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj what shall she remember ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj list ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj sweet honey xxmaj greek , tempt me no more to folly . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj roguery ! 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj nay , then- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj i 'll tell you what- 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj fo , fo ! come , tell a pin ; you are a forsworn- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj in faith , i can not . xxmaj what would you have me do ? 
▁ xxup thersites . a juggling trick , to be secretly open . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj what did you swear you would bestow on me ? 
▁ xxup cressida . i prithee , do not hold me to mine oath ; 
▁ xxmaj bid me do anything but that , sweet xxmaj greek . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj good night . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hold , patience ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj how now , xxmaj troyan ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj diomed ! 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj no , no , good night ; xxmaj i 'll be your fool no more . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj thy better must . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj hark ! a word in your ear . 
▁ xxup troilus . o plague and madness ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj you are moved , xxmaj prince ; let us depart , i pray , 
▁ xxmaj lest your displeasure should enlarge itself 
▁ xxmaj to wrathful terms . xxmaj this place is dangerous ; 
▁ xxmaj the time right deadly ; i beseech you , go . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj behold , i pray you . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj nay , good my lord , go off ; 
▁ xxmaj you flow to great distraction ; come , my lord . 
▁ xxup troilus . i prithee stay . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj you have not patience ; come . 
▁ xxup troilus . i pray you , stay ; by hell and all hell 's torments , 
▁ i will not speak a word . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj and so , good night . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj nay , but you part in anger . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj doth that grieve thee ? o withered truth ! 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj how now , my lord ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj by xxmaj jove , i will be patient . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj guardian ! xxmaj why , xxmaj greek ! 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj fo , fo ! adieu ! you palter . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj in faith , i do not . xxmaj come hither once again . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj you shake , my lord , at something ; will you go ? 
▁ xxmaj you will break out . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj she strokes his cheek . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj come , come . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj nay , stay ; by xxmaj jove , i will not speak a word : 
▁ xxmaj there is between my will and all offences 
▁ a guard of patience . xxmaj stay a little while . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj how the devil luxury , with his fat rump and potato 
▁ finger , tickles these together ! xxmaj fry , lechery , fry ! 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj but will you , then ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj in faith , i will , lo ; never trust me else . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj give me some token for the surety of it . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj i 'll fetch you one . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj you have sworn patience . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj fear me not , my lord ; 
▁ i will not be myself , nor have cognition 
▁ xxmaj of what i feel . i am all patience . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup cressida 

▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj now the pledge ; now , now , now ! 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj here , xxmaj diomed , keep this sleeve . 
▁ xxup troilus . o beauty ! where is thy faith ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj my lord ! 
▁ xxup troilus . i will be patient ; outwardly i will . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj you look upon that sleeve ; behold it well . 
▁ xxmaj he lov'd me - o false wench!-give't me again . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj whose was't ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj it is no matter , now i ha't again . 
▁ i will not meet with you to - morrow night . 
▁ i prithee , xxmaj diomed , visit me no more . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj now she sharpens . xxmaj well said , whetstone . 
▁ xxup diomedes . i shall have it . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj what , this ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj ay , that . 
▁ xxup cressida . o all you gods ! o pretty , pretty pledge ! 
▁ xxmaj thy master now lies thinking on his bed 
▁ xxmaj of thee and me , and sighs , and takes my glove , 
▁ xxmaj and gives memorial dainty kisses to it , 
▁ xxmaj as i kiss thee . xxmaj nay , do not snatch it from me ; 
▁ xxmaj he that takes that doth take my heart withal . 
▁ xxup diomedes . i had your heart before ; this follows it . 
▁ xxup troilus . i did swear patience . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj you shall not have it , xxmaj diomed ; faith , you shall not ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give you something else . 
▁ xxup diomedes . i will have this . xxmaj whose was it ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj it is no matter . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj come , tell me whose it was . 
▁ xxup cressida . ' twas one 's that lov'd me better than you will . 
▁ xxmaj but , now you have it , take it . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj whose was it ? 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj by all xxmaj diana 's waiting women yond , 
▁ xxmaj and by herself , i will not tell you whose . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj to - morrow will i wear it on my helm , 
▁ xxmaj and grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj wert thou the devil and wor'st it on thy horn , 
▁ xxmaj it should be challeng'd . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj well , well , ' tis done , ' tis past ; and yet it is not ; 
▁ i will not keep my word . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj why , then farewell ; 
▁ xxmaj thou never shalt mock xxmaj diomed again . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj you shall not go . xxmaj one can not speak a word 
▁ xxmaj but it straight starts you . 
▁ xxup diomedes . i do not like this fooling . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj nor xxup i , by xxmaj pluto ; but that that likes not you 
▁ xxmaj pleases me best . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj what , shall i come ? xxmaj the hour- 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj ay , come - o xxmaj jove ! xxmaj do come . i shall be plagu'd . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj farewell till then . 
▁ xxup cressida . xxmaj good night . i prithee come . xxmaj exit xxup diomedes 
▁ xxmaj troilus , farewell ! xxmaj one eye yet looks on thee ; 
▁ xxmaj but with my heart the other eye doth see . 
▁ xxmaj ah , poor our sex ! this fault in us i find , 
▁ xxmaj the error of our eye directs our mind . 
▁ xxmaj what error leads must err ; xxup o , then conclude , 
▁ xxmaj minds sway'd by eyes are full of turpitude . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup thersites . a proof of strength she could not publish more , 
▁ xxmaj unless she said ' my mind is now turn'd whore . ' 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj all 's done , my lord . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj it is . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj why stay we , then ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj to make a recordation to my soul 
▁ xxmaj of every syllable that here was spoke . 
▁ xxmaj but if i tell how these two did coact , 
▁ xxmaj shall i not lie in publishing a truth ? 
▁ xxmaj sith yet there is a credence in my heart , 
▁ xxmaj an esperance so obstinately strong , 
▁ xxmaj that doth invert th ' attest of eyes and ears ; 
▁ xxmaj as if those organs had deceptious functions 
▁ xxmaj created only to calumniate . 
▁ xxmaj was xxmaj cressid here ? 
▁ xxup ulysses . i can not conjure , xxmaj troyan . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj she was not , sure . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj most sure she was . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj why , my negation hath no taste of madness . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj nor mine , my lord . xxmaj cressid was here but now . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj let it not be believ'd for womanhood . 
▁ xxmaj think , we had mothers ; do not give advantage 
▁ xxmaj to stubborn critics , apt , without a theme , 
▁ xxmaj for depravation , to square the general sex 
▁ xxmaj by xxmaj cressid 's rule . xxmaj rather think this not xxmaj cressid . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj what hath she done , xxmaj prince , that can soil our mothers ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj nothing at all , unless that this were she . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj will ' a swagger himself out on 's own eyes ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj this she ? xxmaj no ; this is xxmaj diomed 's xxmaj cressida . 
▁ xxmaj if beauty have a soul , this is not she ; 
▁ xxmaj if souls guide vows , if vows be sanctimonies , 
▁ xxmaj if sanctimony be the god 's delight , 
▁ xxmaj if there be rule in unity itself , 
▁ xxmaj this was not she . o madness of discourse , 
▁ xxmaj that cause sets up with and against itself ! 
▁ xxmaj bifold authority ! where reason can revolt 
▁ xxmaj without perdition , and loss assume all reason 
▁ xxmaj without revolt : this is , and is not , xxmaj cressid . 
▁ xxmaj within my soul there doth conduce a fight 
▁ xxmaj of this strange nature , that a thing inseparate 
▁ xxmaj divides more wider than the sky and earth ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet the spacious breadth of this division 
▁ xxmaj admits no orifex for a point as subtle 
▁ xxmaj as xxmaj ariachne 's broken woof to enter . 
▁ xxmaj instance , o instance ! strong as xxmaj pluto 's gates : 
▁ xxmaj cressid is mine , tied with the bonds of heaven . 
▁ xxmaj instance , o instance ! strong as heaven itself : 
▁ xxmaj the bonds of heaven are slipp'd , dissolv'd , and loos'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and with another knot , five - finger - tied , 
▁ xxmaj the fractions of her faith , orts of her love , 
▁ xxmaj the fragments , scraps , the bits , and greasy relics 
▁ xxmaj of her o'er - eaten faith , are bound to xxmaj diomed . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj may worthy xxmaj troilus be half - attach'd 
▁ xxmaj with that which here his passion doth express ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj ay , xxmaj greek ; and that shall be divulged well 
▁ xxmaj in characters as red as xxmaj mars his heart 
▁ xxmaj inflam'd with xxmaj venus . xxmaj never did young man fancy 
▁ xxmaj with so eternal and so fix'd a soul . 
▁ xxmaj hark , xxmaj greek : as much as i do xxmaj cressid love , 
▁ xxmaj so much by weight hate i her xxmaj diomed . 
▁ xxmaj that sleeve is mine that he 'll bear on his helm ; 
▁ xxmaj were it a casque compos'd by xxmaj vulcan 's skill 
▁ xxmaj my sword should bite it . xxmaj not the dreadful spout 
▁ xxmaj which shipmen do the hurricano call , 
▁ xxmaj constring'd in mass by the almighty sun , 
▁ xxmaj shall dizzy with more clamour xxmaj neptune 's ear 
▁ xxmaj in his descent than shall my prompted sword 
▁ xxmaj falling on xxmaj diomed . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj he 'll tickle it for his concupy . 
▁ xxup troilus . o xxmaj cressid ! o false xxmaj cressid ! false , false , false ! 
▁ xxmaj let all untruths stand by thy stained name , 
▁ xxmaj and they 'll seem glorious . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxup o , contain yourself ; 
▁ xxmaj your passion draws ears hither . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup aeneas 

▁ xxup aeneas . i have been seeking you this hour , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj hector , by this , is arming him in xxmaj troy ; 
▁ xxmaj ajax , your guard , stays to conduct you home . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj have with you , xxmaj prince . xxmaj my courteous lord , adieu . 
▁ xxmaj fairwell , revolted fair!-and , xxmaj diomed , 
▁ xxmaj stand fast and wear a castle on thy head . 
▁ xxup ulysses . xxmaj i 'll bring you to the gates . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj accept distracted thanks . 

▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup troilus , xxup aeneas . and xxup ulysses 

▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj would i could meet that rogue xxmaj diomed ! i would croak like 
▁ a raven ; i would bode , i would bode . xxmaj patroclus will give me 
▁ anything for the intelligence of this whore ; the parrot will not 
▁ do more for an almond than he for a commodious drab . xxmaj lechery , 
▁ lechery ! xxmaj still wars and lechery ! xxmaj nothing else holds fashion . a 
▁ burning devil take them ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 3 . 
 xxmaj troy . xxmaj before xxup priam 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup hector and xxup andromache 

▁ xxup andromache . xxmaj when was my lord so much ungently temper'd 
▁ xxmaj to stop his ears against admonishment ? 
▁ xxmaj unarm , unarm , and do not fight to - day . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj you train me to offend you ; get you in . 
▁ xxmaj by all the everlasting gods , xxmaj i 'll go . 
▁ xxup andromache . xxmaj my dreams will , sure , prove ominous to the day . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj no more , i say . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup cassandra 

▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj where is my brother xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxup andromache . xxmaj here , sister , arm'd , and bloody in intent . 
▁ xxmaj consort with me in loud and dear petition , 
▁ xxmaj pursue we him on knees ; for i have dreamt 
▁ xxmaj of bloody turbulence , and this whole night 
▁ xxmaj hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter . 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxup o , ' tis true ! 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj ho ! bid my trumpet sound . 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj no notes of sally , for the heavens , sweet brother ! 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj be gone , i say . xxmaj the gods have heard me swear . 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj the gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows ; 
▁ xxmaj they are polluted off'rings , more abhorr'd 
▁ xxmaj than spotted livers in the sacrifice . 
▁ xxup andromache . xxup o , be persuaded ! xxmaj do not count it holy 
▁ xxmaj to hurt by being just . xxmaj it is as lawful , 
▁ xxmaj for we would give much , to use violent thefts 
▁ xxmaj and rob in the behalf of charity . 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj it is the purpose that makes strong the vow ; 
▁ xxmaj but vows to every purpose must not hold . 
▁ xxmaj unarm , sweet xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj hold you still , i say . 
▁ xxmaj mine honour keeps the weather of my fate . 
▁ xxmaj life every man holds dear ; but the dear man 
▁ xxmaj holds honour far more precious dear than life . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus 
▁
▁ xxmaj how now , young man ! xxmaj mean'st thou to fight to - day ? 
▁ xxup andromache . xxmaj cassandra , call my father to persuade . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup cassandra 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj no , faith , young xxmaj troilus ; doff thy harness , youth ; 
▁ i am to - day i ' th ' vein of chivalry . 
▁ xxmaj let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong , 
▁ xxmaj and tempt not yet the brushes of the war . 
▁ xxmaj unarm thee , go ; and doubt thou not , brave boy , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll stand to - day for thee and me and xxmaj troy . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj brother , you have a vice of mercy in you 
▁ xxmaj which better fits a lion than a man . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj what vice is that , good xxmaj troilus ? 
▁ xxmaj chide me for it . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj when many times the captive xxmaj grecian falls , 
▁ xxmaj even in the fan and wind of your fair sword , 
▁ xxmaj you bid them rise and live . 
▁ xxup hector . xxup o , ' tis fair play ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj fool 's play , by heaven , xxmaj hector . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj how now ! how now ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj for th ' love of all the gods , 
▁ xxmaj let 's leave the hermit xxmaj pity with our mother ; 
▁ xxmaj and when we have our armours buckled on , 
▁ xxmaj the venom'd vengeance ride upon our swords , 
▁ xxmaj spur them to ruthful work , rein them from ruth ! 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj fie , savage , fie ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hector , then ' tis wars . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj troilus , i would not have you fight to - day . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj who should withhold me ? 
▁ xxmaj not fate , obedience , nor the hand of xxmaj mars 
▁ xxmaj beck'ning with fiery truncheon my retire ; 
▁ xxmaj not xxmaj priamus and xxmaj hecuba on knees , 
▁ xxmaj their eyes o'ergalled with recourse of tears ; 
▁ xxmaj nor you , my brother , with your true sword drawn , 
▁ xxmaj oppos'd to hinder me , should stop my way , 
▁ xxmaj but by my ruin . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup cassandra , with xxup priam 

▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj lay hold upon him , xxmaj priam , hold him fast ; 
▁ xxmaj he is thy crutch ; now if thou lose thy stay , 
▁ xxmaj thou on him leaning , and all xxmaj troy on thee , 
▁ xxmaj fall all together . 
▁ xxup priam . xxmaj come , xxmaj hector , come , go back . 
▁ xxmaj thy wife hath dreamt ; thy mother hath had visions ; 
▁ xxmaj cassandra doth foresee ; and i myself 
▁ xxmaj am like a prophet suddenly enrapt 
▁ xxmaj to tell thee that this day is ominous . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , come back . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj aeneas is a - field ; 
▁ xxmaj and i do stand engag'd to many xxmaj greeks , 
▁ xxmaj even in the faith of valour , to appear 
▁ xxmaj this morning to them . 
▁ xxup priam . xxmaj ay , but thou shalt not go . 
▁ xxup hector . i must not break my faith . 
▁ xxmaj you know me dutiful ; therefore , dear sir , 
▁ xxmaj let me not shame respect ; but give me leave 
▁ xxmaj to take that course by your consent and voice 
▁ xxmaj which you do here forbid me , royal xxmaj priam . 
▁ xxup cassandra . o xxmaj priam , yield not to him ! 
▁ xxup andromache . xxmaj do not , dear father . 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj andromache , i am offended with you . 
▁ xxmaj upon the love you bear me , get you in . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup andromache 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj this foolish , dreaming , superstitious girl 
▁ xxmaj makes all these bodements . 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxup o , farewell , dear xxmaj hector ! 
▁ xxmaj look how thou diest . xxmaj look how thy eye turns pale . 
▁ xxmaj look how thy wounds do bleed at many vents . 
▁ xxmaj hark how xxmaj troy roars ; how xxmaj hecuba cries out ; 
▁ xxmaj how poor xxmaj andromache shrills her dolours forth ; 
▁ xxmaj behold distraction , frenzy , and amazement , 
▁ xxmaj like witless antics , one another meet , 
▁ xxmaj and all cry , xxmaj hector ! xxmaj hector 's dead ! o xxmaj hector ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj away , away ! 
▁ xxup cassandra . xxmaj farewell!-yet , soft ! xxmaj hector , i take my leave . 
▁ xxmaj thou dost thyself and all our xxmaj troy deceive . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj you are amaz'd , my liege , at her exclaim . 
▁ xxmaj go in , and cheer the town ; we 'll forth , and fight , 
▁ xxmaj do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night . 
▁ xxup priam . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj the gods with safety stand about thee ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt severally xxup priam and xxup hector . xxmaj alarums 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj they are at it , hark ! xxmaj proud xxmaj diomed , believe , 
▁ i come to lose my arm or win my sleeve . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj do you hear , my lord ? xxmaj do you hear ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj what now ? 
▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj here 's a letter come from yond poor girl . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj let me read . 
▁ xxup pandarus . a whoreson tisick , a whoreson rascally tisick so troubles 
▁ me , and the foolish fortune of this girl , and what one thing , 
▁ what another , that i shall leave you one o ' th 's days ; and i have 
▁ a rheum in mine eyes too , and such an ache in my bones that 
▁ unless a man were curs'd i can not tell what to think on't . xxmaj what 
▁ says she there ? 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj words , words , mere words , no matter from the heart ; 
▁ xxmaj th ' effect doth operate another way . 
▁ [ tearing the letter ] 
▁ xxmaj go , wind , to wind , there turn and change together . 
▁ xxmaj my love with words and errors still she feeds , 
▁ xxmaj but edifies another with her deeds . xxmaj exeunt severally 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 4 . 
 xxmaj the plain between xxmaj troy and the xxmaj grecian camp 

 xxmaj enter xxup thersites . xxmaj excursions 

▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj now they are clapper - clawing one another ; xxmaj i 'll go look 
▁ on . xxmaj that dissembling abominable varlet , xxmaj diomed , has got that same 
▁ scurvy doting foolish young knave 's sleeve of xxmaj troy there in his 
▁ helm . i would fain see them meet , that that same young xxmaj troyan ass 
▁ that loves the whore there might send that xxmaj greekish whoremasterly 
▁ villain with the sleeve back to the dissembling luxurious drab of 
▁ a sleeve - less errand . a th ' t'other side , the policy of those 
▁ crafty swearing rascals - that stale old mouse - eaten dry cheese , 
▁ xxmaj nestor , and that same dog - fox , xxmaj ulysses -is not prov'd worth a 
▁ blackberry . xxmaj they set me up , in policy , that mongrel cur , xxmaj ajax , 
▁ against that dog of as bad a kind , xxmaj achilles ; and now is the cur , 
▁ xxmaj ajax prouder than the cur xxmaj achilles , and will not arm to - day ; 
▁ whereupon the xxmaj grecians begin to proclaim barbarism , and policy 
▁ grows into an ill opinion . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup diomedes , xxup troilus following 
▁
▁ xxmaj soft ! here comes sleeve , and t'other . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj fly not ; for shouldst thou take the river xxmaj styx 
▁ i would swim after . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj thou dost miscall retire . 
▁ i do not fly ; but advantageous care 
▁ xxmaj withdrew me from the odds of multitude . 
▁ xxmaj have at thee . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj hold thy whore , xxmaj grecian ; now for thy whore , 
▁ xxmaj troyan - now the sleeve , now the sleeve ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup troilus and xxup diomedes fighting 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hector 

▁ xxup hector . xxmaj what art thou , xxmaj greek ? xxmaj art thou for xxmaj hector 's match ? 
▁ xxmaj art thou of blood and honour ? 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj no , no - i am a rascal ; a scurvy railing knave ; a very 
▁ filthy rogue . 
▁ xxup hector . i do believe thee . xxmaj live . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj god - a - mercy , that thou wilt believe me ; but a plague 
▁ break thy neck for frighting me ! xxmaj what 's become of the wenching 
▁ rogues ? i think they have swallowed one another . i would laugh at 
▁ that miracle . xxmaj yet , in a sort , lechery eats itself . xxmaj i 'll seek 
▁ them . xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 5 . 
 xxmaj another part of the plain 

 xxmaj enter xxup diomedes and a xxup servant 

▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj go , go , my servant , take thou xxmaj troilus ' horse ; 
▁ xxmaj present the fair steed to my lady xxmaj cressid . 
▁ xxmaj fellow , commend my service to her beauty ; 
▁ xxmaj tell her i have chastis'd the amorous xxmaj troyan , 
▁ xxmaj and am her knight by proof . 
▁ xxup servant . i go , my lord . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup agamemnon 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj renew , renew ! xxmaj the fierce xxmaj polydamus 
▁ xxmaj hath beat down enon ; bastard xxmaj margarelon 
▁ xxmaj hath xxmaj doreus prisoner , 
▁ xxmaj and stands colossus - wise , waving his beam , 
▁ xxmaj upon the pashed corses of the kings 
▁ xxmaj epistrophus and xxmaj cedius . xxmaj polixenes is slain ; 
▁ xxmaj amphimacus and xxmaj thoas deadly hurt ; 
▁ xxmaj patroclus ta'en , or slain ; and xxmaj palamedes 
▁ xxmaj sore hurt and bruis'd . xxmaj the dreadful xxmaj sagittary 
▁ xxmaj appals our numbers . xxmaj haste we , xxmaj diomed , 
▁ xxmaj to reinforcement , or we perish all . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup nestor 

▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj go , bear xxmaj patroclus ' body to xxmaj achilles , 
▁ xxmaj and bid the snail - pac'd xxmaj ajax arm for shame . 
▁ xxmaj there is a thousand xxmaj hectors in the field ; 
▁ xxmaj now here he fights on xxmaj galathe his horse , 
▁ xxmaj and there lacks work ; anon he 's there afoot , 
▁ xxmaj and there they fly or die , like scaled sculls 
▁ xxmaj before the belching whale ; then is he yonder , 
▁ xxmaj and there the strawy xxmaj greeks , ripe for his edge , 
▁ xxmaj fall down before him like the mower 's swath . 
▁ xxmaj here , there , and everywhere , he leaves and takes ; 
▁ xxmaj dexterity so obeying appetite 
▁ xxmaj that what he will he does , and does so much 
▁ xxmaj that proof is call'd impossibility . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup ulysses 

▁ xxup ulysses . xxup o , courage , courage , courage , xxmaj princes ! xxmaj great 
▁ xxmaj achilles xxmaj is arming , weeping , cursing , vowing vengeance . 
▁ xxmaj patroclus ' wounds have rous'd his drowsy blood , 
▁ xxmaj together with his mangled xxmaj myrmidons , 
▁ xxmaj that noseless , handless , hack'd and chipp'd , come to 
▁ him , xxmaj crying on xxmaj hector . xxmaj ajax hath lost a friend 
▁ xxmaj and foams at mouth , and he is arm'd and at it , 
▁ xxmaj roaring for xxmaj troilus ; who hath done to - day 
▁ xxmaj mad and fantastic execution , 
▁ xxmaj engaging and redeeming of himself 
▁ xxmaj with such a careless force and forceless care 
▁ xxmaj as if that luck , in very spite of cunning , 
▁ xxmaj bade him win all . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup ajax 

▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj troilus ! thou coward xxmaj troilus ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj ay , there , there . 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj so , so , we draw together . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxmaj enter xxup achilles 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj where is this xxmaj hector ? 
▁ xxmaj come , come , thou boy - queller , show thy face ; 
▁ xxmaj know what it is to meet xxmaj achilles angry . 
▁ xxmaj hector ! where 's xxmaj hector ? i will none but xxmaj hector . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 6 . 
 xxmaj another part of the plain 

 xxmaj enter xxup ajax 

▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj troilus , thou coward xxmaj troilus , show thy head . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup diomedes 

▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj troilus , i say ! xxmaj where 's xxmaj troilus ? 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj what wouldst thou ? 
▁ xxup diomedes . i would correct him . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj were i the general , thou shouldst have my office 
▁ xxmaj ere that correction . xxmaj troilus , i say ! xxmaj what , xxmaj troilus ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus 

▁ xxup troilus . o traitor xxmaj diomed ! xxmaj turn thy false face , thou traitor , 
▁ xxmaj and pay thy life thou owest me for my horse . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj ha ! art thou there ? 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj i 'll fight with him alone . xxmaj stand , xxmaj diomed . 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj he is my prize . i will not look upon . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj come , both , you cogging xxmaj greeks ; have at you 
▁ xxmaj exeunt fighting 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hector 

▁ xxup hector . xxmaj yea , xxmaj troilus ? xxup o , well fought , my youngest brother ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup achilles 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj now do i see thee , ha ! xxmaj have at thee , xxmaj hector ! 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj pause , if thou wilt . 
▁ xxup achilles . i do disdain thy courtesy , proud xxmaj troyan . 
▁ xxmaj be happy that my arms are out of use ; 
▁ xxmaj my rest and negligence befriends thee now , 
▁ xxmaj but thou anon shalt hear of me again ; 
▁ xxmaj till when , go seek thy fortune . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup hector . xxmaj fare thee well . 
▁ i would have been much more a fresher man , 
▁ xxmaj had i expected thee . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup troilus 

▁ xxmaj how now , my brother ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj ajax hath ta'en xxmaj aeneas . xxmaj shall it be ? 
▁ xxmaj no , by the flame of yonder glorious heaven , 
▁ xxmaj he shall not carry him ; xxmaj i 'll be ta'en too , 
▁ xxmaj or bring him off . xxmaj fate , hear me what i say : 
▁ i reck not though thou end my life to - day . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter one in armour 

▁ xxup hector . xxmaj stand , stand , thou xxmaj greek ; thou art a goodly mark . 
▁ xxmaj no ? wilt thou not ? i like thy armour well ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll frush it and unlock the rivets all 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll be master of it . xxmaj wilt thou not , beast , abide ? 
▁ xxmaj why then , fly on ; xxmaj i 'll hunt thee for thy hide . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 7 . 
 xxmaj another part of the plain 

 xxmaj enter xxup achilles , with xxmaj myrmidons 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj come here about me , you my xxmaj myrmidons ; 
▁ xxmaj mark what i say . xxmaj attend me where i wheel ; 
▁ xxmaj strike not a stroke , but keep yourselves in breath ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i have the bloody xxmaj hector found , 
▁ xxmaj empale him with your weapons round about ; 
▁ xxmaj in fellest manner execute your arms . 
▁ xxmaj follow me , sirs , and my proceedings eye . 
▁ xxmaj it is decreed xxmaj hector the great must die . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup menelaus and xxup paris , fighting ; then xxup thersites 

▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj the cuckold and the cuckold - maker are at it . xxmaj now , bull ! 
▁ now , dog ! ' loo , xxmaj paris , ' loo ! now my double - horn'd xxmaj spartan ! ' loo , 
▁ xxmaj paris , ' loo ! xxmaj the bull has the game . xxmaj ware horns , ho ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup paris and xxup menelaus 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup margarelon 

▁ xxup margarelon . xxmaj turn , slave , and fight . 
▁ xxup thersites . xxmaj what art thou ? 
▁ xxup margarelon . a bastard son of xxmaj priam 's . 
▁ xxup thersites . i am a bastard too ; i love bastards . i am a bastard 
▁ begot , bastard instructed , bastard in mind , bastard in valour , in 
▁ everything illegitimate . xxmaj one bear will not bite another , and 
▁ wherefore should one bastard ? xxmaj take heed , the quarrel 's most 
▁ ominous to us : if the son of a whore fight for a whore , he tempts 
▁ judgment . xxmaj farewell , bastard . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup margarelon . xxmaj the devil take thee , coward ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 8 . 
 xxmaj another part of the plain 

 xxmaj enter xxup hector 

▁ xxup hector . xxmaj most putrified core so fair without , 
▁ xxmaj thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life . 
▁ xxmaj now is my day 's work done ; xxmaj i 'll take good breath : 
▁ xxmaj rest , sword ; thou hast thy fill of blood and death ! 
▁ [ disarms ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup achilles and his xxmaj myrmidons 

▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj look , xxmaj hector , how the sun begins to set ; 
▁ xxmaj how ugly night comes breathing at his heels ; 
▁ xxmaj even with the vail and dark'ning of the sun , 
▁ xxmaj to close the day up , xxmaj hector 's life is done . 
▁ xxup hector . i am unarm'd ; forego this vantage , xxmaj greek . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj strike , fellows , strike ; this is the man i seek . 
▁ [ hector falls ] 
▁ xxmaj so , xxmaj ilion , fall thou next ! xxmaj come , xxmaj troy , sink down ; 
▁ xxmaj here lies thy heart , thy sinews , and thy bone . 
▁ xxmaj on , xxmaj myrmidons , and cry you an amain 
▁ ' achilles hath the mighty xxmaj hector slain . ' 
▁ [ a retreat sounded ] 
▁ xxmaj hark ! a retire upon our xxmaj grecian part . 
▁ xxup myrmidon . xxmaj the xxmaj troyan trumpets sound the like , my lord . 
▁ xxup achilles . xxmaj the dragon wing of night o'erspreads the earth 
▁ xxmaj and , stickler - like , the armies separates . 
▁ xxmaj my half - supp'd sword , that frankly would have fed , 
▁ xxmaj pleas'd with this dainty bait , thus goes to bed . 
▁ [ sheathes his sword ] 
▁ xxmaj come , tie his body to my horse 's tail ; 
▁ xxmaj along the field i will the xxmaj troyan trail . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 9 . 
 xxmaj another part of the plain 

 xxmaj sound retreat . xxmaj shout . xxmaj enter xxup agamemnon , xxup ajax , xxup menelaus , xxup nestor , xxup diomedes , 
 and the rest , marching 

▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj hark ! hark ! what shout is this ? 
▁ xxup nestor . xxmaj peace , drums ! 
▁ xxup soldiers . [ within ] xxmaj achilles ! xxmaj achilles ! xxmaj hector 's slain . xxmaj achilles ! 
▁ xxup diomedes . xxmaj the bruit is xxmaj hector 's slain , and by xxmaj achilles . 
▁ xxup ajax . xxmaj if it be so , yet bragless let it be ; 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj hector was as good a man as he . 
▁ xxup agamemnon . xxmaj march patiently along . xxmaj let one be sent 
▁ xxmaj to pray xxmaj achilles see us at our tent . 
▁ xxmaj if in his death the gods have us befriended ; 
▁ xxmaj great xxmaj troy is ours , and our sharp wars are ended . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene 10 . 
 xxmaj another part of the plain 

 xxmaj enter xxup aeneas , xxup paris , xxup antenor , and xxup deiphobus 

▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj stand , ho ! yet are we masters of the field . 
▁ xxmaj never go home ; here starve we out the night . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup troilus 

▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hector is slain . 
▁ xxup all . xxmaj hector ! xxmaj the gods forbid ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj he 's dead , and at the murderer 's horse 's tail , 
▁ xxmaj in beastly sort , dragg'd through the shameful field . 
▁ xxmaj frown on , you heavens , effect your rage with speed . 
▁ xxmaj sit , gods , upon your thrones , and smile at xxmaj troy . 
▁ i say at once let your brief plagues be mercy , 
▁ xxmaj and linger not our sure destructions on . 
▁ xxup aeneas . xxmaj my lord , you do discomfort all the host . 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj you understand me not that tell me so . 
▁ i do not speak of flight , of fear of death , 
▁ xxmaj but dare all imminence that gods and men 
▁ xxmaj address their dangers in . xxmaj hector is gone . 
▁ xxmaj who shall tell xxmaj priam so , or xxmaj hecuba ? 
▁ xxmaj let him that will a screech - owl aye be call'd 
▁ xxmaj go in to xxmaj troy , and say there ' hector 's dead . ' 
▁ xxmaj there is a word will xxmaj priam turn to stone ; 
▁ xxmaj make wells and xxmaj niobes of the maids and wives , 
▁ xxmaj cold statues of the youth ; and , in a word , 
▁ xxmaj scare xxmaj troy out of itself . xxmaj but , march away ; 
▁ xxmaj hector is dead ; there is no more to say . 
▁ xxmaj stay yet . xxmaj you vile abominable tents , 
▁ xxmaj thus proudly pight upon our xxmaj phrygian plains , 
▁ xxmaj let xxmaj titan rise as early as he dare , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll through and through you . xxmaj and , thou great - siz'd coward ,