xxbos xxmaj no space of earth shall sunder our two hates ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll haunt thee like a wicked conscience still , 
▁ xxmaj that mouldeth goblins swift as frenzy 's thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj strike a free march to xxmaj troy . xxmaj with comfort go ; 
▁ xxmaj hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup pandarus 

▁ xxup pandarus . xxmaj but hear you , hear you ! 
▁ xxup troilus . xxmaj hence , broker - lackey . xxmaj ignominy and shame 
▁ xxmaj pursue thy life and live aye with thy name ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but xxup pandarus 
▁ xxup pandarus . a goodly medicine for my aching bones ! world ! world ! thus 
▁ is the poor agent despis'd ! traitors and bawds , how earnestly are 
▁ you set a work , and how ill requited ! xxmaj why should our endeavour be 
▁ so lov'd , and the performance so loathed ? xxmaj what verse for it ? xxmaj what 
▁ instance for it ? xxmaj let me see- 

▁ xxmaj full merrily the humble - bee doth sing 
▁ xxmaj till he hath lost his honey and his sting ; 
▁ xxmaj and being once subdu'd in armed trail , 
▁ xxmaj sweet honey and sweet notes together fail . 

▁ xxmaj good traders in the flesh , set this in your painted 
▁ cloths . xxmaj as many as be here of pander 's hall , 
▁ xxmaj your eyes , half out , weep out at xxmaj pandar 's fall ; 
▁ xxmaj or , if you can not weep , yet give some groans , 
▁ xxmaj though not for me , yet for your aching bones . 
▁ xxmaj brethren and sisters of the hold - door trade , 
▁ xxmaj some two months hence my will shall here be made . 
▁ xxmaj it should be now , but that my fear is this , 
▁ xxmaj some galled goose of xxmaj winchester would hiss . 
▁ xxmaj till then xxmaj i 'll sweat and seek about for eases , 
▁ xxmaj and at that time bequeath you my diseases . xxmaj exit 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1602 


 xxup twelfth xxup night ; xxup or , xxup what xxup you xxup will 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup orsino , xxmaj duke of xxmaj illyria 
▁ xxup sebastian , brother of xxmaj viola 
▁ xxup antonio , a sea captain , friend of xxmaj sebastian 
▁ a xxup sea xxup captain , friend of xxmaj viola 
▁ xxup valentine , gentleman attending on the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup curio , gentleman attending on the xxmaj duke 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby xxup belch , uncle of xxmaj olivia 
▁ xxup sir xxup andrew xxup aguecheek 
▁ xxup malvolio , steward to xxmaj olivia 
▁ xxup fabian , servant to xxmaj olivia 
▁ xxup feste , a clown , servant to xxmaj olivia 

▁ xxup olivia , a rich countess 
▁ xxup viola , sister of xxmaj sebastian 
▁ xxup maria , xxmaj olivia 's waiting woman 

▁ xxmaj lords , xxmaj priests , xxmaj sailors , xxmaj officers , xxmaj musicians , and xxmaj attendants 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 a city in xxmaj illyria ; and the sea - coast near it 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup orsino , xxmaj duke of xxmaj illyria , xxup curio , and other xxup lords ; xxup musicians attending 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj if music be the food of love , play on , 
▁ xxmaj give me excess of it , that , surfeiting , 
▁ xxmaj the appetite may sicken and so die . 
▁ xxmaj that strain again ! xxmaj it had a dying fall ; 
▁ xxup o , it came o'er my ear like the sweet sound 
▁ xxmaj that breathes upon a bank of violets , 
▁ xxmaj stealing and giving odour ! xxmaj enough , no more ; 
▁ ' tis not so sweet now as it was before . 
▁ o spirit of love , how quick and fresh art thou ! 
▁ xxmaj that , notwithstanding thy capacity 
▁ xxmaj receiveth as the sea , nought enters there , 
▁ xxmaj of what validity and pitch soe'er , 
▁ xxmaj but falls into abatement and low price 
▁ xxmaj even in a minute . xxmaj so full of shapes is fancy , 
▁ xxmaj that it alone is high fantastical . 
▁ xxup curio . xxmaj will you go hunt , my lord ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what , xxmaj curio ? 
▁ xxup curio . xxmaj the hart . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why , so i do , the noblest that i have . 
▁ xxup o , when mine eyes did see xxmaj olivia first , 
▁ xxmaj methought she purg'd the air of pestilence ! 
▁ xxmaj that instant was i turn'd into a hart , 
▁ xxmaj and my desires , like fell and cruel hounds , 
▁ xxmaj e'er since pursue me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup valentine 

▁ xxmaj how now ! what news from her ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj so please my lord , i might not be admitted , 
▁ xxmaj but from her handmaid do return this answer : 
▁ xxmaj the element itself , till seven years ' heat , 
▁ xxmaj shall not behold her face at ample view ; 
▁ xxmaj but like a cloistress she will veiled walk , 
▁ xxmaj and water once a day her chamber round 
▁ xxmaj with eye - offending brine ; all this to season 
▁ a brother 's dead love , which she would keep fresh 
▁ xxmaj and lasting in her sad remembrance . 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , she that hath a heart of that fine frame 
▁ xxmaj to pay this debt of love but to a brother , 
▁ xxmaj how will she love when the rich golden shaft 
▁ xxmaj hath kill'd the flock of all affections else 
▁ xxmaj that live in her ; when liver , brain , and heart , 
▁ xxmaj these sovereign thrones , are all supplied and fill'd , 
▁ xxmaj her sweet perfections , with one self king ! 
▁ xxmaj away before me to sweet beds of flow'rs : 
▁ xxmaj love - thoughts lie rich when canopied with bow'rs . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj the sea - coast 

 xxmaj enter xxup viola , a xxup captain , and xxup sailors 

▁ xxup viola . xxmaj what country , friends , is this ? 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj this is xxmaj illyria , lady . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and what should i do in xxmaj illyria ? 
▁ xxmaj my brother he is in xxmaj elysium . 
▁ xxmaj perchance he is not drown'd- what think you , sailors ? 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj it is perchance that you yourself were saved . 
▁ xxup viola . o my poor brother ! and so perchance may he be . 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj true , madam , and , to comfort you with chance , 
▁ xxmaj assure yourself , after our ship did split , 
▁ xxmaj when you , and those poor number saved with you , 
▁ xxmaj hung on our driving boat , i saw your brother , 
▁ xxmaj most provident in peril , bind himself- 
▁ xxmaj courage and hope both teaching him the practice- 
▁ xxmaj to a strong mast that liv'd upon the sea ; 
▁ xxmaj where , like xxmaj arion on the dolphin 's back , 
▁ i saw him hold acquaintance with the waves 
▁ xxmaj so long as i could see . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj for saying so , there 's gold . 
▁ xxmaj mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope , 
▁ xxmaj whereto thy speech serves for authority , 
▁ xxmaj the like of him . xxmaj know'st thou this country ? 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj ay , madam , well ; for i was bred and born 
▁ xxmaj not three hours ' travel from this very place . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj who governs here ? 
▁ xxup captain . a noble duke , in nature as in name . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj what is his name ? 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj orsino . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj orsino ! i have heard my father name him . 
▁ xxmaj he was a bachelor then . 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj and so is now , or was so very late ; 
▁ xxmaj for but a month ago i went from hence , 
▁ xxmaj and then ' twas fresh in murmur- as , you know , 
▁ xxmaj what great ones do the less will prattle of- 
▁ xxmaj that he did seek the love of fair xxmaj olivia . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj what 's she ? 
▁ xxup captain . a virtuous maid , the daughter of a count 
▁ xxmaj that died some twelvemonth since , then leaving her 
▁ xxmaj in the protection of his son , her brother , 
▁ xxmaj who shortly also died ; for whose dear love , 
▁ xxmaj they say , she hath abjur'd the company 
▁ xxmaj and sight of men . 
▁ xxup viola . o that i serv'd that lady , 
▁ xxmaj and might not be delivered to the world , 
▁ xxmaj till i had made mine own occasion mellow , 
▁ xxmaj what my estate is ! 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj that were hard to compass , 
▁ xxmaj because she will admit no kind of suit- 
▁ xxmaj no , not the xxmaj duke 's . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj there is a fair behaviour in thee , xxmaj captain ; 
▁ xxmaj and though that nature with a beauteous wall 
▁ xxmaj doth oft close in pollution , yet of thee 
▁ i will believe thou hast a mind that suits 
▁ xxmaj with this thy fair and outward character . 
▁ i prithee , and xxmaj i 'll pay thee bounteously , 
▁ xxmaj conceal me what i am , and be my aid 
▁ xxmaj for such disguise as haply shall become 
▁ xxmaj the form of my intent . xxmaj i 'll serve this duke : 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt present me as an eunuch to him ; 
▁ xxmaj it may be worth thy pains , for i can sing 
▁ xxmaj and speak to him in many sorts of music , 
▁ xxmaj that will allow me very worth his service . 
▁ xxmaj what else may hap to time i will commit ; 
▁ xxmaj only shape thou silence to my wit . 
▁ xxup captain . xxmaj be you his eunuch and your mute xxmaj i 'll be ; 
▁ xxmaj when my tongue blabs , then let mine eyes not see . 
▁ xxup viola . i thank thee . xxmaj lead me on . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxup olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby xxup belch and xxup maria 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what a plague means my niece to take the death of her 
▁ brother thus ? i am sure care 's an enemy to life . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj by my troth , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , you must come in earlier o ' nights ; 
▁ your cousin , my lady , takes great exceptions to your ill hours . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj why , let her except before excepted . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ay , but you must confine yourself within the modest limits 
▁ of order . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj confine ! xxmaj i 'll confine myself no finer than i am . xxmaj these 
▁ clothes are good enough to drink in , and so be these boots too ; 
▁ an they be not , let them hang themselves in their own straps . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj that quaffing and drinking will undo you ; i heard my lady 
▁ talk of it yesterday , and of a foolish knight that you brought in 
▁ one night here to be her wooer . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj who ? xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew xxmaj aguecheek ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ay , he . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj he 's as tall a man as any 's in xxmaj illyria . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj what 's that to th ' purpose ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj why , he has three thousand ducats a year . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ay , but he 'll have but a year in all these ducats ; he 's a 
▁ very fool and a prodigal . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj fie that you 'll say so ! xxmaj he plays o ' th ' viol - de - gamboys , 
▁ and speaks three or four languages word for word without book , 
▁ and hath all the good gifts of nature . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj he hath indeed , almost natural ; for , besides that he 's a 
▁ fool , he 's a great quarreller ; and but that he hath the gift of a 
▁ coward to allay the gust he hath in quarrelling , ' tis thought 
▁ among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj by this hand , they are scoundrels and subtractors that 
▁ say so of him . xxmaj who are they ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj they that add , moreover , he 's drunk nightly in your company . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj with drinking healths to my niece ; xxmaj i 'll drink to her as 
▁ long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in xxmaj illyria . 
▁ xxmaj he 's a coward and a coystrill that will not drink to my niece 
▁ till his brains turn o ' th ' toe like a parish - top . xxmaj what , wench ! 
▁ xxmaj castiliano vulgo ! for here comes xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew xxmaj agueface . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup andrew xxup aguecheek 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj sir xxmaj toby xxmaj belch ! xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby xxmaj belch ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj sweet xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew ! 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj bless you , fair shrew . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj and you too , sir . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj accost , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew , accost . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj what 's that ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj my niece 's chambermaid . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj good xxmaj mistress xxmaj accost , i desire better acquaintance . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj my name is xxmaj mary , sir . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj good xxmaj mistress xxmaj mary xxmaj accost- 
▁ xxup sir xxmaj toby . xxmaj you mistake , knight . ' accost ' is front her , board her , 
▁ woo her , assail her . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj by my troth , i would not undertake her in this company . 
▁ xxmaj is that the meaning of ' accost ' ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj fare you well , gentlemen . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj an thou let part so , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew , would thou mightst never 
▁ draw sword again ! 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj an you part so , mistress , i would i might never draw 
▁ sword again . xxmaj fair lady , do you think you have fools in hand ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj sir , i have not you by th ' hand . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj marry , but you shall have ; and here 's my hand . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj now , sir , thought is free . i pray you , bring your hand to 
▁ th ' buttry - bar and let it drink . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj wherefore , sweetheart ? xxmaj what 's your metaphor ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj it 's dry , sir . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj why , i think so ; i am not such an ass but i can keep my 
▁ hand dry . xxmaj but what 's your jest ? 
▁ xxup maria . a dry jest , sir . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj are you full of them ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ay , sir , i have them at my fingers ' ends ; marry , now i let 
▁ go your hand , i am barren . xxmaj exit xxup maria 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . o knight , thou lack'st a cup of canary ! xxmaj when did i see 
▁ thee so put down ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj never in your life , i think ; unless you see canary put 
▁ me down . xxmaj methinks sometimes i have no more wit than a xxmaj christian 
▁ or an ordinary man has ; but i am great eater of beef , and i 
▁ believe that does harm to my wit . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj no question . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj an i thought that , xxmaj i 'd forswear it . xxmaj i 'll ride home 
▁ to - morrow , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj pourquoi , my dear knight ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj what is ' pourquoi'- do or not do ? i would i had bestowed 
▁ that time in the tongues that i have in fencing , dancing , and 
▁ bear - baiting . xxmaj oh , had i but followed the arts ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj why , would that have mended my hair ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj past question ; for thou seest it will not curl by nature . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj but it becomes me well enough , does't not ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj excellent ; it hangs like flax on a distaff , and i hope to 
▁ see a huswife take thee between her legs and spin it off . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj faith , xxmaj i 'll home to - morrow , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby . xxmaj your niece will 
▁ not be seen , or if she be , it 's four to one she 'll none of me ; 
▁ the xxmaj count himself here hard by woos her . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj she 'll none o ' th ' xxmaj count ; she 'll not match above her 
▁ degree , neither in estate , years , nor wit ; i have heard her 
▁ swear't . xxmaj tut , there 's life in't , man . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj i 'll stay a month longer . i am a fellow o ' th ' strangest 
▁ mind i ' th ' world ; i delight in masques and revels sometimes 
▁ altogether . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj art thou good at these kickshawses , knight ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj as any man in xxmaj illyria , whatsoever he be , under the 
▁ degree of my betters ; and yet i will not compare with an old man . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what is thy excellence in a galliard , knight ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj faith , i can cut a caper . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj and i can cut the mutton to't . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj and i think i have the back - trick simply as strong as 
▁ any man in xxmaj illyria . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj wherefore are these things hid ? xxmaj wherefore have these 
▁ gifts a curtain before 'em ? xxmaj are they like to take dust , like 
▁ xxmaj mistress xxmaj mall 's picture ? xxmaj why dost thou not go to church in a 
▁ galliard and come home in a coranto ? xxmaj my very walk should be a 
▁ jig ; i would not so much as make water but in a sink - a - pace . xxmaj what 
▁ dost thou mean ? xxmaj is it a world to hide virtues in ? i did think , by 
▁ the excellent constitution of thy leg , it was form'd under the 
▁ star of a galliard . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj ay , ' tis strong , and it does indifferent well in 
▁ flame - colour'd stock . xxmaj shall we set about some revels ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what shall we do else ? xxmaj were we not born under xxmaj taurus ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj taurus ? xxmaj that 's sides and heart . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj no , sir ; it is legs and thighs . xxmaj let me see the caper . xxmaj ha , 
▁ higher ! xxmaj ha , ha , excellent ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup valentine , and xxup viola in man 's attire 

▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj if the xxmaj duke continue these favours towards you , xxmaj cesario , 
▁ you are like to be much advanc'd ; he hath known you but three 
▁ days , and already you are no stranger . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj you either fear his humour or my negligence , that you call 
▁ in question the continuance of his love . xxmaj is he inconstant , sir , 
▁ in his favours ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no , believe me . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke , xxup curio , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup viola . i thank you . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj count . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj who saw xxmaj cesario , ho ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj on your attendance , my lord , here . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj stand you awhile aloof . xxmaj cesario , 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st no less but all ; i have unclasp'd 
▁ xxmaj to thee the book even of my secret soul . 
▁ xxmaj therefore , good youth , address thy gait unto her ; 
▁ xxmaj be not denied access , stand at her doors , 
▁ xxmaj and tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow 
▁ xxmaj till thou have audience . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj sure , my noble lord , 
▁ xxmaj if she be so abandon'd to her sorrow 
▁ xxmaj as it is spoke , she never will admit me . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be clamorous and leap all civil bounds , 
▁ xxmaj rather than make unprofited return . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj say i do speak with her , my lord , what then ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , then unfold the passion of my love , 
▁ xxmaj surprise her with discourse of my dear faith ! 
▁ xxmaj it shall become thee well to act my woes : 
▁ xxmaj she will attend it better in thy youth 
▁ xxmaj than in a nuncio 's of more grave aspect . 
▁ xxup viola . i think not so , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj dear lad , believe it , 
▁ xxmaj for they shall yet belie thy happy years 
▁ xxmaj that say thou art a man : xxmaj diana 's lip 
▁ xxmaj is not more smooth and rubious ; thy small pipe 
▁ xxmaj is as the maiden 's organ , shrill and sound , 
▁ xxmaj and all is semblative a woman 's part . 
▁ i know thy constellation is right apt 
▁ xxmaj for this affair . xxmaj some four or five attend him- 
▁ xxmaj all , if you will , for i myself am best 
▁ xxmaj when least in company . xxmaj prosper well in this , 
▁ xxmaj and thou shalt live as freely as thy lord 
▁ xxmaj to call his fortunes thine . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj i 'll do my best 
▁ xxmaj to woo your lady . [ aside ] xxmaj yet , a barful strife ! 
▁ xxmaj whoe'er i woo , myself would be his wife . 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxup olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup maria and xxup clown 

▁ xxup maria . xxmaj nay , either tell me where thou hast been , or i will not open 
▁ my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse ; my 
▁ lady will hang thee for thy absence . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj let her hang me . xxmaj he that is well hang'd in this world needs 
▁ to fear no colours . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj make that good . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj he shall see none to fear . 
▁ xxup maria . a good lenten answer . i can tell thee where that saying was 
▁ born , of ' i fear no colours . ' 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj where , good xxmaj mistress xxmaj mary ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj in the wars ; and that may you be bold to say in your 
▁ foolery . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj well , xxmaj god give them wisdom that have it ; and those that are 
▁ fools , let them use their talents . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj yet you will be hang'd for being so long absent ; or to be 
▁ turn'd away- is not that as good as a hanging to you ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage ; and for turning 
▁ away , let summer bear it out . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj you are resolute , then ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj not so , neither ; but i am resolv'd on two points . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj that if one break , the other will hold ; or if both break , 
▁ your gaskins fall . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj apt , in good faith , very apt ! xxmaj well , go thy way ; if xxmaj sir xxmaj toby 
▁ would leave drinking , thou wert as witty a piece of xxmaj eve 's flesh 
▁ as any in xxmaj illyria . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj peace , you rogue , no more o ' that . xxmaj here comes my lady . xxmaj make 
▁ your excuse wisely , you were best . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup olivia and xxup malvolio 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj wit , an't be thy will , put me into good fooling ! xxmaj those wits 
▁ that think they have thee do very oft prove fools ; and i that am 
▁ sure i lack thee may pass for a wise man . xxmaj for what says 
▁ xxmaj quinapalus ? ' better a witty fool than a foolish wit . ' xxmaj god bless 
▁ thee , lady ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj take the fool away . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj do you not hear , fellows ? xxmaj take away the lady . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj go to , y'are a dry fool ; xxmaj i 'll no more of you . xxmaj besides , you 
▁ grow dishonest . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj two faults , madonna , that drink and good counsel will amend ; 
▁ for give the dry fool drink , then is the fool not dry . xxmaj bid the 
▁ dishonest man mend himself : if he mend , he is no longer 
▁ dishonest ; if he can not , let the botcher mend him . xxmaj anything 
▁ that 's mended is but patch'd ; virtue that transgresses is but 
▁ patch'd with sin , and sin that amends is but patch'd with virtue . 
▁ xxmaj if that this simple syllogism will serve , so ; if it will not , 
▁ what remedy ? xxmaj as there is no true cuckold but calamity , so 
▁ beauty 's a flower . xxmaj the lady bade take away the fool ; therefore , i 
▁ say again , take her away . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj sir , i bade them take away you . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj misprision in the highest degree ! xxmaj lady , ' cucullus non facit 
▁ monachum ' ; that 's as much to say as i wear not motley in my 
▁ brain . xxmaj good madonna , give me leave to prove you a fool . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj can you do it ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj dexteriously , good madonna . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj make your proof . 
▁ xxup clown . i must catechize you for it , madonna . 
▁ xxmaj good my mouse of virtue , answer me . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj well , sir , for want of other idleness , xxmaj i 'll bide your 
▁ proof . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj good madonna , why mourn'st thou ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj good fool , for my brother 's death . 
▁ xxup clown . i think his soul is in hell , madonna . 
▁ xxup olivia . i know his soul is in heaven , fool . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj the more fool , madonna , to mourn for your brother 's soul 
▁ being in heaven . xxmaj take away the fool , gentlemen . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what think you of this fool , xxmaj malvolio ? xxmaj doth he not mend ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj yes , and shall do , till the pangs of death shake him . 
▁ xxmaj infirmity , that decays the wise , doth ever make the better fool . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj god send you , sir , a speedy infirmity , for the better 
▁ increasing your folly ! xxmaj sir xxmaj toby will be sworn that i am no fox ; 
▁ but he will not pass his word for twopence that you are no fool . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj how say you to that , xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . i marvel your ladyship takes delight in such a barren 
▁ rascal ; i saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool 
▁ that has no more brain than a stone . xxmaj look you now , he 's out of 
▁ his guard already ; unless you laugh and minister occasion to him , 
▁ he is gagg'd . i protest i take these wise men that crow so at 
▁ these set kind of fools no better than the fools ' zanies . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , you are sick of self - love , xxmaj malvolio , and taste with a 
▁ distemper'd appetite . xxmaj to be generous , guiltless , and of free 
▁ disposition , is to take those things for bird - bolts that you deem 
▁ cannon bullets . xxmaj there is no slander in an allow'd fool , though he 
▁ do nothing but rail ; nor no railing in known discreet man , though 
▁ he do nothing but reprove . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj now xxmaj mercury endue thee with leasing , for thou speak'st well 
▁ of fools ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup maria 

▁ xxup maria . xxmaj madam , there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires 
▁ to speak with you . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj from the xxmaj count xxmaj orsino , is it ? 
▁ xxup maria . i know not , madam ; ' tis a fair young man , and well attended . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj who of my people hold him in delay ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , madam , your kinsman . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj fetch him off , i pray you ; he speaks nothing but madman . 
▁ xxmaj fie on him ! [ exit xxup maria ] xxmaj go you , xxmaj malvolio : if it be a suit from 
▁ the xxmaj count , i am sick , or not at home- what you will to dismiss 
▁ it . [ exit xxup malvolio ] xxmaj now you see , sir , how your fooling grows old , 
▁ and people dislike it . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj thou hast spoke for us , madonna , as if thy eldest son should 
▁ be a fool ; whose skull xxmaj jove cram with brains ! xxmaj for- here he comes- 
▁ one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby 

▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj by mine honour , half drunk ! xxmaj what is he at the gate , cousin ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . a gentleman . 
▁ xxup olivia . a gentleman ! xxmaj what gentleman ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . ' tis a gentleman here . [ hiccups ] a plague o ' these 
▁ pickle - herring ! xxmaj how now , sot ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj good xxmaj sir xxmaj toby ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj cousin , cousin , how have you come so early by this 
▁ lethargy ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj lechery ! i defy lechery . xxmaj there 's one at the gate . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj ay , marry ; what is he ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj let him be the devil an he will , i care not ; give me 
▁ faith , say xxup i. xxmaj well , it 's all one . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what 's a drunken man like , fool ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj like a drown'd man , a fool , and a madman : one draught above 
▁ heat makes him a fool ; the second mads him ; and a third drowns 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj go thou and seek the crowner , and let him sit o ' my coz ; 
▁ for he 's in the third degree of drink , he 's drown'd ; go look 
▁ after him . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj he is but mad yet , madonna , and the fool shall look to the 
▁ madman . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup malvolio 

▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj madam , yond young fellow swears he will speak with you . i 
▁ told him you were sick ; he takes on him to understand so much , 
▁ and therefore comes to speak with you . i told him you were 
▁ asleep ; he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too , and 
▁ therefore comes to speak with you . xxmaj what is to be said to him , 
▁ lady ? xxmaj he 's fortified against any denial . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj tell him he shall not speak with me . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj has been told so ; and he says he 'll stand at your door 
▁ like a sheriff 's post , and be the supporter to a bench , but he 'll 
▁ speak with you . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what kind o ' man is he ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj why , of mankind . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what manner of man ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj of very ill manner ; he 'll speak with you , will you or no . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj of what personage and years is he ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj not yet old enough for a man , nor young enough for a boy ; 
▁ as a squash is before ' tis a peascod , or a codling when ' tis 
▁ almost an apple ; ' tis with him in standing water , between boy and 
▁ man . xxmaj he is very well - favour'd , and he speaks very shrewishly ; one 
▁ would think his mother 's milk were scarce out of him . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj let him approach . xxmaj call in my gentlewoman . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj gentlewoman , my lady calls . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup maria 

▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj give me my veil ; come , throw it o'er my face ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll once more hear xxmaj orsino 's embassy . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup viola 

▁ xxup viola . xxmaj the honourable lady of the house , which is she ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj speak to me ; i shall answer for her . xxmaj your will ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj most radiant , exquisite , and unmatchable beauty- i pray you 
▁ tell me if this be the lady of the house , for i never saw her . i 
▁ would be loath to cast away my speech ; for , besides that it is 
▁ excellently well penn'd , i have taken great pains to con it . xxmaj good 
▁ beauties , let me sustain no scorn ; i am very comptible , even to 
▁ the least sinister usage . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj whence came you , sir ? 
▁ xxup viola . i can say little more than i have studied , and that 
▁ question 's out of my part . xxmaj good gentle one , give me modest 
▁ assurance if you be the lady of the house , that i may proceed in 
▁ my speech . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj are you a comedian ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj no , my profound heart ; and yet , by the very fangs of malice 
▁ i swear , i am not that i play . xxmaj are you the lady of the house ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj if i do not usurp myself , i am . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj most certain , if you are she , you do usurp yourself ; for 
▁ what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve . xxmaj but this is from 
▁ my commission . i will on with my speech in your praise , and then 
▁ show you the heart of my message . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj come to what is important in't . i forgive you the praise . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj alas , i took great pains to study it , and ' tis poetical . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj it is the more like to be feigned ; i pray you keep it in . i 
▁ heard you were saucy at my gates , and allow'd your approach 
▁ rather to wonder at you than to hear you . xxmaj if you be not mad , be 
▁ gone ; if you have reason , be brief ; ' tis not that time of moon 
▁ with me to make one in so skipping dialogue . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj will you hoist sail , sir ? xxmaj here lies your way . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj no , good swabber , i am to hull here a little longer . 
▁ xxmaj some mollification for your giant , sweet lady . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj tell me your mind . 
▁ xxup viola . i am a messenger . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj sure , you have some hideous matter to deliver , when the 
▁ courtesy of it is so fearful . xxmaj speak your office . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj it alone concerns your ear . i bring no overture of war , no 
▁ taxation of homage : i hold the olive in my hand ; my words are as 
▁ full of peace as matter . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj yet you began rudely . xxmaj what are you ? xxmaj what would you ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj the rudeness that hath appear'd in me have i learn'd from my 
▁ entertainment . xxmaj what i am and what i would are as secret as 
▁ maidenhead- to your cars , divinity ; to any other 's , profanation . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj give us the place alone ; we will hear this divinity . 
▁ [ exeunt xxup maria and xxup attendants ] xxmaj now , sir , what is your text ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj most sweet lady- 
▁ xxup olivia . a comfortable doctrine , and much may be said of it . 
▁ xxmaj where lies your text ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj in xxmaj orsino 's bosom . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj in his bosom ! xxmaj in what chapter of his bosom ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj to answer by the method : in the first of his heart . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , i have read it ; it is heresy . xxmaj have you no more to say ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj good madam , let me see your face . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my 
▁ face ? xxmaj you are now out of your text ; but we will draw the curtain 
▁ and show you the picture . [ unveiling ] xxmaj look you , sir , such a one i 
▁ was this present . xxmaj is't not well done ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj excellently done , if xxmaj god did all . 
▁ xxup olivia . ' tis in grain , sir ; ' twill endure wind and weather . 
▁ xxup viola . ' tis beauty truly blent , whose red and white 
▁ xxmaj nature 's own sweet and cunning hand laid on . 
▁ xxmaj lady , you are the cruell'st she alive , 
▁ xxmaj if you will lead these graces to the grave , 
▁ xxmaj and leave the world no copy . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , sir , i will not be so hard - hearted ; i will give out 
▁ divers schedules of my beauty . xxmaj it shall be inventoried , and every 
▁ particle and utensil labell'd to my will : as- item , two lips 
▁ indifferent red ; item , two grey eyes with lids to them ; item , one 
▁ neck , one chin , and so forth . xxmaj were you sent hither to praise me ? 
▁ xxup viola . i see you what you are : you are too proud ; 
▁ xxmaj but , if you were the devil , you are fair . 
▁ xxmaj my lord and master loves you- xxup o , such love 
▁ xxmaj could be but recompens'd though you were crown'd 
▁ xxmaj the nonpareil of beauty ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj how does he love me ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj with adorations , fertile tears , 
▁ xxmaj with groans that thunder love , with sighs of fire . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj your lord does know my mind ; i can not love him . 
▁ xxmaj yet i suppose him virtuous , know him noble , 
▁ xxmaj of great estate , of fresh and stainless youth ; 
▁ xxmaj in voices well divulg'd , free , learn'd , and valiant , 
▁ xxmaj and in dimension and the shape of nature 
▁ a gracious person ; but yet i can not love him . 
▁ xxmaj he might have took his answer long ago . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj if i did love you in my master 's flame , 
▁ xxmaj with such a suff'ring , such a deadly life , 
▁ xxmaj in your denial i would find no sense ; 
▁ i would not understand it . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj why , what would you ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj make me a willow cabin at your gate , 
▁ xxmaj and call upon my soul within the house ; 
▁ xxmaj write loyal cantons of contemned love 
▁ xxmaj and sing them loud even in the dead of night ; 
▁ xxmaj halloo your name to the reverberate hals , 
▁ xxmaj and make the babbling gossip of the air 
▁ xxmaj cry out ' olivia ! ' xxup o , you should not rest 
▁ xxmaj between the elements of air and earth 
▁ xxmaj but you should pity me ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj you might do much . 
▁ xxmaj what is your parentage ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj above my fortunes , yet my state is well : 
▁ i am a gentleman . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj get you to your lord . 
▁ i can not love him ; let him send no more- 
▁ xxmaj unless perchance you come to me again 
▁ xxmaj to tell me how he takes it . xxmaj fare you well . 
▁ i thank you for your pains ; spend this for me . 
▁ xxup viola . i am no fee'd post , lady ; keep your purse ; 
▁ xxmaj my master , not myself , lacks recompense . 
▁ xxmaj love make his heart of flint that you shall love ; 
▁ xxmaj and let your fervour , like my master 's , be 
▁ xxmaj plac'd in contempt ! xxmaj farewell , fair cruelty . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup olivia . ' what is your parentage ? ' 
▁ ' above my fortunes , yet my state is well : 
▁ i am a gentleman . ' xxmaj i 'll be sworn thou art ; 
▁ xxmaj thy tongue , thy face , thy limbs , actions , and spirit , 
▁ xxmaj do give thee five - fold blazon . xxmaj not too fast ! xxmaj soft , soft ! 
▁ xxmaj unless the master were the man . xxmaj how now ! 
▁ xxmaj even so quickly may one catch the plague ? 
▁ xxmaj methinks i feel this youth 's perfections 
▁ xxmaj with an invisible and subtle stealth 
▁ xxmaj to creep in at mine eyes . xxmaj well , let it be . 
▁ xxmaj what ho , xxmaj malvolio ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup malvolio 

▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj here , madam , at your service . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj run after that same peevish messenger , 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj county 's man . xxmaj he left this ring behind him , 
▁ xxmaj would i or not . xxmaj tell him xxmaj i 'll none of it . 
▁ xxmaj desire him not to flatter with his lord , 
▁ xxmaj nor hold him up with hopes ; i am not for him . 
▁ xxmaj if that the youth will come this way to - morrow , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give him reasons for't . xxmaj hie thee , xxmaj malvolio . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj madam , i will . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup olivia . i do i know not what , and fear to find 
▁ xxmaj mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind . 
▁ xxmaj fate , show thy force : ourselves we do not owe ; 
▁ xxmaj what is decreed must be ; and be this so ! xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the sea - coast 

 xxmaj enter xxup antonio and xxup sebastian 

▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj will you stay no longer ; nor will you not that i go with 
▁ you ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj by your patience , no . xxmaj my stars shine darkly over me ; the 
▁ malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours ; therefore i 
▁ shall crave of you your leave that i may bear my evils alone . xxmaj it 
▁ were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj let me know of you whither you are bound . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj no , sooth , sir ; my determinate voyage is mere 
▁ extravagancy . xxmaj but i perceive in you so excellent a touch of 
▁ modesty that you will not extort from me what i am willing to 
▁ keep in ; therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express 
▁ myself . xxmaj you must know of me then , xxmaj antonio , my name is xxmaj sebastian , 
▁ which i call'd xxmaj roderigo ; my father was that xxmaj sebastian of 
▁ xxmaj messaline whom i know you have heard of . xxmaj he left behind him 
▁ myself and a sister , both born in an hour ; if the heavens had 
▁ been pleas'd , would we had so ended ! xxmaj but you , sir , alter'd that ; 
▁ for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was 
▁ my sister drown'd . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj alas the day ! 
▁ xxup sebastian . a lady , sir , though it was said she much resembled me , 
▁ was yet of many accounted beautiful ; but though i could not with 
▁ such estimable wonder overfar believe that , yet thus far i will 
▁ boldly publish her : she bore mind that envy could not but call 
▁ fair . xxmaj she is drown'd already , sir , with salt water , though i seem 
▁ to drown her remembrance again with more . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj pardon me , sir , your bad entertainment . 
▁ xxup sebastian . o good xxmaj antonio , forgive me your trouble . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj if you will not murder me for my love , let me be your 
▁ servant . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj if you will not undo what you have done- that is , kill 
▁ him whom you have recover'd - desire it not . xxmaj fare ye well at once ; 
▁ my bosom is full of kindness , and i am yet so near the manners of 
▁ my mother that , upon the least occasion more , mine eyes will tell 
▁ tales of me . i am bound to the xxmaj count xxmaj orsino 's court . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj the gentleness of all the gods go with thee ! 
▁ i have many cnemies in xxmaj orsino 's court , 
▁ xxmaj else would i very shortly see thee there . 
▁ xxmaj but come what may , i do adore thee so 
▁ xxmaj that danger shall seem sport , and i will go . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup viola and xxup malvolio at several doors 

▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj were you not ev'n now with the xxmaj countess xxmaj olivia ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj even now , sir ; on a moderate pace i have since arriv'd but 
▁ hither . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj she returns this ring to you , sir ; you might have saved 
▁ me my pains , to have taken it away yourself . xxmaj she adds , moreover , 
▁ that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will 
▁ none of him . xxmaj and one thing more : that you be never so hardy to 
▁ come again in his affairs , unless it be to report your lord 's 
▁ taking of this . xxmaj receive it so . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj she took the ring of me ; xxmaj i 'll none of it . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj come , sir , you peevishly threw it to her ; and her will is 
▁ it should be so return'd . xxmaj if it be worth stooping for , there it 
▁ lies in your eye ; if not , be it his that finds it . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup viola . i left no ring with her ; what means this lady ? 
▁ xxmaj fortune forbid my outside have not charm'd her ! 
▁ xxmaj she made good view of me ; indeed , so much 
▁ xxmaj that methought her eyes had lost her tongue , 
▁ xxmaj for she did speak in starts distractedly . 
▁ xxmaj she loves me , sure : the cunning of her passion 
▁ xxmaj invites me in this churlish messenger . 
▁ xxmaj none of my lord 's ring ! xxmaj why , he sent her none . 
▁ i am the man . xxmaj if it be so- as ' tis- 
▁ xxmaj poor lady , she were better love a dream . 
▁ xxmaj disguise , i see thou art a wickedness 
▁ xxmaj wherein the pregnant enemy does much . 
▁ xxmaj how easy is it for the proper - false 
▁ xxmaj in women 's waxen hearts to set their forms ! 
▁ xxmaj alas , our frailty is the cause , not we ! 
▁ xxmaj for such as we are made of , such we be . 
▁ xxmaj how will this fadge ? xxmaj my master loves her dearly , 
▁ xxmaj and xxup i , poor monster , fond as much on him ; 
▁ xxmaj and she , mistaken , seems to dote on me . 
▁ xxmaj what will become of this ? xxmaj as i am man , 
▁ xxmaj my state is desperate for my master 's love ; 
▁ xxmaj as i am woman- now alas the day!- 
▁ xxmaj what thriftless sighs shall poor xxmaj olivia breathe ! 
▁ o xxmaj time , thou must untangle this , not xxup i ; 
▁ xxmaj it is too hard a knot for me t ' untie ! xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxup olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby and xxup sir xxup andrew 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj approach , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew . xxmaj not to be abed after midnight is to 
▁ be up betimes ; and ' diluculo surgere ' thou know'st- 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj nay , by my troth , i know not ; but i know to be up late 
▁ is to be up late . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . a false conclusion ! i hate it as an unfill'd can . xxmaj to be 
▁ up after midnight and to go to bed then is early ; so that to go 
▁ to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes . xxmaj does not our lives 
▁ consist of the four elements ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj faith , so they say ; but i think it rather consists of 
▁ eating and drinking . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj th'art a scholar ; let us therefore eat and drink . 
▁ xxmaj marian , i say ! a stoup of wine . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clown 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj here comes the fool , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj how now , my hearts ! xxmaj did you never see the picture of ' we 
▁ three ' ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj welcome , ass . xxmaj now let 's have a catch . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj by my troth , the fool has an excellent breast . i had 
▁ rather than forty shillings i had such a leg , and so sweet a 
▁ breath to sing , as the fool has . xxmaj in sooth , thou wast in very 
▁ gracious fooling last night , when thou spok'st of xxmaj pigrogromitus , 
▁ of the xxmaj vapians passing the equinoctial of xxmaj queubus ; ' twas very 
▁ good , i ' faith . i sent thee sixpence for thy leman ; hadst it ? 
▁ xxup clown . i did impeticos thy gratillity ; for xxmaj malvolio 's nose is no 
▁ whipstock . xxmaj my lady has a white hand , and the xxmaj myrmidons are no 
▁ bottle - ale houses . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj excellent ! xxmaj why , this is the best fooling , when all is 
▁ done . xxmaj now , a song . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come on , there is sixpence for you . xxmaj let 's have a song . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj there 's a testril of me too ; if one knight give a- 
 xxup clown . xxmaj would you have a love - song , or a song of good life ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . a love - song , a love - song . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj ay , ay ; i care not for good life . 

▁ xxup clown sings 
▁
▁ o mistress mine , where are you roaming ? 
▁ xxup o , stay and hear ; your true love 's coming , 
▁ xxmaj that can sing both high and low . 
▁ xxmaj trip no further , pretty sweeting ; 
▁ xxmaj journeys end in lovers meeting , 
▁ xxmaj every wise man 's son doth know . 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj excellent good , i ' faith ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj good , good ! 

▁ xxup clown sings 

▁ xxmaj what is love ? ' tis not hereafter ; 
▁ xxmaj present mirth hath present laughter ; 
▁ xxmaj what 's to come is still unsure . 
▁ xxmaj in delay there lies no plenty , 
▁ xxmaj then come kiss me , sweet and twenty ; 
▁ xxmaj youth 's a stuff will not endure . 

▁ xxup aguecheek . a mellifluous voice , as i am true knight . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . a contagious breath . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj very sweet and contagious , i ' faith . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj to hear by the nose , it is dulcet in contagion . xxmaj but shall 
▁ we make the welkin dance indeed ? xxmaj shall we rouse the night - owl in 
▁ a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver ? xxmaj shall we do 
▁ that ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj an you love me , let 's do't . i am dog at a catch . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj by'r lady , sir , and some dogs will catch well . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj most certain . xxmaj let our catch be ' thou knave . ' 
▁ xxup clown . ' hold thy peace , thou knave ' knight ? i shall be constrain'd 
▁ in't to call thee knave , knight . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . ' tis not the first time i have constrained one to call 
▁ me knave . xxmaj begin , fool : it begins ' hold thy peace . ' 
▁ xxup clown . i shall never begin if i hold my peace . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj good , i ' faith ! xxmaj come , begin . [ catch sung ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup maria 

▁ xxup maria . xxmaj what a caterwauling do you keep here ! xxmaj if my lady have not 
▁ call'd up her steward xxmaj malvolio , and bid him turn you out of 
▁ doors , never trust me . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj my lady 's a xxmaj cataian , we are politicians , xxmaj malvolio 's a 
▁ peg - a - ramsey , and [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj three merry men be we . 
▁ xxmaj am not i consanguineous ? xxmaj am i not of her blood ? xxmaj tilly - vally , 
▁ lady . [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj there dwelt a man in xxmaj babylon , 
▁ xxmaj lady , lady . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj beshrew me , the knight 's in admirable fooling . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj ay , he does well enough if he be dispos'd , and so do i 
▁ too ; he does it with a better grace , but i do it more natural . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ sings ] xxup o ' the twelfth day of xxmaj december- 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj for the love o ' xxmaj god , peace ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup malvolio 

▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj my masters , are you mad ? xxmaj or what are you ? xxmaj have you no 
▁ wit , manners , nor honesty , but to gabble like tinkers at this 
▁ time of night ? xxmaj do ye make an ale - house of my lady 's house , that 
▁ ye squeak out your coziers ' catches without any mitigation or 
▁ remorse of voice ? xxmaj is there no respect of place , persons , nor 
▁ time , in you ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj we did keep time , sir , in our catches . xxmaj sneck up ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , i must be round with you . xxmaj my lady bade me tell 
▁ you that , though she harbours you as her kins - man , she 's nothing 
▁ allied to your disorders . xxmaj if you can separate yourself and your 
▁ misdemeanours , you are welcome to the house ; if not , and it would 
▁ please you to take leave of her , she is very willing to bid you 
▁ farewell . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ sings ] xxmaj farewell , dear heart , since i must needs be gone . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj nay , good xxmaj sir xxmaj toby . 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj his eyes do show his days are almost done . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj is't even so ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ sings ] xxmaj but i will never die . [ falls down ] 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , there you lie . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj this is much credit to you . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ sings ] xxmaj shall i bid him go ? 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj what an if you do ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ sings ] xxmaj shall i bid him go , and spare not ? 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxup o , no , no , no , no , you dare not . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ rising ] xxmaj out o ' tune , sir ! xxmaj ye lie . xxmaj art any more than a 
▁ steward ? xxmaj dost thou think , because thou art virtuous , there shall 
▁ be no more cakes and ale ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj yes , by xxmaj saint xxmaj anne ; and ginger shall be hot i ' th ' mouth 
▁ too . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj th ' art i ' th ' right . xxmaj go , sir , rub your chain with crumbs . 
▁ a stoup of wine , xxmaj maria ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj mistress xxmaj mary , if you priz'd my lady 's favour at anything 
▁ more than contempt , you would not give means for this uncivil 
▁ rule ; she shall know of it , by this hand . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj go shake your ears . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . ' twere as good a deed as to drink when a man 's ahungry , 
▁ to challenge him the field , and then to break promise with him 
▁ and make a fool of him . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj do't , knight . xxmaj i 'll write thee a challenge ; or xxmaj i 'll 
▁ deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj sweet xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , be patient for to - night ; since the youth of 
▁ the xxmaj count 's was to - day with my lady , she is much out of quiet . 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj monsieur xxmaj malvolio , let me alone with him ; if i do not gull 
▁ him into a nayword , and make him a common recreation , do not 
▁ think i have wit enough to lie straight in my bed . i know i can 
▁ do it . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj possess us , possess us ; tell us something of him . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj marry , sir , sometimes he is a kind of xxmaj puritan . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxup o , if i thought that , xxmaj i 'd beat him like a dog . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what , for being a xxmaj puritan ? xxmaj thy exquisite reason , dear 
▁ knight ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . i have no exquisite reason for't , but i have reason good 
▁ enough . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj the devil a xxmaj puritan that he is , or anything constantly but a 
▁ time - pleaser ; an affection'd ass that cons state without book and 
▁ utters it by great swarths ; the best persuaded of himself , so 
▁ cramm'd , as he thinks , with excellencies that it is his grounds 
▁ of faith that all that look on him love him ; and on that vice in 
▁ him will my revenge find notable cause to work . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what wilt thou do ? 
▁ xxup maria . i will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love ; 
▁ wherein , by the colour of his beard , the shape of his leg , the 
▁ manner of his gait , the expressure of his eye , forehead , and 
▁ complexion , he shall find himself most feelingly personated . i 
▁ can write very like my lady , your niece ; on forgotten matter we 
▁ can hardly make distinction of our hands . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj excellent ! i smell a device . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . i have't in my nose too . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj he shall think , by the letters that thou wilt drop , that