xxbos they come from my niece , and that she 's in love with him . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj my purpose is , indeed , a horse of that colour . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj and your horse now would make him an ass . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj ass , i doubt not . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxup o , ' twill be admirable ! 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj sport royal , i warrant you . i know my physic will work with 
▁ him . i will plant you two , and let the fool make a third , where 
▁ he shall find the letter ; observe his construction of it . xxmaj for 
▁ this night , to bed , and dream on the event . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj good night , xxmaj penthesilea . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj before me , she 's a good wench . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj she 's a beagle true - bred , and one that adores me . 
▁ xxmaj what o ' that ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . i was ador'd once too . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj let 's to bed , knight . xxmaj thou hadst need send for more 
▁ money . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj if i can not recover your niece , i am a foul way out . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj send for money , knight ; if thou hast her not i ' th ' end , 
▁ call me xxmaj cut . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj if i do not , never trust me ; take it how you will . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come , come , xxmaj i 'll go burn some sack ; ' tis too late to go 
▁ to bed now . xxmaj come , knight ; come , knight . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke , xxup viola , xxup curio , and xxup others 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj give me some music . xxmaj now , good morrow , friends . 
▁ xxmaj now , good xxmaj cesario , but that piece of song , 
▁ xxmaj that old and antique song we heard last night ; 
▁ xxmaj methought it did relieve my passion much , 
▁ xxmaj more than light airs and recollected terms 
▁ xxmaj of these most brisk and giddy - paced times . 
▁ xxmaj come , but one verse . 
▁ xxup curio . xxmaj he is not here , so please your lordship , that should sing 
▁ it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj who was it ? 
▁ xxup curio . xxmaj feste , the jester , my lord ; a fool that the xxmaj lady xxmaj olivia 's 
▁ father took much delight in . xxmaj he is about the house . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj seek him out , and play the tune the while . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup curio . [ music plays ] 
▁ xxmaj come hither , boy . xxmaj if ever thou shalt love , 
▁ xxmaj in the sweet pangs of it remember me ; 
▁ xxmaj for such as i am all true lovers are , 
▁ xxmaj unstaid and skittish in all motions else 
▁ xxmaj save in the constant image of the creature 
▁ xxmaj that is belov'd . xxmaj how dost thou like this tune ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj it gives a very echo to the seat 
▁ xxmaj where xxmaj love is thron'd . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj thou dost speak masterly . 
▁ xxmaj my life upon't , young though thou art , thine eye 
▁ xxmaj hath stay'd upon some favour that it loves ; 
▁ xxmaj hath it not , boy ? 
▁ xxup viola . a little , by your favour . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what kind of woman is't ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj of your complexion . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj she is not worth thee , then . xxmaj what years , i ' faith ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj about your years , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj too old , by heaven ! xxmaj let still the woman take 
▁ xxmaj an elder than herself ; so wears she to him , 
▁ xxmaj so sways she level in her husband 's heart . 
▁ xxmaj for , boy , however we do praise ourselves , 
▁ xxmaj our fancies are more giddy and unfirm , 
▁ xxmaj more longing , wavering , sooner lost and won , 
▁ xxmaj than women 's are . 
▁ xxup viola . i think it well , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj then let thy love be younger than thyself , 
▁ xxmaj or thy affection can not hold the bent ; 
▁ xxmaj for women are as roses , whose fair flow'r 
▁ xxmaj being once display'd doth fall that very hour . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and so they are ; alas , that they are so ! 
▁ xxmaj to die , even when they to perfection grow ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup curio and xxup clown 

▁ xxup duke . xxup o , fellow , come , the song we had last night . 
▁ xxmaj mark it , xxmaj cesario ; it is old and plain ; 
▁ xxmaj the spinsters and the knitters in the sun , 
▁ xxmaj and the free maids that weave their thread with bones , 
▁ xxmaj do use to chant it ; it is silly sooth , 
▁ xxmaj and dallies with the innocence of love , 
▁ xxmaj like the old age . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj are you ready , sir ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay ; prithee , sing . [ music ] 

▁ xxup feste 's xxup song 

▁ xxmaj come away , come away , death ; 
▁ xxmaj and in sad cypress let me be laid ; 
▁ xxmaj fly away , fly away , breath , 
▁ i am slain by a fair cruel maid . 
▁ xxmaj my shroud of white , stuck all with yew , 
▁ xxup o , prepare it ! 
▁ xxmaj my part of death no one so true 
▁ xxmaj did share it . 

▁ xxmaj not a flower , not a flower sweet , 
▁ xxmaj on my black coffin let there be strown ; 
▁ xxmaj not a friend , not a friend greet 
▁ xxmaj my poor corpse where my bones shall be thrown ; 
▁ a thousand thousand to save , 
▁ xxmaj lay me , xxup o , where 
▁ xxmaj sad true lover never find my grave , 
▁ xxmaj to weep there ! 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there 's for thy pains . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no pains , sir ; i take pleasure in singing , sir . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj i 'll pay thy pleasure , then . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , sir , and pleasure will be paid one time or another . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj give me now leave to leave thee . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj now the melancholy god protect thee ; and the tailor make thy 
▁ doublet of changeable taffeta , for thy mind is a very opal . i 
▁ would have men of such constancy put to sea , that their business 
▁ might be everything , and their intent everywhere : for that 's it 
▁ that always makes a good voyage of nothing . xxmaj farewell . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup clown 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj let all the rest give place . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup curio and xxup attendants 
▁ xxmaj once more , xxmaj cesario , 
▁ xxmaj get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty . 
▁ xxmaj tell her my love , more noble than the world , 
▁ xxmaj prizes not quantity of dirty lands ; 
▁ xxmaj the parts that fortune hath bestow'd upon her , 
▁ xxmaj tell her i hold as giddily as xxmaj fortune ; 
▁ xxmaj but ' tis that miracle and queen of gems 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj nature pranks her in attracts my soul . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj but if she can not love you , sir ? 
▁ xxup duke . i can not be so answer'd . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj sooth , but you must . 
▁ xxmaj say that some lady , as perhaps there is , 
▁ xxmaj hath for your love as great a pang of heart 
▁ xxmaj as you have for xxmaj olivia . xxmaj you can not love her ; 
▁ xxmaj you tell her so . xxmaj must she not then be answer'd ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there is no woman 's sides 
▁ xxmaj can bide the beating of so strong a passion 
▁ xxmaj as love doth give my heart ; no woman 's heart 
▁ xxmaj so big to hold so much ; they lack retention . 
▁ xxmaj alas , their love may be call'd appetite- 
▁ xxmaj no motion of the liver , but the palate- 
▁ xxmaj that suffer surfeit , cloyment , and revolt ; 
▁ xxmaj but mine is all as hungry as the sea , 
▁ xxmaj and can digest as much . xxmaj make no compare 
▁ xxmaj between that love a woman can bear me 
▁ xxmaj and that i owe xxmaj olivia . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj ay , but i know- 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what dost thou know ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj too well what love women to men may owe . 
▁ xxmaj in faith , they are as true of heart as we . 
▁ xxmaj my father had a daughter lov'd a man , 
▁ xxmaj as it might be perhaps , were i a woman , 
▁ i should your lordship . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and what 's her history ? 
▁ xxup viola . a blank , my lord . xxmaj she never told her love , 
▁ xxmaj but let concealment , like a worm i ' th ' bud , 
▁ xxmaj feed on her damask cheek . xxmaj she pin'd in thought ; 
▁ xxmaj and with a green and yellow melancholy 
▁ xxmaj she sat like xxmaj patience on a monument , 
▁ xxmaj smiling at grief . xxmaj was not this love indeed ? 
▁ xxmaj we men may say more , swear more , but indeed 
▁ xxmaj our shows are more than will ; for still we prove 
▁ xxmaj much in our vows , but little in our love . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj but died thy sister of her love , my boy ? 
▁ xxup viola . i am all the daughters of my father 's house , 
▁ xxmaj and all the brothers too- and yet i know not . 
▁ xxmaj sir , shall i to this lady ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay , that 's the theme . 
▁ xxmaj to her in haste . xxmaj give her this jewel ; say 
▁ xxmaj my love can give no place , bide no denay . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxup olivia 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby , xxup sir xxup andrew , and xxup fabian 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come thy ways , xxmaj signior xxmaj fabian . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll come ; if i lose a scruple of this sport let me be 
▁ boil'd to death with melancholy . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally 
▁ sheep - biter come by some notable shame ? 
▁ xxup fabian . i would exult , man ; you know he brought me out o ' favour 
▁ with my lady about a bear - baiting here . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj to anger him we 'll have the bear again ; and we will fool 
▁ him black and blue- shall we not , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj and we do not , it is pity of our lives . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup maria 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj here comes the little villain . 
▁ xxmaj how now , my metal of xxmaj india ! 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj get ye all three into the box - tree . xxmaj malvolio 's coming down 
▁ this walk . xxmaj he has been yonder i ' the sun practising behaviour to 
▁ his own shadow this half hour . xxmaj observe him , for the love of 
▁ mockery , for i know this letter will make a contemplative idiot 
▁ of him . xxmaj close , in the name of jesting ! [ as the men hide she drops 
▁ a letter ] xxmaj lie thou there ; for here comes the trout that must be 
▁ caught with tickling . 
▁ xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup malvolio 

▁ xxup malvolio . ' tis but fortune ; all is fortune . xxmaj maria once told me she 
▁ did affect me ; and i have heard herself come thus near , that , 
▁ should she fancy , it should be one of my complexion . xxmaj besides , she 
▁ uses me with a more exalted respect than any one else that 
▁ follows her . xxmaj what should i think on't ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj here 's an overweening rogue ! 
▁ xxup fabian . xxup o , peace ! xxmaj contemplation makes a rare turkey - cock of him ; 
▁ how he jets under his advanc'd plumes ! 
▁ xxup aguecheek . ' slight , i could so beat the rogue- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj peace , i say . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj to be xxmaj count xxmaj malvolio ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj ah , rogue ! 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj pistol him , pistol him . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj peace , peace ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj there is example for't : the xxmaj lady of the xxmaj strachy married 
▁ the yeoman of the wardrobe . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj fie on him , xxmaj jezebel ! 
▁ xxup fabian . xxup o , peace ! xxmaj now he 's deeply in ; look how imagination blows 
▁ him . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj having been three months married to her , sitting in my 
▁ state- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxup o , for a stone - bow to hit him in the eye ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj calling my officers about me , in my branch'd velvet gown , 
▁ having come from a day - bed- where i have left xxmaj olivia sleeping- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj fire and brimstone ! 
▁ xxup fabian . xxup o , peace , peace ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj and then to have the humour of state ; and after a demure 
▁ travel of regard , telling them i know my place as i would they 
▁ should do theirs , to ask for my kinsman xxmaj toby- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj bolts and shackles ! 
▁ xxup fabian . xxup o , peace , peace , peace ! xxmaj now , now . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj seven of my people , with an obedient start , make out for 
▁ him . i frown the while , and perchance wind up my watch , or play 
▁ with my- some rich jewel . xxmaj toby approaches ; curtsies there to me- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj shall this fellow live ? 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj though our silence be drawn from us with cars , yet peace . 
▁ xxup malvolio . i extend my hand to him thus , quenching my familiar smile 
▁ with an austere regard of control- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj and does not xxmaj toby take you a blow o ' the lips then ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj saying ' cousin xxmaj toby , my fortunes having cast me on your 
▁ niece give me this prerogative of speech'- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what , what ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' you must amend your drunkenness'- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj out , scab ! 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj nay , patience , or we break the sinews of our plot . 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' besides , you waste the treasure of your time with a 
▁ foolish knight'- 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj that 's me , i warrant you . 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' one xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew . ' 
▁ xxup aguecheek . i knew ' twas xxup i ; for many do call me fool . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj what employment have we here ? 
▁ [ taking up the letter ] 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj now is the woodcock near the gin . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxup o , peace ! xxmaj and the spirit of humours intimate reading 
▁ aloud to him ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj by my life , this is my lady 's hand : these be her very 
▁ xxmaj c 's , her xxmaj u 's , and her xxmaj t 's ; and thus makes she her great xxmaj p 's . xxmaj it 
▁ is , in contempt of question , her hand . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj her xxmaj c 's , her xxmaj u 's , and her xxmaj t 's . xxmaj why that ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . [ reads ] ' to the unknown belov'd , this , and my good 
▁ wishes . ' xxmaj her very phrases ! xxmaj by your leave , wax . xxmaj soft ! xxmaj and the 
▁ impressure her xxmaj lucrece with which she uses to seal ; ' tis my lady . 
▁ xxmaj to whom should this be ? 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj this wins him , liver and all . 
▁ xxup malvolio . [ reads ] 

▁ xxmaj jove knows i love , 
▁ xxmaj but who ? 
▁ xxmaj lips , do not move ; 
▁ xxmaj no man must know . ' 
▁
▁ ' no man must know . ' xxmaj what follows ? xxmaj the numbers alter'd ! 
▁ ' no man must know . ' xxmaj if this should be thee , xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj marry , hang thee , brock ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . [ reads ] 

▁ ' i may command where i adore ; 
▁ xxmaj but silence , like a xxmaj lucrece knife , 
▁ xxmaj with bloodless stroke my heart doth gore ; 
▁ xxup m. xxup o. xxup a. xxup i. doth sway my life . ' 

▁ xxup fabian . a fustian riddle ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj excellent wench , say xxup i. 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' m. xxup o. xxup a. xxup i. doth sway my life . ' 
▁ xxmaj nay , but first let me see , let me see , let me see . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj what dish o ' poison has she dress'd him ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj and with what wing the staniel checks at it ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' i may command where i adore . ' xxmaj why , she may command me : i 
▁ serve her ; she is my lady . xxmaj why , this is evident to any formal 
▁ capacity ; there is no obstruction in this . xxmaj and the end- what 
▁ should that alphabetical position portend ? xxmaj if i could make that 
▁ resemble something in me . xxmaj softly ! xxup m. xxup o. xxup a. xxup i.- 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxup o , ay , make up that ! xxmaj he is now at a cold scent . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj sowter will cry upon't for all this , though it be as rank 
▁ as a fox . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxup m- xxmaj malvolio ; xxup m- why , that begins my name . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj did not i say he would work it out ? 
▁ xxmaj the cur is excellent at faults . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxup m- xxmaj but then there is no consonancy in the sequel ; that 
▁ suffers under probation : a should follow , but o does . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj and o shall end , i hope . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj ay , or xxmaj i 'll cudgel him , and make him cry ' o ! ' 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj and then i comes behind . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj ay , an you had any eye behind you , you might see more 
▁ detraction at your heels than fortunes before you . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxup m. xxup o. xxup a. xxup i. xxmaj this simulation is not as the former ; and 
▁ yet , to crush this a little , it would bow to me , for every one of 
▁ these letters are in my name . xxmaj soft ! here follows prose . 
▁ [ reads ] 
▁ ' if this fall into thy hand , revolve . xxmaj in my stars i am above 
▁ thee ; but be not afraid of greatness . xxmaj some are born great , some 
▁ achieve greatness , and some have greatness thrust upon 'em . xxmaj thy 
▁ xxmaj fates open their hands ; let thy blood and spirit embrace them ; 
▁ and , to inure thyself to what thou art like to be , cast thy 
▁ humble slough and appear fresh . xxmaj be opposite with a kinsman , surly 
▁ with servants ; let thy tongue tang arguments of state ; put 
▁ thyself into the trick of singularity . xxmaj she thus advises thee that 
▁ sighs for thee . xxmaj remember who commended thy yellow stockings , and 
▁ wish'd to see thee ever cross - garter'd . i say , remember , xxmaj go to , 
▁ thou art made , if thou desir'st to be so ; if not , let me see thee 
▁ a steward still , the fellow of servants , and not worthy to touch 
▁ xxmaj fortune 's fingers . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj she that would alter services with 
▁ thee , 
▁ xxup the xxup fortunate - unhappy . ' 

▁ xxmaj daylight and champain discovers not more . xxmaj this is open . i will be 
▁ proud , i will read politic authors , i will baffle xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , i 
▁ will wash off gross acquaintance , i will be point - devise the very 
▁ man . i do not now fool myself to let imagination jade me ; for 
▁ every reason excites to this , that my lady loves me . xxmaj she did 
▁ commend my yellow stockings of late , she did praise my leg being 
▁ cross - garter'd ; and in this she manifests herself to my love , and 
▁ with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits of her 
▁ liking . i thank my stars i am happy . i will be strange , stout , in 
▁ yellow stockings , and cross - garter'd , even with the swiftness of 
▁ putting on . xxmaj jove and my stars be praised ! xxmaj here is yet a 
▁ postscript . 

▁ [ reads ] ' thou canst not choose but know who i am . xxmaj if thou 
▁ entertain'st my love , let it appear in thy smiling ; thy smiles 
▁ become thee well . xxmaj therefore in my presence still smile , dear my 
▁ sweet , i prithee . ' 

▁ xxmaj jove , i thank thee . i will smile ; i will do everything that thou 
▁ wilt have me . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup fabian . i will not give my part of this sport for a pension of 
▁ thousands to be paid from the xxmaj sophy . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . i could marry this wench for this device . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj so could i too . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj and ask no other dowry with her but such another jest . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup maria 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj nor i neither . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj here comes my noble gull - catcher . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj wilt thou set thy foot o ' my neck ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj or o ' mine either ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj shall i play my freedom at tray - trip , and become thy 
▁ bond - slave ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxup i ' faith , or i either ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj why , thou hast put him in such a dream that when the 
▁ image of it leaves him he must run mad . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj nay , but say true ; does it work upon him ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj like aqua - vita ! with a midwife . 
▁ xxup aiaria . xxmaj if you will then see the fruits of the sport , mark his 
▁ first approach before my lady . xxmaj he will come to her in yellow 
▁ stockings , and ' tis a colour she abhors , and cross - garter'd , a 
▁ fashion she detests ; and he will smile upon her , which will now 
▁ be so unsuitable to her disposition , being addicted to a 
▁ melancholy as she is , that it can not but turn him into a notable 
▁ contempt . xxmaj if you will see it , follow me . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj to the gates of xxmaj tartar , thou most excellent devil of wit ! 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj i 'll make one too . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxup olivia 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup viola , and xxup clown with a tabor 

▁ xxup viola . xxmaj save thee , friend , and thy music ! 
▁ xxmaj dost thou live by thy tabor ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no , sir , i live by the church . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj art thou a churchman ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no such matter , sir : i do live by the church ; for i do live 
▁ at my house , and my house doth stand by the church . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj so thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar , if a beggar 
▁ dwell near him ; or the church stands by thy tabor , if thy tabor 
▁ stand by the church . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you have said , sir . xxmaj to see this age ! a sentence is but a 
▁ chev'ril glove to a good wit . xxmaj how quickly the wrong side may be 
▁ turn'd outward ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj nay , that 's certain ; they that dally nicely with words may 
▁ quickly make them wanton . 
▁ xxup clown . i would , therefore , my sister had had name , sir . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj why , man ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj why , sir , her name 's a word ; and to dally with that word 
▁ might make my sister wanton . xxmaj but indeed words are very rascals 
▁ since bonds disgrac'd them . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj thy reason , man ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj troth , sir , i can yield you none without words , and words 
▁ are grown so false i am loath to prove reason with them . 
▁ xxup viola . i warrant thou art a merry fellow and car'st for nothing . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj not so , sir ; i do care for something ; but in my conscience , 
▁ sir , i do not care for you . xxmaj if that be to care for nothing , sir , 
▁ i would it would make you invisible . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj art not thou the xxmaj lady xxmaj olivia 's fool ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no , indeed , sir ; the xxmaj lady xxmaj olivia has no folly ; she will keep 
▁ no fool , sir , till she be married ; and fools are as like husbands 
▁ as pilchers are to herrings- the husband 's the bigger . i am 
▁ indeed not her fool , but her corrupter of words . 
▁ xxup viola . i saw thee late at the xxmaj count xxmaj orsino 's . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj foolery , sir , does walk about the orb like the sun- it 
▁ shines everywhere . i would be sorry , sir , but the fool should be 
▁ as oft with your master as with my mistress : think i saw your 
▁ wisdom there . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj nay , an thou pass upon me , xxmaj i 'll no more with thee . 
▁ xxmaj hold , there 's expenses for thee . [ giving a coin ] 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj now xxmaj jove , in his next commodity of hair , send the a beard ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj by my troth , xxmaj i 'll tell thee , i am almost sick for one ; 
▁ [ aside ] though i would not have it grow on my chin.- xxmaj is thy lady 
▁ within ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj would not a pair of these have bred , sir ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj yes , being kept together and put to use . 
▁ xxup clown . i would play xxmaj lord xxmaj pandarus of xxmaj phrygia , sir , to bring a 
▁ xxmaj cressida to this xxmaj troilus . 
▁ xxup viola . i understand you , sir ; ' tis well begg'd . 
▁ [ giving another coin ] 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj the matter , i hope , is not great , sir , begging but a beggar : 
▁ xxmaj cressida was a beggar . xxmaj my lady is within , sir . i will construe to 
▁ them whence you come ; who you are and what you would are out of 
▁ my welkin- i might say ' element ' but the word is overworn . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup clown 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj this fellow is wise enough to play the fool ; 
▁ xxmaj and to do that well craves a kind of wit . 
▁ xxmaj he must observe their mood on whom he jests , 
▁ xxmaj the quality of persons , and the time ; 
▁ xxmaj and , like the haggard , check at every feather 
▁ xxmaj that comes before his eye . xxmaj this is a practice 
▁ xxmaj as full of labour as a wise man 's art ; 
▁ xxmaj for folly that he wisely shows is fit ; 
▁ xxmaj but wise men , folly - fall'n , quite taint their wit . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby and xxup sir xxup andrew 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj save you , gentleman ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and you , sir . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj dieu vous garde , monsieur . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj et vous aussi ; votre serviteur . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . i hope , sir , you are ; and i am yours . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj will you encounter the house ? xxmaj my niece is desirous you 
▁ should enter , if your trade be to her . 
▁ xxup viola . i am bound to your niece , sir ; i mean , she is the list of my 
▁ voyage . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj taste your legs , sir ; put them to motion . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj my legs do better understand me , sir , than i understand what 
▁ you mean by bidding me taste my legs . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . i mean , to go , sir , to enter . 
▁ xxup viola . i will answer you with gait and entrance . xxmaj but we are 
▁ prevented . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup olivia and xxup maria 

▁ xxmaj most excellent accomplish'd lady , the heavens rain odours on you ! 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj that youth 's a rare courtier- ' rain odours ' well ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj my matter hath no voice , lady , but to your own most pregnant 
▁ and vouchsafed car . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . ' odours , ' ' pregnant , ' and ' vouchsafed'- xxmaj i 'll get 'em all 
▁ three all ready . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj let the garden door be shut , and leave me to my hearing . 
▁ [ exeunt all but xxup olivia and xxup viola ] xxmaj give me your hand , sir . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj my duty , madam , and most humble service . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what is your name ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj cesario is your servant 's name , fair xxmaj princess . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj my servant , sir ! ' twas never merry world 
▁ xxmaj since lowly feigning was call'd compliment . 
▁ xxmaj y'are servant to the xxmaj count xxmaj orsino , youth . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and he is yours , and his must needs be yours : 
▁ xxmaj your servant 's servant is your servant , madam . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj for him , i think not on him ; for his thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj would they were blanks rather than fill'd with me ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj madam , i come to whet your gentle thoughts 
▁ xxmaj on his behalf . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , by your leave , i pray you : 
▁ i bade you never speak again of him ; 
▁ xxmaj but , would you undertake another suit , 
▁ i had rather hear you to solicit that 
▁ xxmaj than music from the spheres . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj dear lady- 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj give me leave , beseech you . i did send , 
▁ xxmaj after the last enchantment you did here , 
▁ a ring in chase of you ; so did i abuse 
▁ xxmaj myself , my servant , and , i fear me , you . 
▁ xxmaj under your hard construction must i sit , 
▁ xxmaj to force that on you in a shameful cunning 
▁ xxmaj which you knew none of yours . xxmaj what might you think ? 
▁ xxmaj have you not set mine honour at the stake , 
▁ xxmaj and baited it with all th ' unmuzzled thoughts 
▁ xxmaj that tyrannous heart can think ? xxmaj to one of your receiving 
▁ xxmaj enough is shown : a cypress , not a bosom , 
▁ xxmaj hides my heart . xxmaj so , let me hear you speak . 
▁ xxup viola . i xxmaj pity xxup you . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj that 's a degree to love . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj no , not a grize ; for ' tis a vulgar proof 
▁ xxmaj that very oft we pity enemies . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj why , then , methinks ' tis time to smile again . 
▁ o world , how apt the poor are to be proud ! 
▁ xxmaj if one should be a prey , how much the better 
▁ xxmaj to fall before the lion than the wolf ! [ clock strikes ] 
▁ xxmaj the clock upbraids me with the waste of time . 
▁ xxmaj be not afraid , good youth ; i will not have you ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , when wit and youth is come to harvest , 
▁ xxmaj your wife is like to reap a proper man . 
▁ xxmaj there lies your way , due west . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj then westward - ho ! 
▁ xxmaj grace and good disposition attend your ladyship ! 
▁ xxmaj you 'll nothing , madam , to my lord by me ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj stay . 
▁ i prithee tell me what thou think'st of me . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj that you do think you are not what you are . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj if i think so , i think the same of you . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj then think you right : i am not what i am . 
▁ xxup olivia . i would you were as i would have you be ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj would it be better , madam , than i am ? 
▁ i wish it might , for now i am your fool . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , what a deal of scorn looks beautiful 
▁ xxmaj in the contempt and anger of his lip ! 
▁ a murd'rous guilt shows not itself more soon 
▁ xxmaj than love that would seem hid : love 's night is noon . 
▁ xxmaj cesario , by the roses of the spring , 
▁ xxmaj by maidhood , honour , truth , and every thing , 
▁ i love thee so that , maugre all thy pride , 
▁ xxmaj nor wit nor reason can my passion hide . 
▁ xxmaj do not extort thy reasons from this clause , 
▁ xxmaj for that i woo , thou therefore hast no cause ; 
▁ xxmaj but rather reason thus with reason fetter : 
▁ xxmaj love sought is good , but given unsought is better . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj by innocence i swear , and by my youth , 
▁ i have one heart , one bosom , and one truth , 
▁ xxmaj and that no woman has ; nor never none 
▁ xxmaj shall mistress be of it , save i alone . 
▁ xxmaj and so adieu , good madam ; never more 
▁ xxmaj will i my master 's tears to you deplore . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj yet come again ; for thou perhaps mayst move 
▁ xxmaj that heart which now abhors to like his love . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxup olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby , xxup sir xxup andrew and xxup fabian 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj no , faith , xxmaj i 'll not stay a jot longer . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj thy reason , dear venom , give thy reason . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj you must needs yield your reason , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj marry , i saw your niece do more favours to the xxmaj count 's 
▁ servingman than ever she bestow'd upon me ; i saw't i ' th ' 
▁ orchard . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj did she see thee the while , old boy ? xxmaj tell me that . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj as plain as i see you now . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj this was a great argument of love in her toward you . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . ' slight ! will you make an ass o ' me ? 
▁ xxup fabian . i will prove it legitimate , sir , upon the oaths of judgment 
▁ and reason . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj and they have been grand - jurymen since before xxmaj noah was a 
▁ sailor . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj she did show favour to the youth in your sight only to 
▁ exasperate you , to awake your dormouse valour , to put fire in 
▁ your heart and brimstone in your liver . xxmaj you should then have 
▁ accosted her ; and with some excellent jests , fire - new from the 
▁ mint , you should have bang'd the youth into dumbness . xxmaj this was 
▁ look'd for at your hand , and this was baulk'd . xxmaj the double gilt of 
▁ this opportunity you let time wash off , and you are now sail'd 
▁ into the north of my lady 's opinion ; where you will hang like an 
▁ icicle on xxmaj dutchman 's beard , unless you do redeem it by some 
▁ laudable attempt either of valour or policy . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj an't be any way , it must be with valour , for policy i 
▁ hate ; i had as lief be a xxmaj brownist as a politician . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj why , then , build me thy fortunes upon the basis of 
▁ valour . xxmaj challenge me the xxmaj count 's youth to fight with him ; hurt 
▁ him in eleven places . xxmaj my niece shall take note of it ; and assure 
▁ thyself there is no love - broker in the world can more prevail in 
▁ man 's commendation with woman than report of valour . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj there is no way but this , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj will either of you bear me a challenge to him ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj go , write it in a martial hand ; be curst and brief ; it is 
▁ no matter how witty , so it be eloquent and full of invention . 
▁ xxmaj taunt him with the license of ink ; if thou thou'st him some 
▁ thrice , it shall not be amiss ; and as many lies as will lie in 
▁ thy sheet of paper , although the sheet were big enough for the 
▁ bed of xxmaj ware in xxmaj england , set 'em down ; go about it . xxmaj let there be 
▁ gall enough in thy ink , though thou write with a goose - pen , no 
▁ matter . xxmaj about it . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj where shall i find you ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj we 'll call thee at the cubiculo . xxmaj go . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup sir xxup andrew 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj this is a dear manakin to you , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . i have been dear to him , lad- some two thousand strong , 
▁ or so . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj we shall have a rare letter from him ; but you 'll not 
▁ deliver't ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj never trust me then ; and by all means stir on the youth 
▁ to an answer . i think oxen and wainropes can not hale them 
▁ together . xxmaj for xxmaj andrew , if he were open'd and you find so much 
▁ blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea , xxmaj i 'll eat the 
▁ rest of th ' anatomy . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj and his opposite , the youth , bears in his visage no great 
▁ presage of cruelty . 
▁
▁ xxmaj enter xxup maria 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj look where the youngest wren of nine comes . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj if you desire the spleen , and will laugh yourselves into 
▁ stitches , follow me . xxmaj yond gull xxmaj malvolio is turned heathen , a very 
▁ renegado ; for there is no xxmaj christian that means to be saved by 
▁ believing rightly can ever believe such impossible passages of 
▁ grossness . xxmaj he 's in yellow stockings . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj and cross - garter'd ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj most villainously ; like a pedant that keeps a school i ' th ' 
▁ church . i have dogg'd him like his murderer . xxmaj he does obey every 
▁ point of the letter that i dropp'd to betray him . xxmaj he does smile 
▁ his face into more lines than is in the new map with the 
▁ augmentation of the xxmaj indies . xxmaj you have not seen such a thing as 
▁ ' tis ; i can hardly forbear hurling things at him . i know my lady 
▁ will strike him ; if she do , he 'll smile and take't for a great 
▁ favour . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come , bring us , bring us where he is . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup sebastian and xxup antonio 

▁ xxup sebastian . i would not by my will have troubled you ; 
▁ xxmaj but since you make your pleasure of your pains , 
▁ i will no further chide you . 
▁ xxup antonio . i could not stay behind you : my desire , 
▁ xxmaj more sharp than filed steel , did spur me forth ; 
▁ xxmaj and not all love to see you- though so much 
▁ xxmaj as might have drawn one to a longer voyage- 
▁ xxmaj but jealousy what might befall your travel , 
▁ xxmaj being skilless in these parts ; which to a stranger , 
▁ xxmaj unguided and unfriended , often prove 
▁ xxmaj rough and unhospitable . xxmaj my willing love , 
▁ xxmaj the rather by these arguments of fear , 
▁ xxmaj set forth in your pursuit . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj my kind xxmaj antonio , 
▁ i can no other answer make but thanks , 
▁ xxmaj and thanks , and ever thanks ; and oft good turns 
▁ xxmaj are shuffl'd off with such uncurrent pay ; 
▁ xxmaj but were my worth as is my conscience firm , 
▁ xxmaj you should find better dealing . xxmaj what 's to do ? 
▁ xxmaj shall we go see the reliques of this town ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj to - morrow , sir ; best first go see your lodging . 
▁ xxup sebastian . i am not weary , and ' tis long to night ; 
▁ i pray you , let us satisfy our eyes 
▁ xxmaj with the memorials and the things of fame 
▁ xxmaj that do renown this city . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj would you 'd pardon me . 
▁ i do not without danger walk these streets : 
▁ xxmaj once in a sea - fight ' gainst the xxmaj count his galleys 
▁ i did some service ; of such note , indeed , 
▁ xxmaj that , were i ta'en here , it would scarce be answer'd . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj belike you slew great number of his people . 
▁ antonio.th ' offence is not of such a bloody nature ; 
▁ xxmaj albeit the quality of the time and quarrel 
▁ xxmaj might well have given us bloody argument . 
▁ xxmaj it might have since been answer'd in repaying 
▁ xxmaj what we took from them ; which , for traffic 's sake , 
▁ xxmaj most of our city did . xxmaj only myself stood out ; 
▁ xxmaj for which , if i be lapsed in this place , 
▁ i shall pay dear . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj do not then walk too open . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj it doth not fit me . xxmaj hold , sir , here 's my purse ; 
▁ xxmaj in the south suburbs , at the xxmaj elephant , 
▁ xxmaj is best to lodge . i will bespeak our diet , 
▁ xxmaj whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge 
▁ xxmaj with viewing of the town ; there shall you have me . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj why i your purse ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj haply your eye shall light upon some toy 
▁ xxmaj you have desire to purchase ; and your store , 
▁ i think , is not for idle markets , sir . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj i 'll be your purse - bearer , and leave you for 
▁ xxmaj an hour . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj to th ' xxmaj elephant . 
▁ xxup sebastian . i do remember . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxup olivia 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup olivia and xxup maria 

▁ xxup olivia . i have sent after him ; he says he 'll come . 
▁ xxmaj how shall i feast him ? xxmaj what bestow of him ? 
▁ xxmaj for youth is bought more oft than begg'd or borrow'd . 
▁ i speak too loud . 
▁ xxmaj where 's xxmaj malvolio ? xxmaj he is sad and civil , 
▁ xxmaj and suits well for a servant with my fortunes . 
▁ xxmaj where is xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj he 's coming , madam ; but in very strange manner . 
▁ xxmaj he is sure possess'd , madam . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj why , what 's the matter ? xxmaj does he rave ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj no , madam , he does nothing but smile . xxmaj your ladyship were 
▁ best to have some guard about you if he come ; for sure the man is 
▁ tainted in 's wits . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj go call him hither . xxmaj exit xxup maria 
▁ i am as mad as he , 
▁ xxmaj if sad and merry madness equal be . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup maria with xxup malvolio 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj malvolio ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sweet lady , ho , ho . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj smil'st thou ? 
▁ i sent for thee upon a sad occasion . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sad , lady ? i could be sad . xxmaj this does make some 
▁ obstruction in the blood , this cross - gartering ; but what of that ? 
▁ xxmaj if it please the eye of one , it is with me as the very true 
▁ sonnet is : ' please one and please all . ' 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj why , how dost thou , man ? xxmaj what is the matter with thee ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj not black in my mind , though yellow in my legs . 
▁ xxmaj it did come to his hands , and commands shall be executed . 
▁ i think we do know the sweet xxmaj roman hand . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj wilt thou go to bed , xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj to bed ? xxmaj ay , sweetheart , and xxmaj i 'll come to thee . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj god comfort thee ! xxmaj why dost thou smile so , and kiss thy hand 
▁ so oft ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj how do you , xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj at your request ? xxmaj yes , nightingales answer daws ! 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' be not afraid of greatness . ' ' twas well writ . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what mean'st thou by that , xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup aialvolio . ' some are born great,'- 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj ha ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' some achieve greatness,'- 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what say'st thou ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' and some have greatness thrust upon them . ' 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj heaven restore thee ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' remember who commended thy yellow stockings,'- 
▁ xxup olivia . ' thy yellow stockings ? ' 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' and wish'd to see thee cross - garterd . ' 
▁ xxup olivia . ' cross - garter'd ? ' 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' go to , thou an made , if thou desir'st to be so';- 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj am i made ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . ' if not , let me see thee a servant still . ' 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj why , this is very midsummer madness . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup servant 
▁
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj madam , the young gentleman of the xxmaj count xxmaj orsino 's is 
▁ return'd ; i could hardly entreat him back ; he attends your 
▁ ladyship 's pleasure . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj i 'll come to him . [ exit xxup servant ] xxmaj good xxmaj maria , let this 
▁ fellow be look'd to . xxmaj where 's my cousin xxmaj toby ? xxmaj let some of my 
▁ people have a special care of him ; i would not have him miscarry 
▁ for the half of my dowry . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup olivia and xxup maria 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxup o , ho ! do you come near me now ? xxmaj no worse man than xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj toby to look to me ! xxmaj this concurs directly with the letter : she 
▁ sends him on purpose , that i may appear stubborn to him ; for she 
▁ incites me to that in the letter . ' cast thy humble slough , ' says 
▁ she . ' be opposite with kinsman , surly with servants ; let thy 
▁ tongue tang with arguments of state ; put thyself into the trick 
▁ of singularity ' and consequently sets down the manner how , as : a 
▁ sad face , a reverend carriage , a slow tongue , in the habit of 
▁ some sir of note , and so forth . i have lim'd her ; but it is 
▁ xxmaj jove 's doing , and xxmaj jove make me thankful ! xxmaj and when she went away 
▁ now- ' let this fellow be look'd to . ' ' fellow , ' not ' malvolio ' nor 
▁ after my degree , but ' fellow . ' xxmaj why , everything adheres together , 
▁ that no dram of a scruple , no scruple of a scruple , no obstacle , 
▁ no incredulous or unsafe circumstance- xxmaj what can be said ? xxmaj nothing 
▁ that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my 
▁ hopes . xxmaj well , xxmaj jove , not xxup i , is the doer of this , and he is to be 
▁ thanked . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup maria , with xxup sir xxup toby and xxup fabian 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj which way is he , in the name of sanctity ? xxmaj if all the 
▁ devils of hell be drawn in little , and xxmaj legion himself possess'd 
▁ him , yet xxmaj i 'll speak to him . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj here he is , here he is . xxmaj how is't with you , sir ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj how is't with you , man ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj go off ; i discard you . xxmaj let me enjoy my private ; go off . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj lo , how hollow the fiend speaks within him ! xxmaj did not i tell 
▁ you ? xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , my lady prays you to have a care of him . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj ah , ha ! does she so ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj go to , go to ; peace , peace ; we must deal gently with him . 
▁ xxmaj let me alone . xxmaj how do you , xxmaj malvolio ? xxmaj how is't with you ? xxmaj what , man , 
▁ defy the devil ; consider , he 's an enemy to mankind . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj do you know what you say ? 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj la you , an you speak ill of the devil , how he takes it at 
▁ heart ! xxmaj pray xxmaj god he be not bewitched . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj carry his water to th ' wise woman . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj marry , and it shall be done to - morrow morning , if i live . xxmaj my 
▁ lady would not lose him for more than xxmaj i 'll say . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj how now , mistress ! 
▁ xxup maria . o xxmaj lord ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj prithee hold thy peace ; this is not the way . xxmaj do you not 
▁ see you move him ? xxmaj let me alone with him . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj no way but gentleness- gently , gently . xxmaj the fiend is rough , 
▁ and will not be roughly us'd . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj why , how now , my bawcock ! 
▁ xxmaj how dost thou , chuck ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sir ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj ay , xxmaj biddy , come with me . xxmaj what , man , ' tis not for gravity 
▁ to play at cherrypit with xxmaj satan . xxmaj hang him , foul collier ! 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj get him to say his prayers , good xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , get him to pray . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj my prayers , minx ! 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj no , i warrant you , he will not hear of godliness . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj go , hang yourselves all ! xxmaj you are idle shallow things ; i 
▁ am not of your element ; you shall know more hereafter . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj is't possible ? 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj if this were play'd upon a stage now , i could condemn it as 
▁ an improbable fiction . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj his very genius hath taken the infection of the device , 
▁ man . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj nay , pursue him now , lest the device take air and taint . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj why , we shall make him mad indeed . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj the house will be the quieter . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come , we 'll have him in a dark room and bound . xxmaj my niece 
▁ is already in the belief that he 's mad . xxmaj we may carry it thus , for 
▁ our pleasure and his penance , till our very pastime , tired out of 
▁ breath , prompt us to have mercy on him ; at which time we will 
▁ bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of 
▁ madmen . xxmaj but see , but see . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup andrew 
▁
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj more matter for a xxmaj may morning . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj here 's the challenge ; read it . i warrant there 's vinegar 
▁ and pepper in't . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj is't so saucy ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj ay , is't , i warrant him ; do but read . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj give me . [ reads ] ' youth , whatsoever thou art , thou art 
▁ but a scurvy fellow . ' 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj good and valiant . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ reads ] ' wonder not , nor admire not in thy mind , why i do 
▁ call thee so , for i will show thee no reason for't . ' 
▁ xxup fabian . a good note ; that keeps you from the blow of the law . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ reads ] ' thou com'st to the xxmaj lady xxmaj olivia , and in my sight 
▁ she uses thee kindly ; but thou liest in thy throat ; that is not 
▁ the matter i challenge thee for . ' 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj very brief , and to exceeding good sense- less . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ reads ] ' i will waylay thee going home ; where if it be 
▁ thy chance to kill me'- 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj good . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . ' thou kill'st me like a rogue and a villain . ' 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj still you keep o ' th ' windy side of the law . xxmaj good ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ reads ] ' fare thee well ; and xxmaj god have mercy upon one of 
▁ our souls ! xxmaj he may have mercy upon mine ; but my hope is better , 
▁ and so look to thyself . xxmaj thy friend , as thou usest him , and thy 
▁ sworn enemy , 
▁ xxup andrew xxup aguecheek . ' 

▁ xxmaj if this letter move him not , his legs can not . xxmaj i 'll give't him . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj you may have very fit occasion for't ; he is now in some 
▁ commerce with my lady , and will by and by depart . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj go , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew ; scout me for him at the corner of the 
▁ orchard , like a bum - baily ; so soon as ever thou seest him , draw ; 
▁ and as thou draw'st , swear horrible ; for it comes to pass oft 
▁ that a terrible oath , with a swaggering accent sharply twang'd 
▁ off , gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would 
▁ have earn'd him . xxmaj away . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj nay , let me alone for swearing . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj now will not i deliver his letter ; for the behaviour of 
▁ the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and 
▁ breeding ; his employment between his lord and my niece confirms 
▁ no less . xxmaj therefore this letter , being so excellently ignorant , 
▁ will breed no terror in the youth : he will find it comes from a 
▁ clodpole . xxmaj but , sir , i will deliver his challenge by word of 
▁ mouth , set upon xxmaj aguecheek notable report of valour , and drive the 
▁ gentleman- as know his youth will aptly receive it- into a most 
▁ hideous opinion of his rage , skill , fury , and impetuosity . xxmaj this 
▁ will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the 
▁ look , like cockatrices . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup olivia . xxmaj with xxup viola 

▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj here he comes with your niece ; give them way till he take 
▁ leave , and presently after him . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . i will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a 
▁ challenge . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup sir xxup toby , xxup fabian , and xxup maria 
▁ xxup olivia . i have said too much unto a heart of stone , 
▁ xxmaj and laid mine honour too unchary out ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's something in me that reproves my fault ; 
▁ xxmaj but such a headstrong potent fault it is 
▁ xxmaj that it but mocks reproof . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj with the same haviour that your passion bears 
▁ xxmaj goes on my master 's griefs . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj here , wear this jewel for me ; ' tis my picture . 
▁ xxmaj refuse it not ; it hath no tongue to vex you . 
▁ xxmaj and i beseech you come again to - morrow . 
▁ xxmaj what shall you ask of me that xxmaj i 'll deny , 
▁ xxmaj that honour sav'd may upon asking give ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj nothing but this- your true love for my master . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj how with mine honour may i give him that 
▁ xxmaj which i have given to you ? 
▁ xxup viola . i will acquit you . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj well , come again to - morrow . xxmaj fare thee well ; 
▁ a fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup sir xxup toby and xxup sir xxup fabian 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj gentleman , xxmaj god save thee . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and you , sir . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj that defence thou hast , betake thee tot . xxmaj of what nature 
▁ the wrongs are thou hast done him , i know not ; but thy 
▁ intercepter , full of despite , bloody as the hunter , attends 
▁ thee at the orchard end . xxmaj dismount thy tuck , be yare in thy 
▁ preparation , for thy assailant is quick , skilful , and deadly . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj you mistake , sir ; i am sure no man hath any quarrel to me ; 
▁ my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offence 
▁ done to any man . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj you 'll find it otherwise , i assure you ; therefore , if you 
▁ hold your life at any price , betake you to your guard ; for your 
▁ opposite hath in him what youth , strength , skill , and wrath , can 
▁ furnish man withal . 
▁ xxup viola . i pray you , sir , what is he ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj he is knight , dubb'd with unhatch'd rapier and on carpet 
▁ consideration ; but he is a devil in private brawl . xxmaj souls and 
▁ bodies hath he divorc'd three ; and his incensement at this moment 
▁ is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of 
▁ death and sepulchre . xxmaj hob - nob is his word- give't or take't . 
▁ xxup viola . i will return again into the house and desire some conduct 
▁ of the lady . i am no fighter . i have heard of some kind of men 
▁ that put quarrels purposely on others to taste their valour ; 
▁ belike this is a man of that quirk . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj sir , no ; his indignation derives itself out of a very 
▁ competent injury ; therefore , get you on and give him his desire . 
▁ xxmaj back you shall not to the house , unless you undertake that with 
▁ me which with as much safety you might answer him ; therefore on , 
▁ or strip your sword stark naked ; for meddle you must , that 's 
▁ certain , or forswear to wear iron about you . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj this is as uncivil as strange . i beseech you do me this 
▁ courteous office as to know of the knight what my offence to him 
▁ is : it is something of my negligence , nothing of my purpose . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . i xxmaj will do so . xxmaj signior xxmaj fabian , stay you by this gentleman 
▁ till my return . xxmaj exit xxup sir xxup toby 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj pray you , sir , do you know of this matter ? 
▁ xxup fabian . i know the knight is incens'd against you , even to a mortal 
▁ arbitrement ; but nothing of the circumstance more . 
▁ xxup viola . i beseech you , what manner of man is he ? 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj nothing of that wonderful promise , to read him by his form , 
▁ as you are like to find him in the proof of his valour . xxmaj he is 
▁ indeed , sir , the most skilful , bloody , and fatal opposite that 
▁ you could possibly have found in any part of xxmaj illyria . xxmaj will you 
▁ walk towards him ? i will make your peace with him if i can . 
▁ xxup viola . i shall be much bound to you for't . i am one that would 
▁ rather go with sir priest than sir knight . i care not who knows 
▁ so much of my mettle . xxmaj exeunt 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup sir xxup toby xxmaj with xxup sir xxup andrew 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj why , man , he 's a very devil ; i have not seen such a 
▁ firago . i had a pass with him , rapier , scabbard , and all , and he 
▁ gives me the stuck in with such a mortal motion that it is 
▁ inevitable ; and on the answer , he pays you as surely as your feet 
▁ hit the ground they step on . xxmaj they say he has been fencer to the 
▁ xxmaj sophy . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj pox on't , xxmaj i 'll not meddle with him . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj ay , but he will not now be pacified ; xxmaj fabian can scarce 
▁ hold him yonder . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj plague on't ; an i thought he had been valiant , and so 
▁ cunning in fence , xxmaj i 'd have seen him damn'd ere xxmaj i 'd have 
▁ challeng'd him . xxmaj let him let the matter slip , and xxmaj i 'll give him 
▁ my horse , grey xxmaj capilet . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj i 'll make the motion . xxmaj stand here , make a good show on't ; 
▁ this shall end without the perdition of souls . [ aside ] xxmaj marry ,