xxbos xxmaj i 'll ride your horse as well as i ride you . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup fabian and xxup viola 

▁ [ to xxup fabian ] i have his horse to take up the quarrel ; i have 
▁ persuaded him the youth 's a devil . 
▁ xxup fabian . [ to xxup sir xxup toby ] xxmaj he is as horribly conceited of him ; and pants 
▁ and looks pale , as if a bear were at his heels . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ to xxup viola ] xxmaj there 's no remedy , sir : he will fight with you 
▁ for 's oath sake . xxmaj marry , he hath better bethought him of his 
▁ quarrel , and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of . 
▁ xxmaj therefore draw for the supportance of his vow ; he protests he 
▁ will not hurt you . 
▁ xxup viola . [ aside ] xxmaj pray xxmaj god defend me ! a little thing would make me 
▁ tell them how much i lack of a man . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj give ground if you see him furious . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew , there 's no remedy ; the gentleman will , 
▁ for his honour 's sake , have one bout with you ; he can not by the 
▁ duello avoid it ; but he has promis'd me , as he is a gentleman and 
▁ a soldier , he will not hurt you . xxmaj come on ; to't . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj pray xxmaj god he keep his oath ! [ they draw ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antonio 

▁ xxup viola . i do assure you ' tis against my will . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj put up your sword . xxmaj if this young gentleman 
▁ xxmaj have done offence , i take the fault on me : 
▁ xxmaj if you offend him , i for him defy you . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj you , sir ! xxmaj why , what are you ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj one , sir , that for his love dares yet do more 
▁ xxmaj than you have heard him brag to you he will . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj nay , if you be an undertaker , i am for you . 
▁ [ they draw ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup officers 

▁ xxup fabian . o good xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , hold ! xxmaj here come the officers . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . [ to xxup antonio ] xxmaj i 'll be with you anon . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj pray , sir , put your sword up , if you please . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj marry , will xxup i , sir ; and for that i promis'd you , xxmaj i 'll be 
▁ as good as my word . xxmaj he will bear you easily and reins well . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj this is the man ; do thy office . 
▁ xxup second xxup officer . xxmaj antonio , i arrest thee at the suit 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj count xxmaj orsino . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj you do mistake me , sir . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj no , sir , no jot ; i know your favour well , 
▁ xxmaj though now you have no sea - cap on your head . 
▁ xxmaj take him away ; he knows i know him well . 
▁ xxup antonio . i xxmaj must obey . [ to xxup viola ] xxmaj this comes with seeking you ; 
▁ xxmaj but there 's no remedy ; i shall answer it . 
▁ xxmaj what will you do , now my necessity 
▁ xxmaj makes me to ask you for my purse ? xxmaj it grieves me 
▁ xxmaj much more for what i can not do for you 
▁ xxmaj than what befalls myself . xxmaj you stand amaz'd ; 
▁ xxmaj but be of comfort . 
▁ xxup second xxup officer . xxmaj come , sir , away . 
▁ xxup antonio . i must entreat of you some of that money . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj what money , sir ? 
▁ xxmaj for the fair kindness you have show'd me here , 
▁ xxmaj and part being prompted by your present trouble , 
▁ xxmaj out of my lean and low ability 
▁ xxmaj i 'll lend you something . xxmaj my having is not much ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make division of my present with you ; 
▁ xxmaj hold , there 's half my coffer . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj will you deny me now ? 
▁ xxmaj is't possible that my deserts to you 
▁ xxmaj can lack persuasion ? xxmaj do not tempt my misery , 
▁ xxmaj lest that it make me so unsound a man 
▁ xxmaj as to upbraid you with those kindnesses 
▁ xxmaj that i have done for you . 
▁ xxup viola . i know of none , 
▁ xxmaj nor know i you by voice or any feature . 
▁ i hate ingratitude more in a man 
▁ xxmaj than lying , vainness , babbling drunkenness , 
▁ xxmaj or any taint of vice whose strong corruption 
▁ xxmaj inhabits our frail blood . 
▁ xxup antonio . o heavens themselves ! 
▁ xxup second xxup officer . xxmaj come , sir , i pray you go . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj let me speak a little . xxmaj this youth that you see here 
▁ i snatch'd one half out of the jaws of death , 
▁ xxmaj reliev'd him with such sanctity of love , 
▁ xxmaj and to his image , which methought did promise 
▁ xxmaj most venerable worth , did i devotion . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj what 's that to us ? xxmaj the time goes by ; away . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj but , xxup o , how vile an idol proves this god ! 
▁ xxmaj thou hast , xxmaj sebastian , done good feature shame . 
▁ xxmaj in nature there 's no blemish but the mind : 
▁ xxmaj none can be call'd deform'd but the unkind . 
▁ xxmaj virtue is beauty ; but the beauteous evil 
▁ xxmaj are empty trunks , o'erflourish'd by the devil . 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj the man grows mad . xxmaj away with him . 
▁ xxmaj come , come , sir . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj lead me on . xxmaj exit with xxup officers 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj methinks his words do from such passion fly 
▁ xxmaj that he believes himself ; so do not xxup i. 
▁ xxmaj prove true , imagination , xxup o , prove true , 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , dear brother , be now ta'en for you ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come hither , knight ; come hither , xxmaj fabian ; we 'll whisper 
▁ o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj he nam'd xxmaj sebastian . i my brother know 
▁ xxmaj yet living in my glass ; even such and so 
▁ xxmaj in favour was my brother ; and he went 
▁ xxmaj still in this fashion , colour , ornament , 
▁ xxmaj for him i imitate . xxup o , if it prove , 
▁ xxmaj tempests are kind , and salt waves fresh in love ! xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . a very dishonest paltry boy , and more a coward than a 
▁ hare . xxmaj his dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in 
▁ necessity and denying him ; and for his cowardship , ask xxmaj fabian . 
▁ xxup fabian . a coward , a most devout coward , religious in it . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . ' slid , xxmaj i 'll after him again and beat him . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj do ; cuff him soundly , but never draw thy sword . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj and i do not- xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj come , let 's see the event . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . i dare lay any money ' twill be nothing yet . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj before xxup olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup sebastian and xxup clown 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj will you make me believe that i am not sent for you ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj go to , go to , thou art a foolish fellow ; let me be clear 
▁ of thee . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj well held out , i ' faith ! xxmaj no , i do not know you ; nor i am not 
▁ sent to you by my lady , to bid you come speak with her ; nor your 
▁ name is not xxmaj master xxmaj cesario ; nor this is not my nose neither . 
▁ xxmaj nothing that is so is so . 
▁ xxup sebastian . i prithee vent thy folly somewhere else . 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st not me . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj vent my folly ! xxmaj he has heard that word of some great man , and 
▁ now applies it to a fool . xxmaj vent my folly ! i am afraid this great 
▁ lubber , the world , will prove a cockney . i prithee now , ungird 
▁ thy strangeness , and tell me what i shall vent to my lady . xxmaj shall 
▁ i vent to her that thou art coming ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . i prithee , foolish xxmaj greek , depart from me ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's money for thee ; if you tarry longer 
▁ i shall give worse payment . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj by my troth , thou hast an open hand . xxmaj these wise men that 
▁ give fools money get themselves a good report after fourteen 
▁ years ' purchase . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup andrew , xxup sir xxup toby , and xxup fabian 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj now , sir , have i met you again ? 
▁ [ striking xxup sebastian ] xxmaj there 's for you . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj why , there 's for thee , and there , and there . 
▁ xxmaj are all the people mad ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj hold , sir , or xxmaj i 'll throw your dagger o'er the house . 
▁ [ holding xxup sebastian ] 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj this will i tell my lady straight . i would not be in some of 
▁ your coats for two - pence . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come on , sir ; hold . 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj nay , let him alone . xxmaj i 'll go another way to work with 
▁ him ; xxmaj i 'll have an action of battery against him , if there be any 
▁ law in xxmaj illyria ; though i struck him first , yet it 's no matter for 
▁ that . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj let go thy hand . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj come , sir , i will not let you go . xxmaj come , my young soldier , 
▁ put up your iron ; you are well flesh'd . xxmaj come on . 
▁ xxup sebastian . i will be free from thee . xxmaj what wouldst thou now ? 
▁ xxmaj if thou dar'st tempt me further , draw thy sword . [ draws ] 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj what , what ? xxmaj nay , then i must have an ounce or two of this 
▁ malapert blood from you . [ draws ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup olivia 

▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj hold , xxmaj toby ; on thy life , i charge thee hold . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj madam ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj will it be ever thus ? xxmaj ungracious wretch , 
▁ xxmaj fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves , 
▁ xxmaj where manners ne'er were preach'd ! xxmaj out of my sight ! 
▁ xxmaj be not offended , dear xxmaj cesario- 
▁ xxmaj rudesby , be gone ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup sir xxup toby , xxup sir xxup andrew , and xxup fabian 
▁ i prithee , gentle friend , 
▁ xxmaj let thy fair wisdom , not thy passion , sway 
▁ xxmaj in this uncivil and unjust extent 
▁ xxmaj against thy peace . xxmaj go with me to my house , 
▁ xxmaj and hear thou there how many fruitless pranks 
▁ xxmaj this ruffian hath botch'd up , that thou thereby 
▁ xxmaj mayst smile at this . xxmaj thou shalt not choose but go ; 
▁ xxmaj do not deny . xxmaj beshrew his soul for me ! 
▁ xxmaj he started one poor heart of mine in thee . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj what relish is in this ? xxmaj how runs the stream ? 
▁ xxmaj or i am mad , or else this is a dream . 
▁ xxmaj let fancy still my sense in xxmaj lethe steep ; 
▁ xxmaj if it be thus to dream , still let me sleep ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj nay , come , i prithee . xxmaj would thou'dst be rul'd by me ! 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj madam , i will . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , say so , and so be ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxup olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup maria and xxup clown 

▁ xxup maria . xxmaj nay , i prithee , put on this gown and this beard ; make him 
▁ believe thou art xxmaj sir xxmaj topas the curate ; do it quickly . xxmaj i 'll call 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj toby the whilst . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll put it on , and i will dissemble myself in't ; and 
▁ i would i were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown . i 
▁ am not tall enough to become the function well nor lean enough to 
▁ be thought a good student ; but to be said an honest man and a 
▁ good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a 
▁ great scholar . xxmaj the competitors enter . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby and xxup maria 

▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj jove bless thee , xxmaj master xxmaj parson . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj bonos dies , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby ; for as the old hermit of xxmaj prague , that 
▁ never saw pen and ink , very wittily said to niece of xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj gorboduc ' that that is is ' ; so xxup i , being xxmaj master xxmaj parson , am xxmaj master 
▁ xxmaj parson ; for what is ' that ' but that , and ' is ' but is ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj to him , xxmaj sir xxmaj topas . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj what ho , i say ! xxmaj peace in this prison ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj the knave counterfeits well ; a good knave . 
▁ xxup malvolio . [ within ] xxmaj who calls there ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj sir xxmaj topas the curate , who comes to visit xxmaj malvolio the 
▁ lunatic . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , good xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , go to my lady . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj out , hyperbolical fiend ! xxmaj how vexest thou this man ! 
▁ xxmaj talkest thou nothing but of ladies ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj well said , xxmaj master xxmaj parson . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , never was man thus wronged . xxmaj good xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , do 
▁ not think i am mad ; they have laid me here in hideous darkness . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj fie , thou dishonest xxmaj satan ! i call thee by the most modest 
▁ terms , for i am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil 
▁ himself with courtesy . xxmaj say'st thou that house is dark ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj as hell , xxmaj sir xxmaj topas . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj why , it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes , and the 
▁ clerestories toward the south north are as lustrous as ebony ; and 
▁ yet complainest thou of obstruction ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . i am not mad , xxmaj sir xxmaj topas . i say to you this house is dark . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj madman , thou errest . i say there is no darkness but 
▁ ignorance ; in which thou art more puzzled than the xxmaj egyptians in 
▁ their fog . 
▁ xxup malvolio . i say this house is as dark as ignorance , though 
▁ ignorance were as dark as hell ; and i say there was never man 
▁ thus abus'd . i am no more mad than you are ; make the trial of it 
▁ in any constant question . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj what is the opinion of xxmaj pythagoras concerning wild fowl ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj that the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj what think'st thou of his opinion ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . i think nobly of the soul , and no way approve his 
▁ opinion . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj fare thee well . xxmaj remain thou still in darkness : thou shalt 
▁ hold th ' opinion of xxmaj pythagoras ere i will allow of thy wits ; and 
▁ fear to kill a woodcock , lest thou dispossess the soul of thy 
▁ grandam . xxmaj fare thee well . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , xxmaj sir xxmaj topas ! 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj my most exquisite xxmaj sir xxmaj topas ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj nay , i am for all waters . 
▁ xxup maria . xxmaj thou mightst have done this without thy beard and gown : he 
▁ sees thee not . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj to him in thine own voice , and bring me word how thou 
▁ find'st him . i would we were well rid of this knavery . xxmaj if he may 
▁ be conveniently deliver'd , i would he were ; for i am now so far 
▁ in offence with my niece that i can not pursue with any safety 
▁ this sport to the upshot . xxmaj come by and by to my chamber . 
▁ xxmaj exit with xxup maria 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj hey , xxmaj robin , jolly xxmaj robin , 
▁ xxmaj tell me how thy lady does . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj fool ! 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj my lady is unkind , perdy . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj fool ! 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj alas , why is she so ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj fool i say ! 
▁ xxup clown . [ sings ] xxmaj she loves another- xxmaj who calls , ha ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj good fool , as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand , 
▁ help me to a candle , and pen , ink , and paper ; as i am a 
▁ gentleman , i will live to be thankful to thee for't . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj master xxmaj malvolio ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj ay , good fool . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj alas , sir , how fell you besides your five wits ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj fool , there was never man so notoriously abus'd ; 
▁ i am as well in my wits , fool , as thou art . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj but as well ? xxmaj then you are mad indeed , if you be no better in 
▁ your wits than a fool . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj they have here propertied me ; keep me in darkness , send 
▁ ministers to me , asses , and do all they can to face me out of my 
▁ wits . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj advise you what . you say : the minister is here . 
▁ [ speaking as xxup sir xxup topas ] xxmaj malvolio , thy wits the heavens restore ! 
▁ xxmaj endeavour thyself to sleep , and leave thy vain bibble - babble . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj sir xxmaj topas ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj maintain no words with him , good fellow.- xxmaj who , xxup i , sir ? xxmaj not 
▁ xxup i , sir . xxmaj god buy you , good xxmaj sir xxmaj topas.- xxmaj marry , amen.- i will sir , i 
▁ will . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj fool , fool , fool , i say ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj alas , sir , be patient . xxmaj what say you , sir ? i am shent for 
▁ speaking to you . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj good fool , help me to some light and some paper . 
▁ i tell thee i am as well in my wits as any man in xxmaj illyria . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj well - a - day that you were , sir ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj by this hand , i am . xxmaj good fool , some ink , paper , and 
▁ light ; and convey what i will set down to my lady . xxmaj it shall 
▁ advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did . 
▁ xxup clown . i will help you to't . xxmaj but tell me true , are you not mad 
▁ indeed , or do you but counterfeit ? 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj believe me , i am not ; i tell thee true . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll ne'er believe a madman till i see his brains . 
▁ i will fetch you light and paper and ink . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj fool , xxmaj i 'll requite it in the highest degree ; i prithe be 
▁ gone . 
▁ xxup clown . [ singing ] 
▁ i am gone , sir , 
▁ xxmaj and anon , sir , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be with you again , 
▁ xxmaj in a trice , 
▁ xxmaj like to the old xxmaj vice , 
▁ xxmaj your need to sustain ; 

▁ xxmaj who with dagger of lath , 
▁ xxmaj in his rage and his wrath , 
▁ xxmaj cries , xxmaj ah , ha ! to the devil , 
▁ xxmaj like a mad lad , 
▁ xxmaj pare thy nails , dad . 
▁ xxmaj adieu , goodman devil . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxup olivia 's garden 

 xxmaj enter xxup sebastian 

▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj this is the air ; that is the glorious sun ; 
▁ xxmaj this pearl she gave me , i do feel't and see't ; 
▁ xxmaj and though ' tis wonder that enwraps me thus , 
▁ xxmaj yet ' tis not madness . xxmaj where 's xxmaj antonio , then ? 
▁ i could not find him at the xxmaj elephant ; 
▁ xxmaj yet there he was ; and there i found this credit , 
▁ xxmaj that he did range the town to seek me out . 
▁ xxmaj his counsel now might do me golden service ; 
▁ xxmaj for though my soul disputes well with my sense 
▁ xxmaj that this may be some error , but no madness , 
▁ xxmaj yet doth this accident and flood of fortune 
▁ xxmaj so far exceed all instance , all discourse , 
▁ xxmaj that i am ready to distrust mine eyes 
▁ xxmaj and wrangle with my reason , that persuades me 
▁ xxmaj to any other trust but that i am mad , 
▁ xxmaj or else the lady 's mad ; yet if ' twere so , 
▁ xxmaj she could not sway her house , command her followers , 
▁ xxmaj take and give back affairs and their dispatch 
▁ xxmaj with such a smooth , discreet , and stable bearing , 
▁ xxmaj as i perceive she does . xxmaj there 's something in't 
▁ xxmaj that is deceivable . xxmaj but here the lady comes . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup olivia and xxup priest 

▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj blame not this haste of mine . xxmaj if you mean well , 
▁ xxmaj now go with me and with this holy man 
▁ xxmaj into the chantry by ; there , before him 
▁ xxmaj and underneath that consecrated roof , 
▁ xxmaj plight me the fun assurance of your faith , 
▁ xxmaj that my most jealous and too doubtful soul 
▁ xxmaj may live at peace . xxmaj he shall conceal it 
▁ xxmaj whiles you are willing it shall come to note , 
▁ xxmaj what time we will our celebration keep 
▁ xxmaj according to my birth . xxmaj what do you say ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj i 'll follow this good man , and go with you ; 
▁ xxmaj and , having sworn truth , ever will be true . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj then lead the way , good father ; and heavens so shine 
▁ xxmaj that they may fairly note this act of mine ! xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj before olivia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup clown and xxup fabian 

▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj now , as thou lov'st me , let me see his letter . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj good xxmaj master xxmaj fabian , grant me another request . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj anything . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj do not desire to see this letter . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj this is to give a dog , and in recompense desire my dog 
▁ again . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke , xxup viola , xxup curio , and xxup lords 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj belong you to the xxmaj lady xxmaj olivia , friends ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay , sir , we are some of her trappings . 
▁ xxup duke . i know thee well . xxmaj how dost thou , my good fellow ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , sir , the better for my foes and the worse for my 
▁ friends . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj just the contrary : the better for thy friends . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no , sir , the worse . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how can that be ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj marry , sir , they praise me and make an ass of me . xxmaj now my 
▁ foes tell me plainly i am an ass ; so that by my foes , sir , i 
▁ profit in the knowledge of myself , and by my friends i am abused ; 
▁ so that , conclusions to be as kisses , if your four negatives make 
▁ your two affirmatives , why then , the worse for my friends , and 
▁ the better for my foes . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why , this is excellent . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj by my troth , sir , no ; though it please you to be one of my 
▁ friends . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj thou shalt not be the worse for me . xxmaj there 's gold . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj but that it would be double - dealing , sir , i would you could 
▁ make it another . 
▁ xxup duke . xxup o , you give me ill counsel . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj put your grace in your pocket , sir , for this once , and let 
▁ your flesh and blood obey it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj well , i will be so much a sinner to be a double - dealer . 
▁ xxmaj there 's another . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj primo , secundo , tertio , is a good play ; and the old saying 
▁ is ' the third pays for all . ' xxmaj the triplex , sir , is a good tripping 
▁ measure ; or the bells of xxmaj saint xxmaj bennet , sir , may put you in mind- 
▁ one , two , three . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you can fool no more money out of me at this throw ; if you 
▁ will let your lady know i am here to speak with her , and bring 
▁ her along with you , it may awake my bounty further . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj marry , sir , lullaby to your bounty till i come again . i go , 
▁ sir ; but i would not have you to think that my desire of having 
▁ is the sin of covetousness . xxmaj but , as you say , sir , let your bounty 
▁ take a nap ; i will awake it anon . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup antonio and xxup officers 

▁ xxup viola . xxmaj here comes the man , sir , that did rescue me . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj that face of his i do remember well ; 
▁ xxmaj yet when i saw it last it was besmear'd 
▁ xxmaj as black as xxmaj vulcan in the smoke of war . 
▁ a baubling vessel was he captain of , 
▁ xxmaj for shallow draught and bulk unprizable , 
▁ xxmaj with which such scathful grapple did he make 
▁ xxmaj with the most noble bottom of our fleet 
▁ xxmaj that very envy and the tongue of los 
▁ xxmaj cried fame and honour on him . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup first xxup officer . xxmaj orsino , this is that xxmaj antonio 
▁ xxmaj that took the xxmaj phoenix and her fraught from xxmaj candy ; 
▁ xxmaj and this is he that did the xxmaj tiger board 
▁ xxmaj when your young nephew xxmaj titus lost his leg . 
▁ xxmaj here in the streets , desperate of shame and state , 
▁ xxmaj in private brabble did we apprehend him . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj he did me kindness , sir ; drew on my side ; 
▁ xxmaj but in conclusion put strange speech upon me . 
▁ i know not what ' twas but distraction . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj notable pirate , thou salt - water thief ! 
▁ xxmaj what foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies 
▁ xxmaj whom thou , in terms so bloody and so dear , 
▁ xxmaj hast made thine enemies ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj orsino , noble sir , 
▁ xxmaj be pleas'd that i shake off these names you give me : 
▁ xxmaj antonio never yet was thief or pirate , 
▁ xxmaj though i confess , on base and ground enough , 
▁ xxmaj orsino 's enemy . a witchcraft drew me hither : 
▁ xxmaj that most ingrateful boy there by your side 
▁ xxmaj from the rude sea 's enrag'd and foamy mouth 
▁ xxmaj did i redeem ; a wreck past hope he was . 
▁ xxmaj his life i gave him , and did thereto ad 
▁ xxmaj my love without retention or restraint , 
▁ xxmaj all his in dedication ; for his sake , 
▁ xxmaj did i expose myself , pure for his love , 
▁ xxmaj into the danger of this adverse town ; 
▁ xxmaj drew to defend him when he was beset ; 
▁ xxmaj where being apprehended , his false cunning , 
▁ xxmaj not meaning to partake with me in danger , 
▁ xxmaj taught him to face me out of his acquaintance , 
▁ xxmaj and grew a twenty years removed thing 
▁ xxmaj while one would wink ; denied me mine own purse , 
▁ xxmaj which i had recommended to his use 
▁ xxmaj not half an hour before . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj how can this be ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj when came he to this town ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj to - day , my lord ; and for three months before , 
▁ xxmaj no int'rim , not a minute 's vacancy , 
▁ xxmaj both day and night did we keep company . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup olivia and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj countess ; now heaven walks on earth . 
▁ xxmaj but for thee , fellow- fellow , thy words are madness . 
▁ xxmaj three months this youth hath tended upon me- 
▁ xxmaj but more of that anon . xxmaj take him aside . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what would my lord , but that he may not have , 
▁ xxmaj wherein xxmaj olivia may seem serviceable ? 
▁ xxmaj cesario , you do not keep promise with me . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj madam ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj gracious xxmaj olivia- 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what do you say , xxmaj cesario ? xxmaj good my lord- 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj my lord would speak ; my duty hushes me . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj if it be aught to the old tune , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj it is as fat and fulsome to mine ear 
▁ xxmaj as howling after music . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj still so cruel ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj still so constant , lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what , to perverseness ? xxmaj you uncivil lady , 
▁ xxmaj to whose ingrate and unauspicious altars 
▁ xxmaj my soul the faithfull'st off'rings hath breath'd out 
▁ xxmaj that e'er devotion tender'd ! xxmaj what shall i do ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj even what it please my lord , that shall become him . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why should i not , had i the heart to do it , 
▁ xxmaj like to the xxmaj egyptian thief at point of death , 
▁ xxmaj kill what i love?- a savage jealousy 
▁ xxmaj that sometime savours nobly . xxmaj but hear me this : 
▁ xxmaj since you to non - regardance cast my faith , 
▁ xxmaj and that i partly know the instrument 
▁ xxmaj that screws me from my true place in your favour , 
▁ xxmaj live you the marble - breasted tyrant still ; 
▁ xxmaj but this your minion , whom i know you love , 
▁ xxmaj and whom , by heaven i swear , i tender dearly , 
▁ xxmaj him will i tear out of that cruel eye 
▁ xxmaj where he sits crowned in his master 's spite . 
▁ xxmaj come , boy , with me ; my thoughts are ripe in mischief : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll sacrifice the lamb that i do love 
▁ xxmaj to spite a raven 's heart within a dove . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and xxup i , most jocund , apt , and willingly , 
▁ xxmaj to do you rest , a thousand deaths would die . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj where goes xxmaj cesario ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj after him i love 
▁ xxmaj more than i love these eyes , more than my life , 
▁ xxmaj more , by all mores , than e'er i shall love wife . 
▁ xxmaj if i do feign , you witnesses above 
▁ xxmaj punish my life for tainting of my love ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj ay me , detested ! xxmaj how am i beguil'd ! 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj who does beguile you ? xxmaj who does do you wrong ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj hast thou forgot thyself ? xxmaj is it so long ? 
▁ xxmaj call forth the holy father . xxmaj exit an xxup attendant 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj come , away ! 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj whither , my lord ? xxmaj cesario , husband , stay . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj husband ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj ay , husband ; can he that deny ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj her husband , sirrah ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj no , my lord , not xxup i. 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj alas , it is the baseness of thy fear 
▁ xxmaj that makes thee strangle thy propriety . 
▁ xxmaj fear not , xxmaj cesario , take thy fortunes up ; 
▁ xxmaj be that thou know'st thou art , and then thou art 
▁ xxmaj as great as that thou fear'st . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup priest 

▁ xxup o , welcome , father ! 
▁ xxmaj father , i charge thee , by thy reverence , 
▁ xxmaj here to unfold- though lately we intended 
▁ xxmaj to keep in darkness what occasion now 
▁ xxmaj reveals before ' tis ripe- what thou dost know 
▁ xxmaj hath newly pass'd between this youth and me . 
▁ xxup priest . a contract of eternal bond of love , 
▁ xxmaj confirm'd by mutual joinder of your hands , 
▁ xxmaj attested by the holy close of lips , 
▁ xxmaj strength'ned by interchangement of your rings ; 
▁ xxmaj and all the ceremony of this compact 
▁ xxmaj seal'd in my function , by my testimony ; 
▁ xxmaj since when , my watch hath told me , toward my grave , 
▁ i have travell'd but two hours . 
▁ xxup duke . o thou dissembling cub ! xxmaj what wilt thou be , 
▁ xxmaj when time hath sow'd a grizzle on thy case ? 
▁ xxmaj or will not else thy craft so quickly grow 
▁ xxmaj that thine own trip shall be thine overthrow ? 
▁ xxmaj farewell , and take her ; but direct thy feet 
▁ xxmaj where thou and i henceforth may never meet . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj my lord , i do protest- 
▁ xxup olivia . xxup o , do not swear ! 
▁ xxmaj hold little faith , though thou has too much fear . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup andrew 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj for the love of xxmaj god , a surgeon ! 
▁ xxmaj send one presently to xxmaj sir xxmaj toby . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj what 's the matter ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj has broke my head across , and has given xxmaj sir xxmaj toby a 
▁ bloody coxcomb too . xxmaj for the love of xxmaj god , your help ! i had rather 
▁ than forty pound i were at home . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj who has done this , xxmaj sir xxmaj andrew ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj the xxmaj count 's gentleman , one xxmaj cesario . xxmaj we took him for a 
▁ coward , but he 's the very devil incardinate . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj my gentleman , xxmaj cesario ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj od 's lifelings , here he is ! xxmaj you broke my head for 
▁ nothing ; and that that did , i was set on to do't by xxmaj sir xxmaj toby . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj why do you speak to me ? i never hurt you . 
▁ xxmaj you drew your sword upon me without cause ; 
▁ xxmaj but i bespake you fair and hurt you not . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sir xxup toby and xxup clown 

▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj if a bloody coxcomb be a hurt , you have hurt me ; i think 
▁ you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb . xxmaj here comes xxmaj sir xxmaj toby halting ; 
▁ you shall hear more ; but if he had not been in drink , he would 
▁ have tickl'd you othergates than he did . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how now , gentleman ? xxmaj how is't with you ? 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj that 's all one ; has hurt me , and there 's th ' end on't . 
▁ xxmaj sot , didst see xxmaj dick xxmaj surgeon , sot ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxup o , he 's drunk , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , an hour agone ; his eyes were set at 
▁ eight i ' th ' morning . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj then he 's a rogue and a passy measures pavin . i hate a 
▁ drunken rogue . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj away with him . xxmaj who hath made this havoc with them ? 
▁ xxup aguecheek . xxmaj i 'll help you , xxmaj sir xxmaj toby , because we 'll be dress'd 
▁ together . 
▁ xxup sir xxup toby . xxmaj will you help- an ass - head and a coxcomb and a knave , a 
▁ thin fac'd knave , a gull ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj get him to bed , and let his hurt be look'd to . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup clown , xxup fabian , xxup sir xxup toby , and xxup sir xxup andrew 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup sebastian 

▁ xxup sebastian . i am sorry , madam , i have hurt your kinsman ; 
▁ xxmaj but , had it been the brother of my blood , 
▁ i must have done no less with wit and safety . 
▁ xxmaj you throw a strange regard upon me , and by that 
▁ i do perceive it hath offended you . 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , sweet one , even for the vows 
▁ xxmaj we made each other but so late ago . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj one face , one voice , one habit , and two persons ! 
▁ a natural perspective , that is and is not . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj antonio , o my dear xxmaj antonio ! 
▁ xxmaj how have the hours rack'd and tortur'd me 
▁ xxmaj since i have lost thee ! 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj sebastian are you ? 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj fear'st thou that , xxmaj antonio ? 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj how have you made division of yourself ? 
▁ xxmaj an apple cleft in two is not more twin 
▁ xxmaj than these two creatures . xxmaj which is xxmaj sebastian ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj most wonderful ! 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj do i stand there ? i never had a brother ; 
▁ xxmaj nor can there be that deity in my nature 
▁ xxmaj of here and everywhere . i had a sister 
▁ xxmaj whom the blind waves and surges have devour'd . 
▁ xxmaj of charity , what kin are you to me ? 
▁ xxmaj what countryman , what name , what parentage ? 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj of xxmaj messaline ; xxmaj sebastian was my father . 
▁ xxmaj such a xxmaj sebastian was my brother too ; 
▁ xxmaj so went he suited to his watery tomb ; 
▁ xxmaj if spirits can assume both form and suit , 
▁ xxmaj you come to fright us . 
▁ xxup sebastian . a spirit i am indeed , 
▁ xxmaj but am in that dimension grossly clad 
▁ xxmaj which from the womb i did participate . 
▁ xxmaj were you a woman , as the rest goes even , 
▁ i should my tears let fall upon your cheek , 
▁ xxmaj and say ' thrice welcome , drowned xxmaj viola ! ' 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj my father had a mole upon his brow . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxmaj and so had mine . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and died that day when xxmaj viola from her birth 
▁ xxmaj had numb'red thirteen years . 
▁ xxup sebastian . xxup o , that record is lively in my soul ! 
▁ xxmaj he finished indeed his mortal act 
▁ xxmaj that day that made my sister thirteen years . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj if nothing lets to make us happy both 
▁ xxmaj but this my masculine usurp'd attire , 
▁ xxmaj do not embrace me till each circumstance 
▁ xxmaj of place , time , fortune , do cohere and jump 
▁ xxmaj that i am xxmaj viola ; which to confirm , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll bring you to a captain in this town , 
▁ xxmaj where lie my maiden weeds ; by whose gentle help 
▁ i was preserv'd to serve this noble xxmaj count . 
▁ xxmaj all the occurrence of my fortune since 
▁ xxmaj hath been between this lady and this lord . 
▁ xxup sebastian . [ to xxup olivia ] xxmaj so xxmaj comes it , lady , you have been mistook ; 
▁ xxmaj but nature to her bias drew in that . 
▁ xxmaj you would have been contracted to a maid ; 
▁ xxmaj nor are you therein , by my life , deceiv'd ; 
▁ xxmaj you are betroth'd both to a maid and man . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be not amaz'd ; right noble is his blood . 
▁ xxmaj if this be so , as yet the glass seems true , 
▁ i shall have share in this most happy wreck . 
▁ [ to xxup viola ] xxmaj boy , thou hast said to me a thousand times 
▁ xxmaj thou never shouldst love woman like to me . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj and all those sayings will i overswear ; 
▁ xxmaj and all those swearings keep as true in soul 
▁ xxmaj as doth that orbed continent the fire 
▁ xxmaj that severs day from night . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj give me thy hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and let me see thee in thy woman 's weeds . 
▁ xxup viola . xxmaj the captain that did bring me first on shore 
▁ xxmaj hath my maid 's garments . xxmaj he , upon some action , 
▁ xxmaj is now in durance , at xxmaj malvolio 's suit , 
▁ a gentleman and follower of my lady 's . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj he shall enlarge him . xxmaj fetch xxmaj malvolio hither ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet , alas , now i remember me , 
▁ xxmaj they say , poor gentleman , he 's much distract . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup clown , with a letter , and xxup fabian 

▁ a most extracting frenzy of mine own 
▁ xxmaj from my remembrance clearly banish'd his . 
▁ xxmaj how does he , sirrah ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj truly , madam , he holds xxmaj belzebub at the stave 's end as well 
▁ as a man in his case may do . xxmaj has here writ a letter to you ; i 
▁ should have given ' t you to - day morning , but as a madman 's 
▁ epistles are no gospels , so it skills not much when they are 
▁ deliver'd . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj open't , and read it . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the 
▁ madman . [ reads madly ] ' by the xxmaj lord , madam- ' 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj art thou mad ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj no , madam , i do but read madness . xxmaj an your ladyship will have 
▁ it as it ought to be , you must allow vox . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj prithee read i ' thy right wits . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj so i do , madonna ; but to read his right wits is to read 
▁ thus ; therefore perpend , my xxmaj princess , and give ear . 
▁ xxup olivia . [ to xxup fabian ] xxmaj read it you , sirrah . 
▁ xxup fabian . [ reads ] ' by the xxmaj lord , madam , you wrong me , and the world 
▁ shall know it . xxmaj though you have put me into darkness and given 
▁ your drunken cousin rule over me , yet have i the benefit of my 
▁ senses as well as your ladyship . i have your own letter that 
▁ induced me to the semblance i put on , with the which i doubt not 
▁ but to do myself much right or you much shame . xxmaj think of me as you 
▁ please . i leave my duty a little unthought of , and speak out of 
▁ my injury . 
▁ xxup the xxup madly - us'd xxup malvolio ' 

▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj did he write this ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay , xxmaj madam . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this savours not much of distraction . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj see him deliver'd , xxmaj fabian ; bring him hither . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup fabian 
▁ xxmaj my lord , so please you , these things further thought on , 
▁ xxmaj to think me as well a sister as a wife , 
▁ xxmaj one day shall crown th ' alliance on't , so please you , 
▁ xxmaj here at my house , and at my proper cost . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj madam , i am most apt t ' embrace your offer . 
▁ [ to xxup viola ] xxmaj your master quits you ; and , for your service done 
▁ him , 
▁ xxmaj so much against the mettle of your sex , 
▁ xxmaj so far beneath your soft and tender breeding , 
▁ xxmaj and since you call'd me master for so long , 
▁ xxmaj here is my hand ; you shall from this time be 
▁ xxmaj you master 's mistress . 
▁ xxup olivia . a sister ! xxmaj you are she . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup fabian , with xxup malvolio 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj is this the madman ? 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj ay , my lord , this same . 
▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj malvolio ! 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj madam , you have done me wrong , 
▁ xxmaj notorious wrong . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj have xxup i , xxmaj malvolio ? xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj lady , you have . xxmaj pray you peruse that letter . 
▁ xxmaj you must not now deny it is your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj write from it if you can , in hand or phrase ; 
▁ xxmaj or say ' tis not your seal , not your invention ; 
▁ xxmaj you can say none of this . xxmaj well , grant it then , 
▁ xxmaj and tell me , in the modesty of honour , 
▁ xxmaj why you have given me such clear lights of favour , 
▁ xxmaj bade me come smiling and cross - garter'd to you , 
▁ xxmaj to put on yellow stockings , and to frown 
▁ xxmaj upon xxmaj sir xxmaj toby and the lighter people ; 
▁ xxmaj and , acting this in an obedient hope , 
▁ xxmaj why have you suffer'd me to be imprison'd , 
▁ xxmaj kept in a dark house , visited by the priest , 
▁ xxmaj and made the most notorious geck and gul 
▁ xxmaj that e'er invention play'd on ? xxmaj tell me why . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj alas , xxmaj malvolio , this is not my writing , 
▁ xxmaj though , i confess , much like the character ; 
▁ xxmaj but out of question ' tis xxmaj maria 's hand . 
▁ xxmaj and now i do bethink me , it was she 
▁ xxmaj first told me thou wast mad ; then cam'st in smiling , 
▁ xxmaj and in such forms which here were presuppos'd 
▁ xxmaj upon thee in the letter . xxmaj prithee , be content ; 
▁ xxmaj this practice hath most shrewdly pass'd upon thee , 
▁ xxmaj but , when we know the grounds and authors of it , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge 
▁ xxmaj of thine own cause . 
▁ xxup fabian . xxmaj good madam , hear me speak , 
▁ xxmaj and let no quarrel nor no brawl to come 
▁ xxmaj taint the condition of this present hour , 
▁ xxmaj which i have wond'red at . xxmaj in hope it shall not , 
▁ xxmaj most freely i confess myself and xxmaj toby 
▁ xxmaj set this device against xxmaj malvolio here , 
▁ xxmaj upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts 
▁ xxmaj we had conceiv'd against him . xxmaj maria writ 
▁ xxmaj the letter , at xxmaj sir xxmaj toby 's great importance , 
▁ xxmaj in recompense whereof he hath married her . 
▁ xxmaj how with a sportful malice it was follow'd 
▁ xxmaj may rather pluck on laughter than revenge , 
▁ xxmaj if that the injuries be justly weigh'd 
▁ xxmaj that have on both sides pass'd . 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj alas , poor fool , how have they baffl'd thee ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj why , ' some are born great , some achieve greatness , and some 
▁ have greatness thrown upon them . ' i was one , sir , in this 
▁ interlude- one xxmaj sir xxmaj topas , sir ; but that 's all one . ' by the xxmaj lord , 
▁ fool , i am not mad ! ' xxmaj but do you remember- ' madam , why laugh you 
▁ at such a barren rascal ? xxmaj an you smile not , he 's gagg'd ' ? xxmaj and thus 
▁ the whirligig of time brings in his revenges . 
▁ xxup malvolio . xxmaj i 'll be reveng'd on the whole pack of you . 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup olivia . xxmaj he hath been most notoriously abus'd . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj pursue him , and entreat him to a peace ; 
▁ xxmaj he hath not told us of the captain yet . 
▁ xxmaj when that is known , and golden time convents , 
▁ a solemn combination shall be made 
▁ xxmaj of our dear souls . xxmaj meantime , sweet sister , 
▁ xxmaj we will not part from hence . xxmaj cesario , come ; 
▁ xxmaj for so you shall be while you are a man ; 
▁ xxmaj but when in other habits you are seen , 
▁ xxmaj orsino 's mistress , and his fancy 's queen . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt all but the xxup clown 

▁ xxup clown sings 

▁ xxmaj when that i was and a little tiny boy , 
▁ xxmaj with hey , ho , the wind and the rain , 
▁ a foolish thing was but a toy , 
▁ xxmaj for the rain it raineth every day . 

▁ xxmaj but when i came to man 's estate , 
▁ xxmaj with hey , ho , the wind and the rain , 
▁ ' gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate , 
▁ xxmaj for the rain it raineth every day . 

▁ xxmaj but when i came , alas ! to wive , 
▁ xxmaj with hey , ho , the wind and the rain , 
▁ xxmaj by swaggering could i never thrive , 
▁ xxmaj for the rain it raineth every day . 

▁ xxmaj but when i came unto my beds , 
▁ xxmaj with hey , ho , the wind and the rain , 
▁ xxmaj with toss - pots still had drunken heads , 
▁ xxmaj for the rain it raineth every day . 

▁ a great while ago the world begun , 
▁ xxmaj with hey , ho , the wind and the rain , 
▁ xxmaj but that 's all one , our play is done , 
▁ xxmaj and we 'll strive to please you every day . 
▁ xxmaj exit 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 1595 

 xxup the xxup two xxup gentlemen xxup of xxup verona 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxup dramatis xxup personae 

▁ xxup duke xxup of xxup milan , father to xxmaj silvia 
▁ xxup valentine , one of the two gentlemen 
▁ xxup proteus , " " " " " 
▁ xxup antonio , father to xxmaj proteus 
▁ xxup thurio , a foolish rival to xxmaj valentine 
▁ xxup eglamour , agent for xxmaj silvia in her escape 
▁ xxup speed , a clownish servant to xxmaj valentine 
▁ xxup launce , the like to xxmaj proteus 
▁ xxup panthino , servant to xxmaj antonio 
▁ xxup host , where xxmaj julia lodges in xxmaj milan 
▁ xxup outlaws , with xxmaj valentine 

▁ xxup julia , a lady of xxmaj verona , beloved of xxmaj proteus 
▁ xxup silvia , the xxmaj duke 's daughter , beloved of xxmaj valentine 
▁ xxup lucetta , waiting - woman to xxmaj julia 

▁ xxup servants 
▁ xxup musicians 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup scene : 
 xxmaj verona ; xxmaj milan ; the frontiers of xxmaj mantua 


 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj verona . xxmaj an open place 

 xxmaj enter xxup valentine and xxup proteus 

▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj cease to persuade , my loving xxmaj proteus : 
▁ xxmaj home - keeping youth have ever homely wits . 
▁ xxmaj were't not affection chains thy tender days 
▁ xxmaj to the sweet glances of thy honour'd love , 
▁ i rather would entreat thy company 
▁ xxmaj to see the wonders of the world abroad , 
▁ xxmaj than , living dully sluggardiz'd at home , 
▁ xxmaj wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness . 
▁ xxmaj but since thou lov'st , love still , and thrive therein , 
▁ xxmaj even as i would , when i to love begin . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj wilt thou be gone ? xxmaj sweet xxmaj valentine , adieu ! 
▁ xxmaj think on thy xxmaj proteus , when thou haply seest 
▁ xxmaj some rare noteworthy object in thy travel . 
▁ xxmaj wish me partaker in thy happiness 
▁ xxmaj when thou dost meet good hap ; and in thy danger , 
▁ xxmaj if ever danger do environ thee , 
▁ xxmaj commend thy grievance to my holy prayers , 
▁ xxmaj for i will be thy headsman , xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj and on a love - book pray for my success ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj upon some book i love xxmaj i 'll pray for thee . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj that 's on some shallow story of deep love : 
▁ xxmaj how young xxmaj leander cross'd the xxmaj hellespont . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj that 's a deep story of a deeper love ; 
▁ xxmaj for he was more than over shoes in love . 
▁ xxup valentine . ' tis true ; for you are over boots in love , 
▁ xxmaj and yet you never swum the xxmaj hellespont . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj over the boots ! xxmaj nay , give me not the boots . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no , i will not , for it boots thee not . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj what ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj to be in love- where scorn is bought with groans , 
▁ xxmaj coy looks with heart - sore sighs , one fading moment 's mirth 
▁ xxmaj with twenty watchful , weary , tedious nights ; 
▁ xxmaj if haply won , perhaps a hapless gain ; 
▁ xxmaj if lost , why then a grievous labour won ; 
▁ xxmaj however , but a folly bought with wit , 
▁ xxmaj or else a wit by folly vanquished . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj so , by your circumstance , you call me fool . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj so , by your circumstance , i fear you 'll prove . 
▁ xxup proteus . ' tis love you cavil at ; i am not xxmaj love . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj love is your master , for he masters you ; 
▁ xxmaj and he that is so yoked by a fool , 
▁ xxmaj methinks , should not be chronicled for wise . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj yet writers say , as in the sweetest bud 
▁ xxmaj the eating canker dwells , so eating love 
▁ xxmaj inhabits in the finest wits of all . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj and writers say , as the most forward bud 
▁ xxmaj is eaten by the canker ere it blow , 
▁ xxmaj even so by love the young and tender wit 
▁ xxmaj is turn'd to folly , blasting in the bud , 
▁ xxmaj losing his verdure even in the prime , 
▁ xxmaj and all the fair effects of future hopes . 
▁ xxmaj but wherefore waste i time to counsel the 
▁ xxmaj that art a votary to fond desire ? 
▁ xxmaj once more adieu . xxmaj my father at the road 
▁ xxmaj expects my coming , there to see me shipp'd . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj and thither will i bring thee , xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj sweet xxmaj proteus , no ; now let us take our leave . 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj milan let me hear from thee by letters 
▁ xxmaj of thy success in love , and what news else 
▁ xxmaj betideth here in absence of thy friend ; 
▁ xxmaj and i likewise will visit thee with mine . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj all happiness bechance to thee in xxmaj milan ! 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj as much to you at home ; and so farewell ! 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup valentine 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj he after honour hunts , i after love ; 
▁ xxmaj he leaves his friends to dignify them more : 
▁ i leave myself , my friends , and all for love . 
▁ xxmaj thou , xxmaj julia , thou hast metamorphis'd me , 
▁ xxmaj made me neglect my studies , lose my time , 
▁ xxmaj war with good counsel , set the world at nought ; 
▁ xxmaj made wit with musing weak , heart sick with thought . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup speed 

▁ xxup speed . xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , save you ! xxmaj saw you my master ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but now he parted hence to embark for xxmaj milan . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj twenty to one then he is shipp'd already , 
▁ xxmaj and i have play'd the sheep in losing him . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj indeed a sheep doth very often stray , 
▁ xxmaj an if the shepherd be awhile away . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj you conclude that my master is a shepherd then , and