xxbos i a sheep ? 
▁ xxup proteus . i do . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why then , my horns are his horns , whether i wake or sleep . 
▁ xxup proteus . a silly answer , and fitting well a sheep . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj this proves me still a sheep . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj true ; and thy master a shepherd . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj nay , that i can deny by a circumstance . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj it shall go hard but xxmaj i 'll prove it by another . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj the shepherd seeks the sheep , and not the sheep the 
▁ shepherd ; but i seek my master , and my master seeks not me ; 
▁ therefore , i am no sheep . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj the sheep for fodder follow the shepherd ; the shepherd for 
▁ food follows not the sheep : thou for wages followest thy master ; 
▁ thy master for wages follows not thee . xxmaj therefore , thou art a 
▁ sheep . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj such another proof will make me cry ' baa . ' 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but dost thou hear ? xxmaj gav'st thou my letter to xxmaj julia ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj ay , sir ; xxup i , a lost mutton , gave your letter to her , a lac'd 
▁ mutton ; and she , a lac'd mutton , gave me , a lost mutton , nothing 
▁ for my labour . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj here 's too small a pasture for such store of muttons . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj if the ground be overcharg'd , you were best stick her . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj nay , in that you are astray : ' twere best pound you . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj nay , sir , less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your 
▁ letter . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj you mistake ; i mean the pound- a pinfold . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj from a pound to a pin ? xxmaj fold it over and over , 
▁ ' tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but what said she ? 
▁ xxup speed . [ nodding ] xxmaj ay . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj nod- ay . xxmaj why , that 's ' noddy . ' 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj you mistook , sir ; i say she did nod ; and you ask me if she 
▁ did nod ; and i say ' ay . ' 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj and that set together is ' noddy . ' 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj now you have taken the pains to set it together , take it for 
▁ your pains . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj no , no ; you shall have it for bearing the letter . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj well , i perceive i must be fain to bear with you . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj why , sir , how do you bear with me ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj marry , sir , the letter , very orderly ; having nothing but the 
▁ word ' noddy ' for my pains . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj beshrew me , but you have a quick wit . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj and yet it can not overtake your slow purse . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj come , come , open the matter ; in brief , what said she ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj open your purse , that the money and the matter may be both 
▁ at once delivered . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj well , sir , here is for your pains . xxmaj what said she ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj truly , sir , i think you 'll hardly win her . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj why , couldst thou perceive so much from her ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj sir , i could perceive nothing at all from her ; no , not so 
▁ much as a ducat for delivering your letter ; and being so hard to 
▁ me that brought your mind , i fear she 'll prove as hard to you in 
▁ telling your mind . xxmaj give her no token but stones , for she 's as 
▁ hard as steel . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj what said she ? xxmaj nothing ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj no , not so much as ' take this for thy pains . ' xxmaj to testify 
▁ your bounty , i thank you , you have testern'd me ; in requital 
▁ whereof , henceforth carry your letters yourself ; and so , sir , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll commend you to my master . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj go , go , be gone , to save your ship from wreck , 
▁ xxmaj which can not perish , having thee aboard , 
▁ xxmaj being destin'd to a drier death on shore . xxmaj exit xxup speed 
▁ i must go send some better messenger . 
▁ i fear my xxmaj julia would not deign my lines , 
▁ xxmaj receiving them from such a worthless post . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj verona . xxmaj the garden xxmaj of xxup julia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup julia and xxup lucetta 

▁ xxup julia . xxmaj but say , xxmaj lucetta , now we are alone , 
▁ xxmaj wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj ay , madam ; so you stumble not unheedfully . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj of all the fair resort of gentlemen 
▁ xxmaj that every day with parle encounter me , 
▁ xxmaj in thy opinion which is worthiest love ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj please you , repeat their names ; xxmaj i 'll show my mind 
▁ xxmaj according to my shallow simple skill . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj what think'st thou of the fair xxmaj sir xxmaj eglamour ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj as of a knight well - spoken , neat , and fine ; 
▁ xxmaj but , were i you , he never should be mine . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj what think'st thou of the rich xxmaj mercatio ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj well of his wealth ; but of himself , so so . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj what think'st thou of the gentle xxmaj proteus ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj lord , xxmaj lord ! to see what folly reigns in us ! 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj how now ! what means this passion at his name ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj pardon , dear madam ; ' tis a passing shame 
▁ xxmaj that xxup i , unworthy body as i am , 
▁ xxmaj should censure thus on lovely gentlemen . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj why not on xxmaj proteus , as of all the rest ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj then thus : of many good i think him best . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj your reason ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . i have no other but a woman 's reason : 
▁ i think him so , because i think him so . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and wouldst thou have me cast my love on him ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj ay , if you thought your love not cast away . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj why , he , of all the rest , hath never mov'd me . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj yet he , of all the rest , i think , best loves ye . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj his little speaking shows his love but small . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj fire that 's closest kept burns most of all . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj they do not love that do not show their love . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxup o , they love least that let men know their love . 
▁ xxup julia . i would i knew his mind . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj peruse this paper , madam . 
▁ xxup julia . ' to xxmaj julia'- xxmaj say , from whom ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj that the contents will show . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj say , say , who gave it thee ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine 's page ; and sent , i think , from xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxmaj he would have given it you ; but xxup i , being in the way , 
▁ xxmaj did in your name receive it ; pardon the fault , i pray . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj now , by my modesty , a goodly broker ! 
▁ xxmaj dare you presume to harbour wanton lines ? 
▁ xxmaj to whisper and conspire against my youth ? 
▁ xxmaj now , trust me , ' tis an office of great worth , 
▁ xxmaj and you an officer fit for the place . 
▁ xxmaj there , take the paper ; see it be return'd ; 
▁ xxmaj or else return no more into my sight . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj to plead for love deserves more fee than hate . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj will ye be gone ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj that you may ruminate . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and yet , i would i had o'erlook'd the letter . 
▁ xxmaj it were a shame to call her back again , 
▁ xxmaj and pray her to a fault for which i chid her . 
▁ xxmaj what fool is she , that knows i am a maid 
▁ xxmaj and would not force the letter to my view ! 
▁ xxmaj since maids , in modesty , say ' no ' to that 
▁ xxmaj which they would have the profferer construe ' ay . ' 
▁ xxmaj fie , fie , how wayward is this foolish love , 
▁ xxmaj that like a testy babe will scratch the nurse , 
▁ xxmaj and presently , all humbled , kiss the rod ! 
▁ xxmaj how churlishly i chid xxmaj lucetta hence , 
▁ xxmaj when willingly i would have had her here ! 
▁ xxmaj how angerly i taught my brow to frown , 
▁ xxmaj when inward joy enforc'd my heart to smile ! 
▁ xxmaj my penance is to call xxmaj lucetta back 
▁ xxmaj and ask remission for my folly past . 
▁ xxmaj what ho ! xxmaj lucetta ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lucetta 

▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj what would your ladyship ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj is't near dinner time ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . i would it were , 
▁ xxmaj that you might kill your stomach on your meat 
▁ xxmaj and not upon your maid . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj what is't that you took up so gingerly ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj nothing . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj why didst thou stoop then ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj to take a paper up that i let fall . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and is that paper nothing ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj nothing concerning me . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj then let it lie for those that it concerns . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj madam , it will not lie where it concerns , 
▁ xxmaj unless it have a false interpreter . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj that i might sing it , madam , to a tune . 
▁ xxmaj give me a note ; your ladyship can set . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj as little by such toys as may be possible . 
▁ xxmaj best sing it to the tune of ' light o ' xxmaj love . ' 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj it is too heavy for so light a tune . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj heavy ! belike it hath some burden then . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj ay ; and melodious were it , would you sing it . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and why not you ? 
▁ xxup lucetta . i can not reach so high . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj let 's see your song . [ lucetta withholds the letter ] 
▁ xxmaj how now , minion ! 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj keep tune there still , so you will sing it out . 
▁ xxmaj and yet methinks i do not like this tune . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj you do not ! 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj no , madam ; ' tis too sharp . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj you , minion , are too saucy . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj nay , now you are too flat 
▁ xxmaj and mar the concord with too harsh a descant ; 
▁ xxmaj there wanteth but a mean to fill your song . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj the mean is drown'd with your unruly bass . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj indeed , i bid the base for xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj this babble shall not henceforth trouble me . 
▁ xxmaj here is a coil with protestation ! [ tears the letter ] 
▁ xxmaj go , get you gone ; and let the papers lie . 
▁ xxmaj you would be fing'ring them , to anger me . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj she makes it strange ; but she would be best pleas'd 
▁ xxmaj to be so ang'red with another letter . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj nay , would i were so ang'red with the same ! 
▁ o hateful hands , to tear such loving words ! 
▁ xxmaj injurious wasps , to feed on such sweet honey 
▁ xxmaj and kill the bees that yield it with your stings ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll kiss each several paper for amends . 
▁ xxmaj look , here is writ ' kind xxmaj julia . ' xxmaj unkind xxmaj julia , 
▁ xxmaj as in revenge of thy ingratitude , 
▁ i throw thy name against the bruising stones , 
▁ xxmaj trampling contemptuously on thy disdain . 
▁ xxmaj and here is writ ' love - wounded xxmaj proteus . ' 
▁ xxmaj poor wounded name ! my bosom,,as a bed , 
▁ xxmaj shall lodge thee till thy wound be throughly heal'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and thus i search it with a sovereign kiss . 
▁ xxmaj but twice or thrice was ' proteus ' written down . 
▁ xxmaj be calm , good wind , blow not a word away 
▁ xxmaj till i have found each letter in the letter- 
▁ xxmaj except mine own name ; that some whirlwind bear 
▁ xxmaj unto a ragged , fearful , hanging rock , 
▁ xxmaj and throw it thence into the raging sea . 
▁ xxmaj lo , here in one line is his name twice writ : 
▁ ' poor forlorn xxmaj proteus , passionate xxmaj proteus , 
▁ xxmaj to the sweet xxmaj julia . ' xxmaj that xxmaj i 'll tear away ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i will not , sith so prettily 
▁ xxmaj he couples it to his complaining names . 
▁ xxmaj thus will i fold them one upon another ; 
▁ xxmaj now kiss , embrace , contend , do what you will . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup lucetta 

▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj madam , 
▁ xxmaj dinner is ready , and your father stays . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj well , let us go . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj what , shall these papers lie like tell - tales here ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj if you respect them , best to take them up . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj nay , i was taken up for laying them down ; 
▁ xxmaj yet here they shall not lie for catching cold . 
▁ xxup julia . i see you have a month 's mind to them . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj ay , madam , you may say what sights you see ; 
▁ i see things too , although you judge i wink . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj come , come ; will't please you go ? xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj verona . xxup antonio 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup antonio and xxup panthino 

▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj tell me , xxmaj panthino , what sad talk was that 
▁ xxmaj wherewith my brother held you in the cloister ? 
▁ xxup panthino . ' twas of his nephew xxmaj proteus , your son . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj why , what of him ? 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj he wond'red that your lordship 
▁ xxmaj would suffer him to spend his youth at home , 
▁ xxmaj while other men , of slender reputation , 
▁ xxmaj put forth their sons to seek preferment out : 
▁ xxmaj some to the wars , to try their fortune there ; 
▁ xxmaj some to discover islands far away ; 
▁ xxmaj some to the studious universities . 
▁ xxmaj for any , or for all these exercises , 
▁ xxmaj he said that xxmaj proteus , your son , was meet ; 
▁ xxmaj and did request me to importune you 
▁ xxmaj to let him spend his time no more at home , 
▁ xxmaj which would be great impeachment to his age , 
▁ xxmaj in having known no travel in his youth . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj nor need'st thou much importune me to that 
▁ xxmaj whereon this month i have been hammering . 
▁ i have consider'd well his loss of time , 
▁ xxmaj and how he can not be a perfect man , 
▁ xxmaj not being tried and tutor'd in the world : 
▁ xxmaj experience is by industry achiev'd , 
▁ xxmaj and perfected by the swift course of time . 
▁ xxmaj then tell me whither were i best to send him . 
▁ xxup panthino . i think your lordship is not ignorant 
▁ xxmaj how his companion , youthful xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj attends the xxmaj emperor in his royal court . 
▁ xxup antonio . i know it well . 
▁ xxup panthino . ' twere good , i think , your lordship sent him thither : 
▁ xxmaj there shall he practise tilts and tournaments , 
▁ xxmaj hear sweet discourse , converse with noblemen , 
▁ xxmaj and be in eye of every exercise 
▁ xxmaj worthy his youth and nobleness of birth . 
▁ xxup antonio . i like thy counsel ; well hast thou advis'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and that thou mayst perceive how well i like it , 
▁ xxmaj the execution of it shall make known : 
▁ xxmaj even with the speediest expedition 
▁ i will dispatch him to the xxmaj emperor 's court . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj to - morrow , may it please you , xxmaj don xxmaj alphonso 
▁ xxmaj with other gentlemen of good esteem 
▁ xxmaj are journeying to salute the xxmaj emperor , 
▁ xxmaj and to commend their service to his will . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj good company ; with them shall xxmaj proteus go . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup proteus 

▁ xxmaj and- in good time!- now will we break with him . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sweet love ! sweet lines ! sweet life ! 
▁ xxmaj here is her hand , the agent of her heart ; 
▁ xxmaj here is her oath for love , her honour 's pawn . 
▁ o that our fathers would applaud our loves , 
▁ xxmaj to seal our happiness with their consents ! 
▁ o heavenly xxmaj julia ! 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj what letter are you reading there ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj may't please your lordship , ' tis a word or two 
▁ xxmaj of commendations sent from xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj deliver'd by a friend that came from him . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj lend me the letter ; let me see what news . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj there is no news , my lord ; but that he writes 
▁ xxmaj how happily he lives , how well - belov'd 
▁ xxmaj and daily graced by the xxmaj emperor ; 
▁ xxmaj wishing me with him , partner of his fortune . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj and how stand you affected to his wish ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj as one relying on your lordship 's will , 
▁ xxmaj and not depending on his friendly wish . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj my will is something sorted with his wish . 
▁ xxmaj muse not that i thus suddenly proceed ; 
▁ xxmaj for what i will , i will , and there an end . 
▁ i am resolv'd that thou shalt spend some time 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj valentinus in the xxmaj emperor 's court ; 
▁ xxmaj what maintenance he from his friends receives , 
▁ xxmaj like exhibition thou shalt have from me . 
▁ xxmaj to - morrow be in readiness to go- 
▁ xxmaj excuse it not , for i am peremptory . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj my lord , i can not be so soon provided ; 
▁ xxmaj please you , deliberate a day or two . 
▁ xxup antonio . xxmaj look what thou want'st shall be sent after thee . 
▁ xxmaj no more of stay ; to - morrow thou must go . 
▁ xxmaj come on , xxmaj panthino ; you shall be employ'd 
▁ xxmaj to hasten on his expedition . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup antonio and xxup panthino 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj thus have i shunn'd the fire for fear of burning , 
▁ xxmaj and drench'd me in the sea , where i am drown'd . 
▁ i fear'd to show my father xxmaj julia 's letter , 
▁ xxmaj lest he should take exceptions to my love ; 
▁ xxmaj and with the vantage of mine own excuse 
▁ xxmaj hath he excepted most against my love . 
▁ xxup o , how this spring of love resembleth 
▁ xxmaj the uncertain glory of an xxmaj april day , 
▁ xxmaj which now shows all the beauty of the sun , 
▁ xxmaj and by an by a cloud takes all away ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup panthino 

▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , your father calls for you ; 
▁ xxmaj he is in haste ; therefore , i pray you , go . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj why , this it is : my heart accords thereto ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet a thousand times it answers ' no . ' xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup valentine and xxup speed 

▁ xxup speed . xxmaj sir , your glove . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj not mine : my gloves are on . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why , then , this may be yours ; for this is but one . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ha ! let me see ; ay , give it me , it 's mine ; 
▁ xxmaj sweet ornament that decks a thing divine ! 
▁ xxmaj ah , xxmaj silvia ! xxmaj silvia ! 
▁ xxup speed . [ calling ] xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia ! xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia ! 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how now , sirrah ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj she is not within hearing , sir . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why , sir , who bade you call her ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj your worship , sir ; or else i mistook . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj well , you 'll still be too forward . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj and yet i was last chidden for being too slow . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj go to , sir ; tell me , do you know xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj she that your worship loves ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why , how know you that i am in love ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj marry , by these special marks : first , you have learn'd , like 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , to wreath your arms like a malcontent ; to relish a 
▁ love - song , like a robin redbreast ; to walk alone , like one that 
▁ had the pestilence ; to sigh , like a school - boy that had lost his 
▁ a b xxup c ; to weep , like a young wench that had buried her grandam ; 
▁ to fast , like one that takes diet ; to watch , like one that fears 
▁ robbing ; to speak puling , like a beggar at xxmaj hallowmas . xxmaj you were 
▁ wo nt , when you laughed , to crow like a cock ; when you walk'd , to 
▁ walk like one of the lions ; when you fasted , it was presently 
▁ after dinner ; when you look'd sadly , it was for want of money . 
▁ xxmaj and now you are metamorphis'd with a mistress , that , when i look 
▁ on you , i can hardly think you my master . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj are all these things perceiv'd in me ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj they are all perceiv'd without ye . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj without me ? xxmaj they can not . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj without you ! xxmaj nay , that 's certain ; for , without you were so 
▁ simple , none else would ; but you are so without these follies 
▁ that these follies are within you , and shine through you like the 
▁ water in an urinal , that not an eye that sees you but is a 
▁ physician to comment on your malady . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj but tell me , dost thou know my lady xxmaj silvia ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj she that you gaze on so , as she sits at supper ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj hast thou observ'd that ? xxmaj even she , i mean . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why , sir , i know her not . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj dost thou know her by my gazing on her , and yet know'st 
▁ her not ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj is she not hard - favour'd , sir ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj not so fair , boy , as well - favour'd . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj sir , i know that well enough . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj what dost thou know ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj that she is not so fair as , of you , well - favour'd . 
▁ xxup valentine . i mean that her beauty is exquisite , but her favour 
▁ infinite . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj that 's because the one is painted , and the other out of all 
▁ count . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how painted ? and how out of count ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj marry , sir , so painted , to make her fair , that no man counts 
▁ of her beauty . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how esteem'st thou me ? i account of her beauty . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj you never saw her since she was deform'd . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how long hath she been deform'd ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj ever since you lov'd her . 
▁ xxup valentine . i have lov'd her ever since i saw her , and still 
▁ i see her beautiful . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj if you love her , you can not see her . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj because xxmaj love is blind . o that you had mine eyes ; or your own 
▁ eyes had the lights they were wo nt to have when you chid at xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj proteus for going ungarter'd ! 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj what should i see then ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj your own present folly and her passing deformity ; for he , 
▁ being in love , could not see to garter his hose ; and you , being 
▁ in love , can not see to put on your hose . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj belike , boy , then you are in love ; for last morning you 
▁ could not see to wipe my shoes . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj true , sir ; i was in love with my bed . i thank you , you 
▁ swing'd me for my love , which makes me the bolder to chide you 
▁ for yours . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj in conclusion , i stand affected to her . 
▁ xxup speed . i would you were set , so your affection would cease . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj last night she enjoin'd me to write some lines to one 
▁ she loves . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj and have you ? 
▁ xxup valentine . i have . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj are they not lamely writ ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no , boy , but as well as i can do them . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup silvia 

▁ xxmaj peace ! here she comes . 
▁ xxup speed . [ aside ] o excellent motion ! o exceeding puppet ! 
▁ xxmaj now will he interpret to her . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj madam and mistress , a thousand good morrows . 
▁ xxup speed . [ aside ] xxup o , give ye good ev'n ! 
▁ xxmaj here 's a million of manners . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine and servant , to you two thousand . 
▁ xxup speed . [ aside ] xxmaj he should give her interest , and she gives it him . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj as you enjoin'd me , i have writ your letter 
▁ xxmaj unto the secret nameless friend of yours ; 
▁ xxmaj which i was much unwilling to proceed in , 
▁ xxmaj but for my duty to your ladyship . 
▁ xxup silvia . i thank you , gentle servant . ' tis very clerkly done . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj now trust me , madam , it came hardly off ; 
▁ xxmaj for , being ignorant to whom it goes , 
▁ i writ at random , very doubtfully . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj perchance you think too much of so much pains ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no , madam ; so it stead you , i will write , 
▁ xxmaj please you command , a thousand times as much ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet- 
▁ xxup silvia . a pretty period ! xxmaj well , i guess the sequel ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet i will not name it- and yet i care not . 
▁ xxmaj and yet take this again- and yet i thank you- 
▁ xxmaj meaning henceforth to trouble you no more . 
▁ xxup speed . [ aside ] xxmaj and yet you will ; and yet another ' yet . ' 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj what means your ladyship ? xxmaj do you not like it ? 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj yes , yes ; the lines are very quaintly writ ; 
▁ xxmaj but , since unwillingly , take them again . 
▁ xxmaj nay , take them . [ gives hack the letter ] 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj madam , they are for you . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj ay , ay , you writ them , sir , at my request ; 
▁ xxmaj but i will none of them ; they are for you : 
▁ i would have had them writ more movingly . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj please you , xxmaj i 'll write your ladyship another . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj and when it 's writ , for my sake read it over ; 
▁ xxmaj and if it please you , so ; if not , why , so . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj if it please me , madam , what then ? 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj why , if it please you , take it for your labour . 
▁ xxmaj and so good morrow , servant . xxmaj exit xxup silvia 
▁ xxup speed . o jest unseen , inscrutable , invisible , 
▁ xxmaj as a nose on a man 's face , or a weathercock on a steeple ! 
▁ xxmaj my master sues to her ; and she hath taught her suitor , 
▁ xxmaj he being her pupil , to become her tutor . 
▁ o excellent device ! xxmaj was there ever heard a better , 
▁ xxmaj that my master , being scribe , to himself should write the letter ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how now , sir ! xxmaj what are you reasoning with yourself ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj nay , i was rhyming : ' tis you that have the reason . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj to do what ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj to be a spokesman from xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj to whom ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj to yourself ; why , she woos you by a figure . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj what figure ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj by a letter , i should say . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why , she hath not writ to me . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj what need she , when she hath made you write to yourself ? 
▁ xxmaj why , do you not perceive the jest ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no , believe me . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj no believing you indeed , sir . xxmaj but did you perceive her 
▁ earnest ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj she gave me none except an angry word . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why , she hath given you a letter . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj that 's the letter i writ to her friend . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj and that letter hath she deliver'd , and there an end . 
▁ xxup valentine . i would it were no worse . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj i 'll warrant you ' tis as well . 
▁ ' for often have you writ to her ; and she , in modesty , 
▁ xxmaj or else for want of idle time , could not again reply ; 
▁ xxmaj or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover , 
▁ xxmaj herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover . ' 
▁ xxmaj all this i speak in print , for in print i found it . xxmaj why muse you , 
▁ sir ? ' tis dinner time . 
▁ xxup valentine . i have din'd . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj ay , but hearken , sir ; though the chameleon xxmaj love can feed on 
▁ the air , i am one that am nourish'd by my victuals , and would 
▁ fain have meat . xxup o , be not like your mistress ! xxmaj be moved , be moved . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj verona . xxup julia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup proteus and xxup julia 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj have patience , gentle xxmaj julia . 
▁ xxup julia . i must , where is no remedy . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj when possibly i can , i will return . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj if you turn not , you will return the sooner . 
▁ xxmaj keep this remembrance for thy xxmaj julia 's sake . 
▁ [ giving a ring ] 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj why , then , we 'll make exchange . xxmaj here , take you this . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and seal the bargain with a holy kiss . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj here is my hand for my true constancy ; 
▁ xxmaj and when that hour o'erslips me in the day 
▁ xxmaj wherein i sigh not , xxmaj julia , for thy sake , 
▁ xxmaj the next ensuing hour some foul mischance 
▁ xxmaj torment me for my love 's forgetfulness ! 
▁ xxmaj my father stays my coming ; answer not ; 
▁ xxmaj the tide is now- nay , not thy tide of tears : 
▁ xxmaj that tide will stay me longer than i should . 
▁ xxmaj julia , farewell ! xxmaj exit xxup julia 
▁ xxmaj what , gone without a word ? 
▁ xxmaj ay , so true love should do : it can not speak ; 
▁ xxmaj for truth hath better deeds than words to grace it . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup panthino 

▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , you are stay'd for . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj go ; i come , i come . 
▁ xxmaj alas ! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj verona . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup launce , leading a dog 

▁ xxup launce . xxmaj nay , ' twill be this hour ere i have done weeping ; all the 
▁ kind of the xxmaj launces have this very fault . i have receiv'd my 
▁ proportion , like the xxmaj prodigious xxmaj son , and am going with xxmaj sir 
▁ xxmaj proteus to the xxmaj imperial 's court . i think xxmaj crab my dog be the 
▁ sourest - natured dog that lives : my mother weeping , my father 
▁ wailing , my sister crying , our maid howling , our cat wringing her 
▁ hands , and all our house in a great perplexity ; yet did not this 
▁ cruel - hearted cur shed one tear . xxmaj he is a stone , a very pebble 
▁ stone , and has no more pity in him than a dog . a xxmaj jew would have 
▁ wept to have seen our parting ; why , my grandam having no eyes , 
▁ look you , wept herself blind at my parting . xxmaj nay , xxmaj i 'll show you 
▁ the manner of it . xxmaj this shoe is my father ; no , this left shoe is 
▁ my father ; no , no , left shoe is my mother ; nay , that can not be so 
▁ neither ; yes , it is so , it is so , it hath the worser sole . xxmaj this 
▁ shoe with the hole in it is my mother , and this my father . a 
▁ vengeance on ' t ! xxmaj there ' tis . xxmaj now , sir , this staff is my sister , 
▁ for , look you , she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand ; 
▁ this hat is xxmaj nan our maid ; i am the dog ; no , the dog is himself , 
▁ and i am the dog- xxup o , the dog is me , and i am myself ; ay , so , so . 
▁ xxmaj now come i to my father : ' father , your blessing . ' xxmaj now should not 
▁ the shoe speak a word for weeping ; now should i kiss my father ; 
▁ well , he weeps on . xxmaj now come i to my mother . o that she could 
▁ speak now like a wood woman ! xxmaj well , i kiss her- why there ' tis ; 
▁ here 's my mother 's breath up and down . xxmaj now come i to my sister ; 
▁ mark the moan she makes . xxmaj now the dog all this while sheds not a 
▁ tear , nor speaks a word ; but see how i lay the dust with my 
▁ tears . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup panthino 

▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj launce , away , away , aboard ! xxmaj thy master is shipp'd , and 
▁ thou art to post after with oars . xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj why weep'st 
▁ thou , man ? xxmaj away , ass ! xxmaj you 'll lose the tide if you tarry any 
▁ longer . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj it is no matter if the tied were lost ; for it is the 
▁ unkindest tied that ever any man tied . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj what 's the unkindest tide ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , he that 's tied here , xxmaj crab , my dog . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj tut , man , i mean thou'lt lose the flood , and , in losing 
▁ the flood , lose thy voyage , and , in losing thy voyage , lose thy 
▁ master , and , in losing thy master , lose thy service , and , in 
▁ losing thy service- xxmaj why dost thou stop my mouth ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj for fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj where should i lose my tongue ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj in thy tale . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj in thy tail ! 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj lose the tide , and the voyage , and the master , and the 
▁ service , and the tied ! xxmaj why , man , if the river were dry , i am able 
▁ to fill it with my tears ; if the wind were down , i could drive 
▁ the boat with my sighs . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj come , come away , man ; i was sent to call thee . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj sir , call me what thou dar'st . 
▁ xxup panthino . xxmaj will thou go ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj well , i will go . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup silvia , xxup valentine , xxup thurio , and xxup speed 

▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj servant ! 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj mistress ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj master , xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio frowns on you . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ay , boy , it 's for love . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj not of you . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj of my mistress , then . 
▁ xxup speed . ' twere good you knock'd him . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj servant , you are sad . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj indeed , madam , i seem so . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj seem you that you are not ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj haply i do . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj so do counterfeits . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj so do you . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj what seem i that i am not ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj wise . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj what instance of the contrary ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj your folly . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj and how quote you my folly ? 
▁ xxup valentine . i quote it in your jerkin . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj my jerkin is a doublet . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj well , then , xxmaj i 'll double your folly . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj how ? 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj what , angry , xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio ! xxmaj do you change colour ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj give him leave , madam ; he is a kind of chameleon . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj that hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your 
▁ air . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj you have said , sir . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj ay , sir , and done too , for this time . 
▁ xxup valentine . i know it well , sir ; you always end ere you begin . 
▁ xxup silvia . a fine volley of words , gentlemen , and quickly shot off . 
▁ xxup valentine . ' tis indeed , madam ; we thank the giver . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj who is that , servant ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj yourself , sweet lady ; for you gave the fire . xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio 
▁ borrows his wit from your ladyship 's looks , and spends what he 
▁ borrows kindly in your company . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj sir , if you spend word for word with me , i shall make your 
▁ wit bankrupt . 
▁ xxup valentine . i know it well , sir ; you have an exchequer of words , 
▁ and , i think , no other treasure to give your followers ; for it 
▁ appears by their bare liveries that they live by your bare words . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke 

▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj no more , gentlemen , no more . xxmaj here comes my father . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj now , daughter xxmaj silvia , you are hard beset . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine , your father is in good health . 
▁ xxmaj what say you to a letter from your friends 
▁ xxmaj of much good news ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj my lord , i will be thankful 
▁ xxmaj to any happy messenger from thence . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj know ye xxmaj don xxmaj antonio , your countryman ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ay , my good lord , i know the gentleman 
▁ xxmaj to be of worth and worthy estimation , 
▁ xxmaj and not without desert so well reputed . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj hath he not a son ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ay , my good lord ; a son that well deserves 
▁ xxmaj the honour and regard of such a father . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj you know him well ? 
▁ xxup valentine . i knew him as myself ; for from our infancy 
▁ xxmaj we have convers'd and spent our hours together ; 
▁ xxmaj and though myself have been an idle truant , 
▁ xxmaj omitting the sweet benefit of time 
▁ xxmaj to clothe mine age with angel - like perfection , 
▁ xxmaj yet hath xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , for that 's his name , 
▁ xxmaj made use and fair advantage of his days : 
▁ xxmaj his years but young , but his experience old ; 
▁ xxmaj his head unmellowed , but his judgment ripe ; 
▁ xxmaj and , in a word , for far behind his worth 
▁ xxmaj comes all the praises that i now bestow , 
▁ xxmaj he is complete in feature and in mind , 
▁ xxmaj with all good grace to grace a gentleman . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj beshrew me , sir , but if he make this good , 
▁ xxmaj he is as worthy for an empress ' love 
▁ xxmaj as meet to be an emperor 's counsellor . 
▁ xxmaj well , sir , this gentleman is come to me 
▁ xxmaj with commendation from great potentates , 
▁ xxmaj and here he means to spend his time awhile . 
▁ i think ' tis no unwelcome news to you . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj should i have wish'd a thing , it had been he . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj welcome him , then , according to his worth- 
▁ xxmaj silvia , i speak to you , and you , xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj valentine , i need not cite him to it . 
▁ i will send him hither to you presently . xxmaj exit xxup duke 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj this is the gentleman i told your ladyship 
▁ xxmaj had come along with me but that his mistre xxrep 3 s 
▁ xxmaj did hold his eyes lock'd in her crystal looks . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj belike that now she hath enfranchis'd them 
▁ xxmaj upon some other pawn for fealty . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj nay , sure , i think she holds them prisoners still . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj nay , then , he should be blind ; and , being blind , 
▁ xxmaj how could he see his way to seek out you ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why , lady , xxmaj love hath twenty pair of eyes . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj they say that xxmaj love hath not an eye at all . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj to see such lovers , xxmaj thurio , as yourself ; 
▁ xxmaj upon a homely object xxmaj love can wink . xxmaj exit xxup thurio 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup proteus 

▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj have done , have done ; here comes the gentleman . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj welcome , dear xxmaj proteus ! xxmaj mistress , i beseech you 
▁ xxmaj confirm his welcome with some special favour . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj his worth is warrant for his welcome hither , 
▁ xxmaj if this be he you oft have wish'd to hear from . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj mistress , it is ; sweet lady , entertain him 
▁ xxmaj to be my fellow - servant to your ladyship . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj too low a mistress for so high a servant . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj not so , sweet lady ; but too mean a servant 
▁ xxmaj to have a look of such a worthy mistress . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj leave off discourse of disability ; 
▁ xxmaj sweet lady , entertain him for your servant . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj my duty will i boast of , nothing else . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj and duty never yet did want his meed . 
▁ xxmaj servant , you are welcome to a worthless mistress . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj i 'll die on him that says so but yourself . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj that you are welcome ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj that you are worthless . 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup thurio 

▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj madam , my lord your father would speak with you . 
▁ xxup silvia . i wait upon his pleasure . xxmaj come , xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio , 
▁ xxmaj go with me . xxmaj once more , new servant , welcome . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll leave you to confer of home affairs ; 
▁ xxmaj when you have done we look to hear from you . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj we 'll both attend upon your ladyship . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup silvia and xxup thurio 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj now , tell me , how do all from whence you came ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj your friends are well , and have them much commended . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj and how do yours ? 
▁ xxup proteus . i left them all in health . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how does your lady , and how thrives your love ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj my tales of love were wo nt to weary you ; 
▁ i know you joy not in a love - discourse . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ay , xxmaj proteus , but that life is alter'd now ; 
▁ i have done penance for contemning xxmaj love , 
▁ xxmaj whose high imperious thoughts have punish'd me 
▁ xxmaj with bitter fasts , with penitential groans , 
▁ xxmaj with nightly tears , and daily heart - sore sighs ; 
▁ xxmaj for , in revenge of my contempt of love , 
▁ xxmaj love hath chas'd sleep from my enthralled eyes 
▁ xxmaj and made them watchers of mine own heart 's sorrow . 
▁ o gentle xxmaj proteus , xxmaj love 's a mighty lord , 
▁ xxmaj and hath so humbled me as i confess 
▁ xxmaj there is no woe to his correction , 
▁ xxmaj nor to his service no such joy on earth . 
▁ xxmaj now no discourse , except it be of love ; 
▁ xxmaj now can i break my fast , dine , sup , and sleep , 
▁ xxmaj upon the very naked name of love . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj enough ; i read your fortune in your eye . 
▁ xxmaj was this the idol that you worship so ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj even she ; and is she not a heavenly saint ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj no ; but she is an earthly paragon . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj call her divine . 
▁ xxup proteus . i will not flatter her . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxup o , flatter me ; for love delights in praises ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj when i was sick you gave me bitter pills , 
▁ xxmaj and i must minister the like to you . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj then speak the truth by her ; if not divine , 
▁ xxmaj yet let her be a principality , 
▁ xxmaj sovereign to all the creatures on the earth . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj except my mistress . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj sweet , except not any ; 
▁ xxmaj except thou wilt except against my love . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj have i not reason to prefer mine own ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj and i will help thee to prefer her too : 
▁ xxmaj she shall be dignified with this high honour- 
▁ xxmaj to bear my lady 's train , lest the base earth 
▁ xxmaj should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss 
▁ xxmaj and , of so great a favour growing proud , 
▁ xxmaj disdain to root the summer - swelling flow'r 
▁ xxmaj and make rough winter everlastingly . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj why , xxmaj valentine , what braggardism is this ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj pardon me , xxmaj proteus ; all i can is nothing 
▁ xxmaj to her , whose worth makes other worthies nothing ; 
▁ xxmaj she is alone . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj then let her alone . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj not for the world ! xxmaj why , man , she is mine own ; 
▁ xxmaj and i as rich in having such a jewel 
▁ xxmaj as twenty seas , if all their sand were pearl , 
▁ xxmaj the water nectar , and the rocks pure gold . 
▁ xxmaj forgive me that i do not dream on thee , 
▁ xxmaj because thou seest me dote upon my love . 
▁ xxmaj my foolish rival , that her father likes 
▁ xxmaj only for his possessions are so huge , 
▁ xxmaj is gone with her along ; and i must after , 
▁ xxmaj for love , thou know'st , is full of jealousy . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but she loves you ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ay , and we are betroth'd ; nay more , our marriage - hour , 
▁ xxmaj with all the cunning manner of our flight , 
▁ xxmaj determin'd of- how i must climb her window , 
▁ xxmaj the ladder made of cords , and all the means 
▁ xxmaj plotted and ' greed on for my happiness . 
▁ xxmaj good xxmaj proteus , go with me to my chamber , 
▁ xxmaj in these affairs to aid me with thy counsel . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj go on before ; i shall enquire you forth ; 
▁ i must unto the road to disembark 
▁ xxmaj some necessaries that i needs must use ; 
▁ xxmaj and then xxmaj i 'll presently attend you . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj will you make haste ? 
▁ xxup proteus . i will . xxmaj exit xxup valentine 
▁ xxmaj even as one heat another heat expels 
▁ xxmaj or as one nail by strength drives out another , 
▁ xxmaj so the remembrance of my former love 
▁ xxmaj is by a newer object quite forgotten . 
▁ xxmaj is it my mind , or xxmaj valentinus ' praise , 
▁ xxmaj her true perfection , or my false transgression , 
▁ xxmaj that makes me reasonless to reason thus ? 
▁ xxmaj she is fair ; and so is xxmaj julia that i love- 
▁ xxmaj that i did love , for now my love is thaw'd ; 
▁ xxmaj which like a waxen image ' gainst a fire 
▁ xxmaj bears no impression of the thing it was . 
▁ xxmaj methinks my zeal to xxmaj valentine is cold , 
▁ xxmaj and that i love him not as i was wo nt . 
▁ xxup o ! but i love his lady too too much , 
▁ xxmaj and that 's the reason i love him so little . 
▁ xxmaj how shall i dote on her with more advice 
▁ xxmaj that thus without advice begin to love her ! 
▁ ' tis but her picture i have yet beheld , 
▁ xxmaj and that hath dazzled my reason 's light ; 
▁ xxmaj but when i look on her perfections , 
▁ xxmaj there is no reason but i shall be blind . 
▁ xxmaj if i can check my erring love , i will ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , to compass her xxmaj i 'll use my skill . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup v. 
 xxmaj milan . a street 

 xxmaj enter xxup speed and xxup launce severally 

▁ xxup speed . xxmaj launce ! by mine honesty , welcome to xxmaj padua . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj forswear not thyself , sweet youth , for i am not welcome . i 
▁ reckon this always , that a man is never undone till he be hang'd , 
▁ nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid , and 
▁ the hostess say ' welcome ! ' 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj come on , you madcap ; xxmaj i 'll to the alehouse with you 
▁ presently ; where , for one shot of five pence , thou shalt have 
▁ five thousand welcomes . xxmaj but , sirrah , how did thy master part with 
▁ xxmaj madam xxmaj julia ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj marry , after they clos'd in earnest , they parted very 
▁ fairly in jest . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj but shall she marry him ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj how then ? xxmaj shall he marry her ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj no , neither . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj what , are they broken ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj no , they are both as whole as a fish . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why then , how stands the matter with them ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj marry , thus : when it stands well with him , it stands well 
▁ with her . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj what an ass art thou ! i understand thee not . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj what a block art thou that thou canst not ! xxmaj my staff 
▁ understands me . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj what thou say'st ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj ay , and what i do too ; look thee , xxmaj i 'll but lean , and my 
▁ staff understands me . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj it stands under thee , indeed . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , stand - under and under - stand is all one . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj but tell me true , will't be a match ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj ask my dog . xxmaj if he say ay , it will ; if he say no , it will ; 
▁ if he shake his tail and say nothing , it will . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj the conclusion is , then , that it will . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a 
▁ parable . 
▁ xxup speed . ' tis well that i get it so . xxmaj but , xxmaj launce , how say'st thou 
▁ that my master is become a notable lover ? 
▁ xxup launce . i never knew him otherwise . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj than how ? 
▁ xxup launce . a notable lubber , as thou reportest him to be . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why , thou whoreson ass , thou mistak'st me . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , fool , i meant not thee , i meant thy master . 
▁ xxup speed . i tell thee my master is become a hot lover . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , i tell thee i care not though he burn himself in love . 
▁ xxmaj if thou wilt , go with me to the alehouse ; if not , thou art an 
▁ xxmaj hebrew , a xxmaj jew , and not worth the name of a xxmaj christian . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to 
▁ the ale with a xxmaj christian . xxmaj wilt thou go ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj at thy service . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup vi . 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj the duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup proteus 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj to leave my xxmaj julia , shall i be forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj to love fair xxmaj silvia , shall i be forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj to wrong my friend , i shall be much forsworn ; 
▁ xxmaj and ev'n that pow'r which gave me first my oath 
▁ xxmaj provokes me to this threefold perjury : 
▁ xxmaj love bade me swear , and xxmaj love bids me forswear . 
▁ o sweet - suggesting xxmaj love , if thou hast sinn'd , 
▁ xxmaj teach me , thy tempted subject , to excuse it ! 
▁ xxmaj at first i did adore a twinkling star , 
▁ xxmaj but now i worship a celestial sun . 
▁ xxmaj unheedful vows may heedfully be broken ; 
▁ xxmaj and he wants wit that wants resolved will 
▁ xxmaj to learn his wit t ' exchange the bad for better . 
▁ xxmaj fie , fie , unreverend tongue , to call her bad 
▁ xxmaj whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferr'd 
▁ xxmaj with twenty thousand soul - confirming oaths ! 
▁ i can not leave to love , and yet i do ; 
▁ xxmaj but there i leave to love where i should love . 
▁ xxmaj julia i lose , and xxmaj valentine i lose ; 
▁ xxmaj if i keep them , i needs must lose myself ; 
▁ xxmaj if i lose them , thus find i by their loss : 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj valentine , myself ; for xxmaj julia , xxmaj silvia . 
▁ i to myself am dearer than a friend ; 
▁ xxmaj for love is still most precious in itself ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj silvia- witness heaven , that made her fair!- 
▁ xxmaj shows xxmaj julia but a swarthy xxmaj ethiope . 
▁ i will forget that xxmaj julia is alive , 
▁ xxmaj rememb'ring that my love to her is dead ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj valentine xxmaj i 'll hold an enemy , 
▁ xxmaj aiming at xxmaj silvia as a sweeter friend . 
▁ i can not now prove constant to myself 
▁ xxmaj without some treachery us'd to xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxmaj this night he meaneth with a corded ladder 
▁ xxmaj to climb celestial xxmaj silvia 's chamber window , 
▁ xxmaj myself in counsel , his competitor . 
▁ xxmaj now presently xxmaj i 'll give her father notice 
▁ xxmaj of their disguising and pretended flight , 
▁ xxmaj who , all enrag'd , will banish xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj thurio , he intends , shall we d his daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj valentine being gone , xxmaj i 'll quickly cross 
▁ xxmaj by some sly trick blunt xxmaj thurio 's dull proceeding . 
▁ xxmaj love , lend me wings to make my purpose swift , 
▁ xxmaj as thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup vii . 
 xxmaj verona . xxup julia 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup julia and xxup lucetta 

▁ xxup julia . xxmaj counsel , xxmaj lucetta ; gentle girl , assist me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , ev'n in kind love , i do conjure thee , 
▁ xxmaj who art the table wherein all my thoughts 
▁ xxmaj are visibly character'd and engrav'd , 
▁ xxmaj to lesson me and tell me some good mean 
▁ xxmaj how , with my honour , i may undertake 
▁ a journey to my loving xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj alas , the way is wearisome and long ! 
▁ xxup julia . a true - devoted pilgrim is not weary 
▁ xxmaj to measure kingdoms with his feeble steps ; 
▁ xxmaj much less shall she that hath xxmaj love 's wings to fly , 
▁ xxmaj and when the flight is made to one so dear , 
▁ xxmaj of such divine perfection , as xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj better forbear till xxmaj proteus make return . 
▁ xxup julia . xxup o , know'st thou not his looks are my soul 's food ? 
▁ xxmaj pity the dearth that i have pined in 
▁ xxmaj by longing for that food so long a time . 
▁ xxmaj didst thou but know the inly touch of love . 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow 
▁ xxmaj as seek to quench the fire of love with words . 
▁ xxup lucetta . i do not seek to quench your love 's hot fire , 
▁ xxmaj but qualify the fire 's extreme rage , 
▁ xxmaj lest it should burn above the bounds of reason . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj the more thou dam'st it up , the more it burns . 
▁ xxmaj the current that with gentle murmur glides , 
▁ xxmaj thou know'st , being stopp'd , impatiently doth rage ; 
▁ xxmaj but when his fair course is not hindered , 
▁ xxmaj he makes sweet music with th ' enamell'd stones , 
▁ xxmaj giving a gentle kiss to every sedge 
▁ xxmaj he overtaketh in his pilgrimage ; 
▁ xxmaj and so by many winding nooks he strays , 
▁ xxmaj with willing sport , to the wild ocean . 
▁ xxmaj then let me go , and hinder not my course . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be as patient as a gentle stream , 
▁ xxmaj and make a pastime of each weary step , 
▁ xxmaj till the last step have brought me to my love ;