xxbos xxmaj and there xxmaj i 'll rest as , after much turmoil , 
▁ a blessed soul doth in xxmaj elysium . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj but in what habit will you go along ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj not like a woman , for i would prevent 
▁ xxmaj the loose encounters of lascivious men ; 
▁ xxmaj gentle xxmaj lucetta , fit me with such weeds 
▁ xxmaj as may beseem some well - reputed page . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj why then , your ladyship must cut your hair . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj no , girl ; xxmaj i 'll knit it up in silken strings 
▁ xxmaj with twenty odd - conceited true - love knots- 
▁ xxmaj to be fantastic may become a youth 
▁ xxmaj of greater time than i shall show to be . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj what fashion , madam , shall i make your breeches ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj that fits as well as ' tell me , good my lord , 
▁ xxmaj what compass will you wear your farthingale . ' 
▁ xxmaj why ev'n what fashion thou best likes , xxmaj lucetta . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj you must needs have them with a codpiece , madam . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj out , out , xxmaj lucetta , that will be ill - favour'd . 
▁ xxup lucetta . a round hose , madam , now 's not worth a pin , 
▁ xxmaj unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj lucetta , as thou lov'st me , let me have 
▁ xxmaj what thou think'st meet , and is most mannerly . 
▁ xxmaj but tell me , wench , how will the world repute me 
▁ xxmaj for undertaking so unstaid a journey ? 
▁ i fear me it will make me scandaliz'd . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj if you think so , then stay at home and go not . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj nay , that i will not . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj then never dream on infamy , but go . 
▁ xxmaj if xxmaj proteus like your journey when you come , 
▁ xxmaj no matter who 's displeas'd when you are gone . 
▁ i fear me he will scarce be pleas'd withal . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj that is the least , xxmaj lucetta , of my fear : 
▁ a thousand oaths , an ocean of his tears , 
▁ xxmaj and instances of infinite of love , 
▁ xxmaj warrant me welcome to my xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj all these are servants to deceitful men . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj base men that use them to so base effect ! 
▁ xxmaj but truer stars did govern xxmaj proteus ' birth ; 
▁ xxmaj his words are bonds , his oaths are oracles , 
▁ xxmaj his love sincere , his thoughts immaculate , 
▁ xxmaj his tears pure messengers sent from his heart , 
▁ xxmaj his heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth . 
▁ xxup lucetta . xxmaj pray heav'n he prove so when you come to him . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj now , as thou lov'st me , do him not that wrong 
▁ xxmaj to bear a hard opinion of his truth ; 
▁ xxmaj only deserve my love by loving him . 
▁ xxmaj and presently go with me to my chamber , 
▁ xxmaj to take a note of what i stand in need of 
▁ xxmaj to furnish me upon my longing journey . 
▁ xxmaj all that is mine i leave at thy dispose , 
▁ xxmaj my goods , my lands , my reputation ; 
▁ xxmaj only , in lieu thereof , dispatch me hence . 
▁ xxmaj come , answer not , but to it presently ; 
▁ i am impatient of my tarriance . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke , xxup thurio , and xxup proteus 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio , give us leave , i pray , awhile ; 
▁ xxmaj we have some secrets to confer about . xxmaj exit xxup thurio 
▁ xxmaj now tell me , xxmaj proteus , what 's your will with me ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj my gracious lord , that which i would discover 
▁ xxmaj the law of friendship bids me to conceal ; 
▁ xxmaj but , when i call to mind your gracious favours 
▁ xxmaj done to me , undeserving as i am , 
▁ xxmaj my duty pricks me on to utter that 
▁ xxmaj which else no worldly good should draw from me . 
▁ xxmaj know , worthy prince , xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine , my friend , 
▁ xxmaj this night intends to steal away your daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj myself am one made privy to the plot . 
▁ i know you have determin'd to bestow her 
▁ xxmaj on xxmaj thurio , whom your gentle daughter hates ; 
▁ xxmaj and should she thus be stol'n away from you , 
▁ xxmaj it would be much vexation to your age . 
▁ xxmaj thus , for my duty 's sake , i rather chose 
▁ xxmaj to cross my friend in his intended drift 
▁ xxmaj than , by concealing it , heap on your head 
▁ a pack of sorrows which would press you down , 
▁ xxmaj being unprevented , to your timeless grave . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj proteus , i thank thee for thine honest care , 
▁ xxmaj which to requite , command me while i live . 
▁ xxmaj this love of theirs myself have often seen , 
▁ xxmaj haply when they have judg'd me fast asleep , 
▁ xxmaj and oftentimes have purpos'd to forbid 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine her company and my court ; 
▁ xxmaj but , fearing lest my jealous aim might err 
▁ xxmaj and so , unworthily , disgrace the man , 
▁ a rashness that i ever yet have shunn'd , 
▁ i gave him gentle looks , thereby to find 
▁ xxmaj that which thyself hast now disclos'd to me . 
▁ xxmaj and , that thou mayst perceive my fear of this , 
▁ xxmaj knowing that tender youth is soon suggested , 
▁ i nightly lodge her in an upper tow'r , 
▁ xxmaj the key whereof myself have ever kept ; 
▁ xxmaj and thence she can not be convey'd away . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj know , noble lord , they have devis'd a mean 
▁ xxmaj how he her chamber window will ascend 
▁ xxmaj and with a corded ladder fetch her down ; 
▁ xxmaj for which the youthful lover now is gone , 
▁ xxmaj and this way comes he with it presently ; 
▁ xxmaj where , if it please you , you may intercept him . 
▁ xxmaj but , good my lord , do it so cunningly 
▁ xxmaj that my discovery be not aimed at ; 
▁ xxmaj for love of you , not hate unto my friend , 
▁ xxmaj hath made me publisher of this pretence . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj upon mine honour , he shall never know 
▁ xxmaj that i had any light from thee of this . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj adieu , my lord ; xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine is coming . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup valentine 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine , whither away so fast ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj please it your xxmaj grace , there is a messenger 
▁ xxmaj that stays to bear my letters to my friends , 
▁ xxmaj and i am going to deliver them . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj be they of much import ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj the tenour of them doth but signify 
▁ xxmaj my health and happy being at your court . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj nay then , no matter ; stay with me awhile ; 
▁ i am to break with thee of some affairs 
▁ xxmaj that touch me near , wherein thou must be secret . 
▁ ' tis not unknown to thee that i have sought 
▁ xxmaj to match my friend xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio to my daughter . 
▁ xxup valentine . i know it well , my lord ; and , sure , the match 
▁ xxmaj were rich and honourable ; besides , the gentleman 
▁ xxmaj is full of virtue , bounty , worth , and qualities 
▁ xxmaj beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter . 
▁ xxmaj can not your grace win her to fancy him ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj no , trust me ; she is peevish , sullen , froward , 
▁ xxmaj proud , disobedient , stubborn , lacking duty ; 
▁ xxmaj neither regarding that she is my child 
▁ xxmaj nor fearing me as if i were her father ; 
▁ xxmaj and , may i say to thee , this pride of hers , 
▁ xxmaj upon advice , hath drawn my love from her ; 
▁ xxmaj and , where i thought the remnant of mine age 
▁ xxmaj should have been cherish'd by her childlike duty , 
▁ i now am full resolv'd to take a wife 
▁ xxmaj and turn her out to who will take her in . 
▁ xxmaj then let her beauty be her wedding - dow'r ; 
▁ xxmaj for me and my possessions she esteems not . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj what would your xxmaj grace have me to do in this ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj there is a lady , in xxmaj verona here , 
▁ xxmaj whom i affect ; but she is nice , and coy , 
▁ xxmaj and nought esteems my aged eloquence . 
▁ xxmaj now , therefore , would i have thee to my tutor- 
▁ xxmaj for long agone i have forgot to court ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , the fashion of the time is chang'd- 
▁ xxmaj how and which way i may bestow myself 
▁ xxmaj to be regarded in her sun - bright eye . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj win her with gifts , if she respect not words : 
▁ xxmaj dumb jewels often in their silent kind 
▁ xxmaj more than quick words do move a woman 's mind . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj but she did scorn a present that i sent her . 
▁ xxup valentine . a woman sometime scorns what best contents her . 
▁ xxmaj send her another ; never give her o'er , 
▁ xxmaj for scorn at first makes after - love the more . 
▁ xxmaj if she do frown , ' tis not in hate of you , 
▁ xxmaj but rather to beget more love in you ; 
▁ xxmaj if she do chide , ' tis not to have you gone , 
▁ xxmaj for why , the fools are mad if left alone . 
▁ xxmaj take no repulse , whatever she doth say ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' get you gone ' she doth not mean ' away ! ' 
▁ xxmaj flatter and praise , commend , extol their graces ; 
▁ xxmaj though ne'er so black , say they have angels ' faces . 
▁ xxmaj that man that hath a tongue , i say , is no man , 
▁ xxmaj if with his tongue he can not win a woman . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj but she i mean is promis'd by her friends 
▁ xxmaj unto a youthful gentleman of worth ; 
▁ xxmaj and kept severely from resort of men , 
▁ xxmaj that no man hath access by day to her . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why then i would resort to her by night . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay , but the doors be lock'd and keys kept safe , 
▁ xxmaj that no man hath recourse to her by night . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj what lets but one may enter at her window ? 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj her chamber is aloft , far from the ground , 
▁ xxmaj and built so shelving that one can not climb it 
▁ xxmaj without apparent hazard of his life . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why then a ladder , quaintly made of cords , 
▁ xxmaj to cast up with a pair of anchoring hooks , 
▁ xxmaj would serve to scale another xxmaj hero 's tow'r , 
▁ xxmaj so bold xxmaj leander would adventure it . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj now , as thou art a gentleman of blood , 
▁ xxmaj advise me where i may have such a ladder . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj when would you use it ? xxmaj pray , sir , tell me that . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this very night ; for xxmaj love is like a child , 
▁ xxmaj that longs for everything that he can come by . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj by seven o'clock xxmaj i 'll get you such a ladder . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj but , hark thee ; i will go to her alone ; 
▁ xxmaj how shall i best convey the ladder thither ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj it will be light , my lord , that you may bear it 
▁ xxmaj under a cloak that is of any length . 
▁ xxup duke . a cloak as long as thine will serve the turn ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj then let me see thy cloak . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll get me one of such another length . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why , any cloak will serve the turn , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how shall i fashion me to wear a cloak ? 
▁ i pray thee , let me feel thy cloak upon me . 
▁ xxmaj what letter is this same ? xxmaj what 's here ? ' to xxmaj silvia ' ! 
▁ xxmaj and here an engine fit for my proceeding ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be so bold to break the seal for once . [ reads ] 
▁ ' my thoughts do harbour with my xxmaj silvia nightly , 
▁ xxmaj and slaves they are to me , that send them flying . 
▁ xxup o , could their master come and go as lightly , 
▁ xxmaj himself would lodge where , senseless , they are lying ! 
▁ xxmaj my herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them , 
▁ xxmaj while xxup i , their king , that thither them importune , 
▁ xxmaj do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them , 
▁ xxmaj because myself do want my servants ' fortune . 
▁ i curse myself , for they are sent by me , 
▁ xxmaj that they should harbour where their lord should be . ' 
▁ xxmaj what 's here ? 
▁ ' silvia , this night i will enfranchise thee . ' 
▁ ' tis so ; and here 's the ladder for the purpose . 
▁ xxmaj why , xxmaj phaethon- for thou art xxmaj merops ' son- 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car , 
▁ xxmaj and with thy daring folly burn the world ? 
▁ xxmaj wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee ? 
▁ xxmaj go , base intruder , over - weening slave , 
▁ xxmaj bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates ; 
▁ xxmaj and think my patience , more than thy desert , 
▁ xxmaj is privilege for thy departure hence . 
▁ xxmaj thank me for this more than for all the favours 
▁ xxmaj which , all too much , i have bestow'd on thee . 
▁ xxmaj but if thou linger in my territories 
▁ xxmaj longer than swiftest expedition 
▁ xxmaj will give thee time to leave our royal court , 
▁ xxmaj by heaven ! my wrath shall far exceed the love 
▁ i ever bore my daughter or thyself . 
▁ xxmaj be gone ; i will not hear thy vain excuse , 
▁ xxmaj but , as thou lov'st thy life , make speed from hence . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj and why not death rather than living torment ? 
▁ xxmaj to die is to be banish'd from myself , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj silvia is myself ; banish'd from her 
▁ xxmaj is self from self , a deadly banishment . 
▁ xxmaj what light is light , if xxmaj silvia be not seen ? 
▁ xxmaj what joy is joy , if xxmaj silvia be not by ? 
▁ xxmaj unless it be to think that she is by , 
▁ xxmaj and feed upon the shadow of perfection . 
▁ xxmaj except i be by xxmaj silvia in the night , 
▁ xxmaj there is no music in the nightingale ; 
▁ xxmaj unless i look on xxmaj silvia in the day , 
▁ xxmaj there is no day for me to look upon . 
▁ xxmaj she is my essence , and i leave to be 
▁ xxmaj if i be not by her fair influence 
▁ xxmaj foster'd , illumin'd , cherish'd , kept alive . 
▁ i fly not death , to fly his deadly doom : 
▁ xxmaj tarry i here , i but attend on death ; 
▁ xxmaj but fly i hence , i fly away from life . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup proteus and xxup launce 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj run , boy , run , run , seek him out . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj so - ho , so - ho ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj what seest thou ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj him we go to find : there 's not a hair on 's head but ' tis a 
▁ xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj valentine ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj who then ? his spirit ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj neither . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj nothing . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj can nothing speak ? xxmaj master , shall i strike ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj who wouldst thou strike ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj nothing . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj villain , forbear . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , sir , xxmaj i 'll strike nothing . i pray you- 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sirrah , i say , forbear . xxmaj friend xxmaj valentine , a word . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj my ears are stopp'd and can not hear good news , 
▁ xxmaj so much of bad already hath possess'd them . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj then in dumb silence will i bury mine , 
▁ xxmaj for they are harsh , untuneable , and bad . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj is xxmaj silvia dead ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj no , xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no xxmaj valentine , indeed , for sacred xxmaj silvia . 
▁ xxmaj hath she forsworn me ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj no , xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no xxmaj valentine , if xxmaj silvia have forsworn me . 
▁ xxmaj what is your news ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj sir , there is a proclamation that you are vanished . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj that thou art banished- xxup o , that 's the news!- 
▁ xxmaj from hence , from xxmaj silvia , and from me thy friend . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxup o , i have fed upon this woe already , 
▁ xxmaj and now excess of it will make me surfeit . 
▁ xxmaj doth xxmaj silvia know that i am banished ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj ay , ay ; and she hath offered to the doom- 
▁ xxmaj which , unrevers'd , stands in effectual force- 
▁ a sea of melting pearl , which some call tears ; 
▁ xxmaj those at her father 's churlish feet she tender'd ; 
▁ xxmaj with them , upon her knees , her humble self , 
▁ xxmaj wringing her hands , whose whiteness so became them 
▁ xxmaj as if but now they waxed pale for woe . 
▁ xxmaj but neither bended knees , pure hands held up , 
▁ xxmaj sad sighs , deep groans , nor silver - shedding tears , 
▁ xxmaj could penetrate her uncompassionate sire- 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj valentine , if he be ta'en , must die . 
▁ xxmaj besides , her intercession chaf'd him so , 
▁ xxmaj when she for thy repeal was suppliant , 
▁ xxmaj that to close prison he commanded her , 
▁ xxmaj with many bitter threats of biding there . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj no more ; unless the next word that thou speak'st 
▁ xxmaj have some malignant power upon my life : 
▁ xxmaj if so , i pray thee breathe it in mine ear , 
▁ xxmaj as ending anthem of my endless dolour . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj cease to lament for that thou canst not help , 
▁ xxmaj and study help for that which thou lament'st . 
▁ xxmaj time is the nurse and breeder of all good . 
▁ xxmaj here if thou stay thou canst not see thy love ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , thy staying will abridge thy life . 
▁ xxmaj hope is a lover 's staff ; walk hence with that , 
▁ xxmaj and manage it against despairing thoughts . 
▁ xxmaj thy letters may be here , though thou art hence , 
▁ xxmaj which , being writ to me , shall be deliver'd 
▁ xxmaj even in the milk - white bosom of thy love . 
▁ xxmaj the time now serves not to expostulate . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll convey thee through the city gate ; 
▁ xxmaj and , ere i part with thee , confer at large 
▁ xxmaj of all that may concern thy love affairs . 
▁ xxmaj as thou lov'st xxmaj silvia , though not for thyself , 
▁ xxmaj regard thy danger , and along with me . 
▁ xxup valentine . i pray thee , xxmaj launce , an if thou seest my boy , 
▁ xxmaj bid him make haste and meet me at the xxmaj northgate . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj go , sirrah , find him out . xxmaj come , xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup valentine . o my dear xxmaj silvia ! xxmaj hapless xxmaj valentine ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup valentine and xxup proteus 
▁ xxup launce . i am but a fool , look you , and yet i have the wit to think 
▁ my master is a kind of a knave ; but that 's all one if he be but 
▁ one knave . xxmaj he lives not now that knows me to be in love ; yet i am 
▁ in love ; but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me ; nor 
▁ who ' tis i love ; and yet ' tis a woman ; but what woman i will not 
▁ tell myself ; and yet ' tis a milkmaid ; yet ' tis not a maid , for 
▁ she hath had gossips ; yet ' tis a maid , for she is her master 's 
▁ maid and serves for wages . xxmaj she hath more qualities than a 
▁ water - spaniel- which is much in a bare xxmaj christian . xxmaj here is the 
▁ cate - log [ pulling out a paper ] of her condition . ' inprimis : xxmaj she 
▁ can fetch and carry . ' xxmaj why , a horse can do no more ; nay , a horse 
▁ can not fetch , but only carry ; therefore is she better than a 
▁ jade . ' item : xxmaj she can milk . ' xxmaj look you , a sweet virtue in a maid 
▁ with clean hands . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup speed 

▁ xxup speed . xxmaj how now , xxmaj signior xxmaj launce ! xxmaj what news with your mastership ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj with my master 's ship ? xxmaj why , it is at sea . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj well , your old vice still : mistake the word . xxmaj what news , 
▁ then , in your paper ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj the black'st news that ever thou heard'st . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why , man ? how black ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , as black as ink . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj let me read them . 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj fie on thee , jolt - head ; thou canst not read . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj thou liest ; i can . 
▁ xxup launce . i will try thee . xxmaj tell me this : xxmaj who begot thee ? 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj marry , the son of my grandfather . 
▁ xxup launce . o illiterate loiterer . xxmaj it was the son of thy grandmother . 
▁ xxmaj this proves that thou canst not read . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj come , fool , come ; try me in thy paper . 
▁ xxup launce . [ handing over the paper ] xxmaj there ; and xxmaj saint xxmaj nicholas be thy 
▁ speed . 
▁ xxup speed . [ reads ] ' inprimis : xxmaj she can milk . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj ay , that she can . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she brews good ale . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj and thereof comes the proverb : xxmaj blessing of your heart , you 
▁ brew good ale . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she can sew . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj that 's as much as to say ' can she so ? ' 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she can knit . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj what need a man care for a stock with a wench , when she can 
▁ knit him a stock . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she can wash and scour . ' 
▁ xxup launce . a special virtue ; for then she need not be wash'd and 
▁ scour'd . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she can spin . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj then may i set the world on wheels , when she can spin for 
▁ her living . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she hath many nameless virtues . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj that 's as much as to say ' bastard virtues ' ; that indeed 
▁ know not their fathers , and therefore have no names . 
▁ xxup speed . ' here follow her vices . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj close at the heels of her virtues . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she is not to be kiss'd fasting , in respect of her 
▁ breath . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj well , that fault may be mended with a breakfast . 
▁ xxmaj read on . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she hath a sweet mouth . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj that makes amends for her sour breath . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she doth talk in her sleep . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj it 's no matter for that , so she sleep not in her talk . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she is slow in words . ' 
▁ xxup launce . o villain , that set this down among her vices ! xxmaj to be slow 
▁ in words is a woman 's only virtue . i pray thee , out with't ; and 
▁ place it for her chief virtue . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she is proud . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj out with that too ; it was xxmaj eve 's legacy , and can not be ta'en 
▁ from her . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she hath no teeth . ' 
▁ xxup launce . i care not for that neither , because i love crusts . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she is curst . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj well , the best is , she hath no teeth to bite . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she will often praise her liquor . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj if her liquor be good , she shall ; if she will not , i will ; 
▁ for good things should be praised . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she is too liberal . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj of her tongue she can not , for that 's writ down she is slow 
▁ of ; of her purse she shall not , for that xxmaj i 'll keep shut . xxmaj now of 
▁ another thing she may , and that can not i help . xxmaj well , proceed . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she hath more hair than wit , and more faults 
▁ than hairs , and more wealth than faults . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj stop there ; xxmaj i 'll have her ; she was mine , and not mine , 
▁ twice or thrice in that last article . xxmaj rehearse that once more . 
▁ xxup speed . ' item : xxmaj she hath more hair than wit'- 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj more hair than wit . xxmaj it may be ; xxmaj i 'll prove it : the cover of 
▁ the salt hides the salt , and therefore it is more than the salt ; 
▁ the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit , for the 
▁ greater hides the less . xxmaj what 's next ? 
▁ xxup speed . ' and more faults than hairs'- 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj that 's monstrous . o that that were out ! 
▁ xxup speed . ' and more wealth than faults . ' 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , that word makes the faults gracious . xxmaj well , xxmaj i 'll have 
▁ her ; an if it be a match , as nothing is impossible- 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj what then ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj why , then will i tell thee- that thy master stays for thee 
▁ at the xxmaj northgate . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj for me ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj for thee ! ay , who art thou ? xxmaj he hath stay'd for a better man 
▁ than thee . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj and must i go to him ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj thou must run to him , for thou hast stay'd so long that 
▁ going will scarce serve the turn . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj why didst not tell me sooner ? xxmaj pox of your love letters ! 
▁ xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj now will he be swing'd for reading my letter . xxmaj an unmannerly 
▁ slave that will thrust himself into secrets ! xxmaj i 'll after , to 
▁ rejoice in the boy 's correction . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup duke and xxup thurio 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio , fear not but that she will love you 
▁ xxmaj now xxmaj valentine is banish'd from her sight . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj since his exile she hath despis'd me most , 
▁ xxmaj forsworn my company and rail'd at me , 
▁ xxmaj that i am desperate of obtaining her . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this weak impress of love is as a figure 
▁ xxmaj trenched in ice , which with an hour 's heat 
▁ xxmaj dissolves to water and doth lose his form . 
▁ a little time will melt her frozen thoughts , 
▁ xxmaj and worthless xxmaj valentine shall be forgot . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup proteus 

▁ xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus ! xxmaj is your countryman , 
▁ xxmaj according to our proclamation , gone ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj gone , my good lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj my daughter takes his going grievously . 
▁ xxup proteus . a little time , my lord , will kill that grief . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj so i believe ; but xxmaj thurio thinks not so . 
▁ xxmaj proteus , the good conceit i hold of thee- 
▁ xxmaj for thou hast shown some sign of good desert- 
▁ xxmaj makes me the better to confer with thee . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj longer than i prove loyal to your xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj let me not live to look upon your xxmaj grace . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj thou know'st how willingly i would effect 
▁ xxmaj the match between xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio and my daughter . 
▁ xxup proteus . i do , my lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and also , i think , thou art not ignorant 
▁ xxmaj how she opposes her against my will . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj she did , my lord , when xxmaj valentine was here . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay , and perversely she persevers so . 
▁ xxmaj what might we do to make the girl forget 
▁ xxmaj the love of xxmaj valentine , and love xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj the best way is to slander xxmaj valentine 
▁ xxmaj with falsehood , cowardice , and poor descent- 
▁ xxmaj three things that women highly hold in hate . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay , but she 'll think that it is spoke in hate . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj ay , if his enemy deliver it ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore it must with circumstance be spoken 
▁ xxmaj by one whom she esteemeth as his friend . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj then you must undertake to slander him . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj and that , my lord , i shall be loath to do : 
▁ ' tis an ill office for a gentleman , 
▁ xxmaj especially against his very friend . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj where your good word can not advantage him , 
▁ xxmaj your slander never can endamage him ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore the office is indifferent , 
▁ xxmaj being entreated to it by your friend . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj you have prevail'd , my lord ; if i can do it 
▁ xxmaj by aught that i can speak in his dispraise , 
▁ xxmaj she shall not long continue love to him . 
▁ xxmaj but say this weed her love from xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj it follows not that she will love xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj therefore , as you unwind her love from him , 
▁ xxmaj lest it should ravel and be good to none , 
▁ xxmaj you must provide to bottom it on me ; 
▁ xxmaj which must be done by praising me as much 
▁ xxmaj as you in worth dispraise xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj and , xxmaj proteus , we dare trust you in this kind , 
▁ xxmaj because we know , on xxmaj valentine 's report , 
▁ xxmaj you are already xxmaj love 's firm votary 
▁ xxmaj and can not soon revolt and change your mind . 
▁ xxmaj upon this warrant shall you have access 
▁ xxmaj where you with xxmaj silvia may confer at large- 
▁ xxmaj for she is lumpish , heavy , melancholy , 
▁ xxmaj and , for your friend 's sake , will be glad of you- 
▁ xxmaj where you may temper her by your persuasion 
▁ xxmaj to hate young xxmaj valentine and love my friend . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj as much as i can do i will effect . 
▁ xxmaj but you , xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio , are not sharp enough ; 
▁ xxmaj you must lay lime to tangle her desires 
▁ xxmaj by wailful sonnets , whose composed rhymes 
▁ xxmaj should be full - fraught with serviceable vows . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj ay , 
▁ xxmaj much is the force of heaven - bred poesy . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj say that upon the altar of her beauty 
▁ xxmaj you sacrifice your tears , your sighs , your heart ; 
▁ xxmaj write till your ink be dry , and with your tears 
▁ xxmaj moist it again , and frame some feeling line 
▁ xxmaj that may discover such integrity ; 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj orpheus ' lute was strung with poets ' sinews , 
▁ xxmaj whose golden touch could soften steel and stones , 
▁ xxmaj make tigers tame , and huge leviathans 
▁ xxmaj forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands . 
▁ xxmaj after your dire - lamenting elegies , 
▁ xxmaj visit by night your lady 's chamber window 
▁ xxmaj with some sweet consort ; to their instruments 
▁ xxmaj tune a deploring dump- the night 's dead silence 
▁ xxmaj will well become such sweet - complaining grievance . 
▁ xxmaj this , or else nothing , will inherit her . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj this discipline shows thou hast been in love . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj and thy advice this night xxmaj i 'll put in practice ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , sweet xxmaj proteus , my direction - giver , 
▁ xxmaj let us into the city presently 
▁ xxmaj to sort some gentlemen well skill'd in music . 
▁ i have a sonnet that will serve the turn 
▁ xxmaj to give the onset to thy good advice . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj about it , gentlemen ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj we 'll wait upon your xxmaj grace till after supper , 
▁ xxmaj and afterward determine our proceedings . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj even now about it ! i will pardon you . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup act_4|sc_1 
 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj the frontiers of xxmaj mantua . a forest 

 xxmaj enter certain xxup outlaws 

▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj fellows , stand fast ; i see a passenger . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj if there be ten , shrink not , but down with 'em . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup valentine and xxup speed 

▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj stand , sir , and throw us that you have about ye ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , we 'll make you sit , and rifle you . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj sir , we are undone ; these are the villains 
▁ xxmaj that all the travellers do fear so much . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj my friends- 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj that 's not so , sir ; we are your enemies . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj peace ! we 'll hear him . 
▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj ay , by my beard , will we ; for he is a proper man . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj then know that i have little wealth to lose ; 
▁ a man i am cross'd with adversity ; 
▁ xxmaj my riches are these poor habiliments , 
▁ xxmaj of which if you should here disfurnish me , 
▁ xxmaj you take the sum and substance that i have . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj whither travel you ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj to xxmaj verona . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj whence came you ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj from xxmaj milan . 
▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj have you long sojourn'd there ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj some sixteen months , and longer might have stay'd , 
▁ xxmaj if crooked fortune had not thwarted me . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj what , were you banish'd thence ? 
▁ xxup valentine . i was . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj for what offence ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj for that which now torments me to rehearse : 
▁ i kill'd a man , whose death i much repent ; 
▁ xxmaj but yet i slew him manfully in fight , 
▁ xxmaj without false vantage or base treachery . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj why , ne'er repent it , if it were done so . 
▁ xxmaj but were you banish'd for so small a fault ? 
▁ xxup valentine . i was , and held me glad of such a doom . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj have you the tongues ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj my youthful travel therein made me happy , 
▁ xxmaj or else i often had been miserable . 
▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj by the bare scalp of xxmaj robin xxmaj hood 's fat friar , 
▁ xxmaj this fellow were a king for our wild faction ! 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj we 'll have him . xxmaj sirs , a word . 
▁ xxup speed . xxmaj master , be one of them ; it 's an honourable kind of thievery . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj peace , villain ! 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj tell us this : have you anything to take to ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj nothing but my fortune . 
▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj know , then , that some of us are gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj such as the fury of ungovern'd youth 
▁ xxmaj thrust from the company of awful men ; 
▁ xxmaj myself was from xxmaj verona banished 
▁ xxmaj for practising to steal away a lady , 
▁ xxmaj an heir , and near allied unto the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj and i from xxmaj mantua , for a gentleman 
▁ xxmaj who , in my mood , i stabb'd unto the heart . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj and i for such - like petty crimes as these . 
▁ xxmaj but to the purpose- for we cite our faults 
▁ xxmaj that they may hold excus'd our lawless lives ; 
▁ xxmaj and , partly , seeing you are beautified 
▁ xxmaj with goodly shape , and by your own report 
▁ a linguist , and a man of such perfection 
▁ xxmaj as we do in our quality much want- 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj indeed , because you are a banish'd man , 
▁ xxmaj therefore , above the rest , we parley to you . 
▁ xxmaj are you content to be our general- 
▁ xxmaj to make a virtue of necessity , 
▁ xxmaj and live as we do in this wilderness ? 
▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj what say'st thou ? xxmaj wilt thou be of our consort ? 
▁ xxmaj say ' ay ' and be the captain of us all . 
▁ xxmaj we 'll do thee homage , and be rul'd by thee , 
▁ xxmaj love thee as our commander and our king . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj but if thou scorn our courtesy thou diest . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj thou shalt not live to brag what we have offer'd . 
▁ xxup valentine . i take your offer , and will live with you , 
▁ xxmaj provided that you do no outrages 
▁ xxmaj on silly women or poor passengers . 
▁ xxup third xxup outlaw . xxmaj no , we detest such vile base practices . 
▁ xxmaj come , go with us ; we 'll bring thee to our crews , 
▁ xxmaj and show thee all the treasure we have got ; 
▁ xxmaj which , with ourselves , all rest at thy dispose . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj outside the xxup duke 's palace , under xxup silvia 's window 

 xxmaj enter xxup proteus 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj already have i been false to xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj and now i must be as unjust to xxmaj thurio . 
▁ xxmaj under the colour of commending him 
▁ i have access my own love to prefer ; 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj silvia is too fair , too true , too holy , 
▁ xxmaj to be corrupted with my worthless gifts . 
▁ xxmaj when i protest true loyalty to her , 
▁ xxmaj she twits me with my falsehood to my friend ; 
▁ xxmaj when to her beauty i commend my vows , 
▁ xxmaj she bids me think how i have been forsworn 
▁ xxmaj in breaking faith with xxmaj julia whom i lov'd ; 
▁ xxmaj and notwithstanding all her sudden quips , 
▁ xxmaj the least whereof would quell a lover 's hope , 
▁ xxmaj yet , spaniel - like , the more she spurns my love 
▁ xxmaj the more it grows and fawneth on her still . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup thurio and xxup musicians 

▁ xxmaj but here comes xxmaj thurio . xxmaj now must we to her window , 
▁ xxmaj and give some evening music to her ear . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , are you crept before us ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj ay , gentle xxmaj thurio ; for you know that love 
▁ xxmaj will creep in service where it can not go . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj ay , but i hope , sir , that you love not here . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sir , but i do ; or else i would be hence . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj who ? xxmaj silvia ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj ay , xxmaj silvia- for your sake . 
▁ xxup thurio . i thank you for your own . xxmaj now , gentlemen , 
▁ xxmaj let 's tune , and to it lustily awhile . 

▁ xxmaj enter at a distance , xxup host , and xxup julia in boy 's clothes 

▁ xxup host . xxmaj now , my young guest , methinks you 're allycholly ; i pray you , 
▁ why is it ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj marry , mine host , because i can not be merry . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj come , we 'll have you merry ; xxmaj i 'll bring you where you shall 
▁ hear music , and see the gentleman that you ask'd for . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj but shall i hear him speak ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj ay , that you shall . [ music plays ] 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj that will be music . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj hark , hark ! 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj is he among these ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj ay ; but peace ! let 's hear 'em . 

▁ xxup song 
▁ xxmaj who is xxmaj silvia ? xxmaj what is she , 
▁ xxmaj that all our swains commend her ? 
▁ xxmaj holy , fair , and wise is she ; 
▁ xxmaj the heaven such grace did lend her , 
▁ xxmaj that she might admired be . 

▁ xxmaj is she kind as she is fair ? 
▁ xxmaj for beauty lives with kindness . 
▁ xxmaj love doth to her eyes repair , 
▁ xxmaj to help him of his blindness ; 
▁ xxmaj and , being help'd , inhabits there . 
▁
▁ xxmaj then to xxmaj silvia let us sing 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj silvia is excelling ; 
▁ xxmaj she excels each mortal thing 
▁ xxmaj upon the dull earth dwelling . 
▁ ' to her let us garlands bring . 

▁ xxup host . xxmaj how now , are you sadder than you were before ? 
▁ xxmaj how do you , man ? xxmaj the music likes you not . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj you mistake ; the musician likes me not . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj why , my pretty youth ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj he plays false , father . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj how , out of tune on the strings ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj not so ; but yet so false that he grieves my very 
▁ heart - strings . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj you have a quick ear . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj ay , i would i were deaf ; it makes me have a slow heart . 
▁ xxup host . i perceive you delight not in music . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj not a whit , when it jars so . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj hark , what fine change is in the music ! 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj ay , that change is the spite . 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj you would have them always play but one thing ? 
▁ xxup julia . i would always have one play but one thing . 
▁ xxmaj but , xxmaj host , doth this xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , that we talk on , 
▁ xxmaj often resort unto this gentlewoman ? 
▁ xxup host . i tell you what xxmaj launce , his man , told me : he lov'd her out of 
▁ all nick . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj where is xxmaj launce ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj gone to seek his dog , which to - morrow , by his master 's 
▁ command , he must carry for a present to his lady . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj peace , stand aside ; the company parts . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sir xxmaj thurio , fear not you ; i will so plead 
▁ xxmaj that you shall say my cunning drift excels . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj where meet we ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj at xxmaj saint xxmaj gregory 's well . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exeunt xxup thurio and xxup musicians 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup silvia above , at her window 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj madam , good ev'n to your ladyship . 
▁ xxup silvia . i thank you for your music , gentlemen . 
▁ xxmaj who is that that spake ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj one , lady , if you knew his pure heart 's truth , 
▁ xxmaj you would quickly learn to know him by his voice . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , as i take it . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , gentle lady , and your servant . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj what 's your will ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj that i may compass yours . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj you have your wish ; my will is even this , 
▁ xxmaj that presently you hie you home to bed . 
▁ xxmaj thou subtle , perjur'd , false , disloyal man , 
▁ xxmaj think'st thou i am so shallow , so conceitless , 
▁ xxmaj to be seduced by thy flattery 
▁ xxmaj that hast deceiv'd so many with thy vows ? 
▁ xxmaj return , return , and make thy love amends . 
▁ xxmaj for me , by this pale queen of night i swear , 
▁ i am so far from granting thy request 
▁ xxmaj that i despise thee for thy wrongful suit , 
▁ xxmaj and by and by intend to chide myself 
▁ xxmaj even for this time i spend in talking to thee . 
▁ xxup proteus . i grant , sweet love , that i did love a lady ; 
▁ xxmaj but she is dead . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] ' twere false , if i should speak it ; 
▁ xxmaj for i am sure she is not buried . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj say that she be ; yet xxmaj valentine , thy friend , 
▁ xxmaj survives , to whom , thyself art witness , 
▁ i am betroth'd ; and art thou not asham'd 
▁ xxmaj to wrong him with thy importunacy ? 
▁ xxup proteus . i likewise hear that xxmaj valentine is dead . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj and so suppose am xxup i ; for in his grave 
▁ xxmaj assure thyself my love is buried . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sweet lady , let me rake it from the earth . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj go to thy lady 's grave , and call hers thence ; 
▁ xxmaj or , at the least , in hers sepulchre thine . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj he heard not that . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj madam , if your heart be so obdurate , 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love , 
▁ xxmaj the picture that is hanging in your chamber ; 
▁ xxmaj to that xxmaj i 'll speak , to that xxmaj i 'll sigh and weep ; 
▁ xxmaj for , since the substance of your perfect self 
▁ xxmaj is else devoted , i am but a shadow ; 
▁ xxmaj and to your shadow will i make true love . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj if ' twere a substance , you would , sure , deceive it 
▁ xxmaj and make it but a shadow , as i am . 
▁ xxup silvia . i am very loath to be your idol , sir ; 
▁ xxmaj but since your falsehood shall become you well 
▁ xxmaj to worship shadows and adore false shapes , 
▁ xxmaj send to me in the morning , and xxmaj i 'll send it ; 
▁ xxmaj and so , good rest . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj as wretches have o'ernight 
▁ xxmaj that wait for execution in the morn . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup proteus and xxup silvia 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj host , will you go ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj by my halidom , i was fast asleep . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj pray you , where lies xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus ? 
▁ xxup host . xxmaj marry , at my house . xxmaj trust me , i think ' tis almost day . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj not so ; but it hath been the longest night 
▁ xxmaj that e'er i watch'd , and the most heaviest . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj under xxup silvia 's window 

 xxmaj enter xxup eglamour 

▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj this is the hour that xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia 
▁ xxmaj entreated me to call and know her mind ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's some great matter she 'd employ me in . 
▁ xxmaj madam , madam ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup silvia above , at her window 

▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj who calls ? 
▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj your servant and your friend ; 
▁ xxmaj one that attends your ladyship 's command . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj sir xxmaj eglamour , a thousand times good morrow ! 
▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj as many , worthy lady , to yourself ! 
▁ xxmaj according to your ladyship 's impose , 
▁ i am thus early come to know what service 
▁ xxmaj it is your pleasure to command me in . 
▁ xxup silvia . o xxmaj eglamour , thou art a gentleman- 
▁ xxmaj think not i flatter , for i swear i do not- 
▁ xxmaj valiant , wise , remorseful , well accomplish'd . 
▁ xxmaj thou art not ignorant what dear good will 
▁ i bear unto the banish'd xxmaj valentine ; 
▁ xxmaj nor how my father would enforce me marry 
▁ xxmaj vain xxmaj thurio , whom my very soul abhors . 
▁ xxmaj thyself hast lov'd ; and i have heard thee say 
▁ xxmaj no grief did ever come so near thy heart 
▁ xxmaj as when thy lady and thy true love died , 
▁ xxmaj upon whose grave thou vow'dst pure chastity . 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj eglamour , i would to xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj to xxmaj mantua , where i hear he makes abode ; 
▁ xxmaj and , for the ways are dangerous to pass , 
▁ i do desire thy worthy company , 
▁ xxmaj upon whose faith and honour i repose . 
▁ xxmaj urge not my father 's anger , xxmaj eglamour , 
▁ xxmaj but think upon my grief , a lady 's grief , 
▁ xxmaj and on the justice of my flying hence 
▁ xxmaj to keep me from a most unholy match , 
▁ xxmaj which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues . 
▁ i do desire thee , even from a heart 
▁ xxmaj as full of sorrows as the sea of sands , 
▁ xxmaj to bear me company and go with me ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , to hide what i have said to thee , 
▁ xxmaj that i may venture to depart alone . 
▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj madam , i pity much your grievances ; 
▁ xxmaj which since i know they virtuously are plac'd , 
▁ i give consent to go along with you , 
▁ xxmaj recking as little what betideth me 
▁ xxmaj as much i wish all good befortune you . 
▁ xxmaj when will you go ? 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj this evening coming . 
▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj where shall i meet you ? 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj at xxmaj friar xxmaj patrick 's cell , 
▁ xxmaj where i intend holy confession . 
▁ xxup eglamour . i will not fail your ladyship . xxmaj good morrow , gentle lady . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj good morrow , kind xxmaj sir xxmaj eglamour . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj under xxup silvia 's xxmaj window 

 xxmaj enter xxup launce with his dog 

▁ xxup launce . xxmaj when a man 's servant shall play the cur with him , look you , 
▁ it goes hard- one that i brought up of a puppy ; one that i sav'd 
▁ from drowning , when three or four of his blind brothers and 
▁ sisters went to it . i have taught him , even as one would say 
▁ precisely ' thus i would teach a dog . ' i was sent to deliver him 
▁ as a present to xxmaj mistress xxmaj silvia from my master ; and i came no 
▁ sooner into the dining - chamber , but he steps me to her trencher 
▁ and steals her capon 's leg . xxup o , ' tis a foul thing when a cur 
▁ can not keep himself in all companies ! i would have , as one should 
▁ say , one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed , to be , as it 
▁ were , a dog at all things . xxmaj if i had not had more wit than he , to 
▁ take a fault upon me that he did , i think verily he had been 
▁ hang'd for't ; sure as i live , he had suffer'd for't . xxmaj you shall 
▁ judge . xxmaj he thrusts me himself into the company of three or four 
▁ gentleman - like dogs under the xxmaj duke 's table ; he had not been 
▁ there , bless the mark , a pissing while but all the chamber smelt 
▁ him . ' out with the dog ' says one ; ' what cur is that ? ' says 
▁ another ; ' whip him out ' says the third ; ' hang him up ' says the 
▁ xxmaj duke . xxup i , having been acquainted with the smell before , knew it 
▁ was xxmaj crab , and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs . 
▁ ' friend , ' quoth i ' you mean to whip the dog . ' ' ay , marry do xxup i ' 
▁ quoth he . ' you do him the more wrong , ' quoth xxup i ; " twas i did the 
▁ thing you wot of . ' xxmaj he makes me no more ado , but whips me out of 
▁ the chamber . xxmaj how many masters would do this for his servant ? xxmaj nay , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll be sworn , i have sat in the stock for puddings he hath 
▁ stol'n , otherwise he had been executed ; i have stood on the 
▁ pillory for geese he hath kill'd , otherwise he had suffer'd 
▁ for't . xxmaj thou think'st not of this now . xxmaj nay , i remember the trick 
▁ you serv'd me when i took my leave of xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia . xxmaj did not i bid 
▁ thee still mark me and do as i do ? xxmaj when didst thou see me heave 
▁ up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman 's farthingale ? 
▁ xxmaj didst thou ever see me do such a trick ? 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup proteus , and xxup julia in boy 's clothes 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj sebastian is thy name ? i like thee well , 
▁ xxmaj and will employ thee in some service presently . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj in what you please ; xxmaj i 'll do what i can . 
▁ xxup proteus .. i hope thou wilt . [ to xxup launce ] xxmaj how now , you whoreson 
▁ peasant ! 
▁ xxmaj where have you been these two days loitering ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj marry , sir , i carried xxmaj mistress xxmaj silvia the dog you bade me . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj and what says she to my little jewel ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj marry , she says your dog was a cur , and tells you currish 
▁ thanks is good enough for such a present . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but she receiv'd my dog ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj no , indeed , did she not ; here have i brought him back 
▁ again . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj what , didst thou offer her this from me ? 
▁ xxup launce . xxmaj ay , sir ; the other squirrel was stol'n from me by the 
▁ hangman 's boys in the market - place ; and then i offer'd her mine 
▁ own , who is a dog as big as ten of yours , and therefore the gift 
▁ the greater . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj go , get thee hence and find my dog again , 
▁ xxmaj or ne'er return again into my sight . 
▁ xxmaj away , i say . xxmaj stayest thou to vex me here ? xxmaj exit xxup launce 
▁ a slave that still an end turns me to shame ! 
▁ xxmaj sebastian , i have entertained thee 
▁ xxmaj partly that i have need of such a youth 
▁ xxmaj that can with some discretion do my business , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis no trusting to yond foolish lout , 
▁ xxmaj but chiefly for thy face and thy behaviour , 
▁ xxmaj which , if my augury deceive me not , 
▁ xxmaj witness good bringing up , fortune , and truth ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , know thou , for this i entertain thee . 
▁ xxmaj go presently , and take this ring with thee , 
▁ xxmaj deliver it to xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia- 
▁ xxmaj she lov'd me well deliver'd it to me . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj it seems you lov'd not her , to leave her token . 
▁ xxmaj she is dead , belike ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj not so ; i think she lives . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj alas ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj why dost thou cry ' alas ' ? 
▁ xxup julia . i can not choose 
▁ xxmaj but pity her . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj wherefore shouldst thou pity her ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj because methinks that she lov'd you as well 
▁ xxmaj as you do love your lady xxmaj silvia . 
▁ xxmaj she dreams on him that has forgot her love : 
▁ xxmaj you dote on her that cares not for your love . 
▁ ' tis pity love should be so contrary ; 
▁ xxmaj and thinking on it makes me cry ' alas ! ' 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj well , give her that ring , and therewithal 
▁ xxmaj this letter . xxmaj that 's her chamber . xxmaj tell my lady 
▁ i claim the promise for her heavenly picture . 
▁ xxmaj your message done , hie home unto my chamber , 
▁ xxmaj where thou shalt find me sad and solitary . xxmaj exit xxup proteus 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj how many women would do such a message ? 
▁ xxmaj alas , poor xxmaj proteus , thou hast entertain'd 
▁ a fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs . 
▁ xxmaj alas , poor fool , why do i pity him 
▁ xxmaj that with his very heart despiseth me ? 
▁ xxmaj because he loves her , he despiseth me ; 
▁ xxmaj because i love him , i must pity him . 
▁ xxmaj this ring i gave him , when he parted from me , 
▁ xxmaj to bind him to remember my good will ; 
▁ xxmaj and now am xxup i , unhappy messenger , 
▁ xxmaj to plead for that which i would not obtain , 
▁ xxmaj to carry that which i would have refus'd , 
▁ xxmaj to praise his faith , which i would have disprais'd . 
▁ i am my master 's true confirmed love , 
▁ xxmaj but can not be true servant to my master 
▁ xxmaj unless i prove false traitor to myself . 
▁ xxmaj yet will i woo for him , but yet so coldly 
▁ xxmaj as , heaven it knows , i would not have him speed .