xxbos xxmaj enter xxup silvia , attended 

▁ xxmaj gentlewoman , good day ! i pray you be my mean 
▁ xxmaj to bring me where to speak with xxmaj madam xxmaj silvia . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj what would you with her , if that i be she ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj if you be she , i do entreat your patience 
▁ xxmaj to hear me speak the message i am sent on . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj from whom ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj from my master , xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , madam . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxup o , he sends you for a picture ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj ay , madam . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj ursula , bring my picture there . 
▁ xxmaj go , give your master this . xxmaj tell him from me , 
▁ xxmaj one xxmaj julia , that his changing thoughts forget , 
▁ xxmaj would better fit his chamber than this shadow . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj madam , please you peruse this letter . 
▁ xxmaj pardon me , madam ; i have unadvis'd 
▁ xxmaj deliver'd you a paper that i should not . 
▁ xxmaj this is the letter to your ladyship . 
▁ xxup silvia . i pray thee let me look on that again . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj it may not be ; good madam , pardon me . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj there , hold ! 
▁ i will not look upon your master 's lines . 
▁ i know they are stuff'd with protestations , 
▁ xxmaj and full of new - found oaths , which he wul break 
▁ xxmaj as easily as i do tear his paper . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj madam , he sends your ladyship this ring . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj the more shame for him that he sends it me ; 
▁ xxmaj for i have heard him say a thousand times 
▁ xxmaj his xxmaj julia gave it him at his departure . 
▁ xxmaj though his false finger have profan'd the ring , 
▁ xxmaj mine shall not do his xxmaj julia so much wrong . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj she thanks you . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj what say'st thou ? 
▁ xxup julia . i thank you , madam , that you tender her . 
▁ xxmaj poor gentlewoman , my master wrongs her much . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj dost thou know her ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj almost as well as i do know myself . 
▁ xxmaj to think upon her woes , i do protest 
▁ xxmaj that i have wept a hundred several times . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj belike she thinks that xxmaj proteus hath forsook her . 
▁ xxup julia . i think she doth , and that 's her cause of sorrow . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj is she not passing fair ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj she hath been fairer , madam , than she is . 
▁ xxmaj when she did think my master lov'd her well , 
▁ xxmaj she , in my judgment , was as fair as you ; 
▁ xxmaj but since she did neglect her looking - glass 
▁ xxmaj and threw her sun - expelling mask away , 
▁ xxmaj the air hath starv'd the roses in her cheeks 
▁ xxmaj and pinch'd the lily - tincture of her face , 
▁ xxmaj that now she is become as black as xxup i. 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj how tall was she ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj about my stature ; for at xxmaj pentecost , 
▁ xxmaj when all our pageants of delight were play'd , 
▁ xxmaj our youth got me to play the woman 's part , 
▁ xxmaj and i was trimm'd in xxmaj madam xxmaj julia 's gown ; 
▁ xxmaj which served me as fit , by all men 's judgments , 
▁ xxmaj as if the garment had been made for me ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore i know she is about my height . 
▁ xxmaj and at that time i made her weep a good , 
▁ xxmaj for i did play a lamentable part . 
▁ xxmaj madam , ' twas xxmaj ariadne passioning 
▁ xxmaj for xxmaj theseus ' perjury and unjust flight ; 
▁ xxmaj which i so lively acted with my tears 
▁ xxmaj that my poor mistress , moved therewithal , 
▁ xxmaj wept bitterly ; and would i might be dead 
▁ xxmaj if i in thought felt not her very sorrow . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj she is beholding to thee , gentle youth . 
▁ xxmaj alas , poor lady , desolate and left ! 
▁ i weep myself , to think upon thy words . 
▁ xxmaj here , youth , there is my purse ; i give thee this 
▁ xxmaj for thy sweet mistress ' sake , because thou lov'st her . 
▁ xxmaj farewell . xxmaj exit xxup silvia with xxup attendants 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and she shall thank you for't , if e'er you know her . 
▁ a virtuous gentlewoman , mild and beautiful ! 
▁ i hope my master 's suit will be but cold , 
▁ xxmaj since she respects my mistress ' love so much . 
▁ xxmaj alas , how love can trifle with itself ! 
▁ xxmaj here is her picture ; let me see . i think , 
▁ xxmaj if i had such a tire , this face of mine 
▁ xxmaj were full as lovely as is this of hers ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet the painter flatter'd her a little , 
▁ xxmaj unless i flatter with myself too much . 
▁ xxmaj her hair is auburn , mine is perfect yellow ; 
▁ xxmaj if that be all the difference in his love , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll get me such a colour'd periwig . 
▁ xxmaj her eyes are grey as glass , and so are mine ; 
▁ xxmaj ay , but her forehead 's low , and mine 's as high . 
▁ xxmaj what should it be that he respects in her 
▁ xxmaj but i can make respective in myself , 
▁ xxmaj if this fond xxmaj love were not a blinded god ? 
▁ xxmaj come , shadow , come , and take this shadow up , 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis thy rival . o thou senseless form , 
▁ xxmaj thou shalt be worshipp'd , kiss'd , lov'd , and ador'd ! 
▁ xxmaj and were there sense in his idolatry 
▁ xxmaj my substance should be statue in thy stead . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll use thee kindly for thy mistress ' sake , 
▁ xxmaj that us'd me so ; or else , by xxmaj jove i vow , 
▁ i should have scratch'd out your unseeing eyes , 
▁ xxmaj to make my master out of love with thee . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj an abbey 

 xxmaj enter xxup eglamour 

▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj the sun begins to gild the western sky , 
▁ xxmaj and now it is about the very hour 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj silvia at xxmaj friar xxmaj patrick 's cell should meet me . 
▁ xxmaj she will not fail , for lovers break not hours 
▁ xxmaj unless it be to come before their time , 
▁ xxmaj so much they spur their expedition . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup silvia 

▁ xxmaj see where she comes . xxmaj lady , a happy evening ! 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj amen , amen ! xxmaj go on , good xxmaj eglamour , 
▁ xxmaj out at the postern by the abbey wall ; 
▁ i fear i am attended by some spies . 
▁ xxup eglamour . xxmaj fear not . xxmaj the forest is not three leagues off ; 
▁ xxmaj if we recover that , we are sure enough . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj milan . xxmaj the xxup duke 's palace 

 xxmaj enter xxup thurio , xxup proteus , and xxup julia as xxup sebastian 

▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus , what says xxmaj silvia to my suit ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxup o , sir , i find her milder than she was ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet she takes exceptions at your person . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj what , that my leg is too long ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj no ; that it is too little . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj i 'll wear a boot to make it somewhat rounder . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj but love will not be spurr'd to what it loathes . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj what says she to my face ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj she says it is a fair one . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj nay , then , the wanton lies ; my face is black . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but pearls are fair ; and the old saying is : 
▁ xxmaj black men are pearls in beauteous ladies ' eyes . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] ' tis true , such pearls as put out ladies ' eyes ; 
▁ xxmaj for i had rather wink than look on them . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj how likes she my discourse ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj ill , when you talk of war . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj but well when i discourse of love and peace ? 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj but better , indeed , when you hold your peace . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj what says she to my valour ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxup o , sir , she makes no doubt of that . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj she needs not , when she knows it cowardice . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj what says she to my birth ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj that you are well deriv'd . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj true ; from a gentleman to a fool . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj considers she my possessions ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxup o , ay ; and pities them . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj wherefore ? 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj that such an ass should owe them . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj that they are out by lease . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj here comes the xxmaj duke . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup duke 

▁ xxup duke . xxmaj how now , xxmaj sir xxmaj proteus ! how now , xxmaj thurio ! 
▁ xxmaj which of you saw xxmaj sir xxmaj eglamour of late ? 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj not xxup i. 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj nor xxup i. 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj saw you my daughter ? 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj neither . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj why then , 
▁ xxmaj she 's fled unto that peasant xxmaj valentine ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj eglamour is in her company . 
▁ ' tis true ; for xxmaj friar xxmaj lawrence met them both 
▁ xxmaj as he in penance wander'd through the forest ; 
▁ xxmaj him he knew well , and guess'd that it was she , 
▁ xxmaj but , being mask'd , he was not sure of it ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , she did intend confession 
▁ xxmaj at xxmaj patrick 's cell this even ; and there she was not . 
▁ xxmaj these likelihoods confirm her flight from hence ; 
▁ xxmaj therefore , i pray you , stand not to discourse , 
▁ xxmaj but mount you presently , and meet with me 
▁ xxmaj upon the rising of the mountain foot 
▁ xxmaj that leads toward xxmaj mantua , whither they are fled . 
▁ xxmaj dispatch , sweet gentlemen , and follow me . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj why , this it is to be a peevish girl 
▁ xxmaj that flies her fortune when it follows her . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll after , more to be reveng'd on xxmaj eglamour 
▁ xxmaj than for the love of reckless xxmaj silvia . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj and i will follow , more for xxmaj silvia 's love 
▁ xxmaj than hate of xxmaj eglamour , that goes with her . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and i will follow , more to cross that love 
▁ xxmaj than hate for xxmaj silvia , that is gone for love . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj the frontiers of xxmaj mantua . xxmaj the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup outlaws with xxup silva 

▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj come , come . 
▁ xxmaj be patient ; we must bring you to our captain . 
▁ xxup silvia . a thousand more mischances than this one 
▁ xxmaj have learn'd me how to brook this patiently . 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj come , bring her away . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj where is the gentleman that was with her ? 
▁ xxup second xxup outlaw . xxmaj being nimble - footed , he hath outrun us , 
▁ xxmaj but xxmaj moyses and xxmaj valerius follow him . 
▁ xxmaj go thou with her to the west end of the wood ; 
▁ xxmaj there is our captain ; we 'll follow him that 's fled . 
▁ xxmaj the thicket is beset ; he can not ' scape . 
▁ xxup first xxup outlaw . xxmaj come , i must bring you to our captain 's cave ; 
▁ xxmaj fear not ; he bears an honourable mind , 
▁ xxmaj and will not use a woman lawlessly . 
▁ xxup silvia . o xxmaj valentine , this i endure for thee ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj another part of the forest 

 xxmaj enter xxup valentine 

▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj how use doth breed a habit in a man ! 
▁ xxmaj this shadowy desert , unfrequented woods , 
▁ i better brook than flourishing peopled towns . 
▁ xxmaj here can i sit alone , unseen of any , 
▁ xxmaj and to the nightingale 's complaining notes 
▁ xxmaj tune my distresses and record my woes . 
▁ o thou that dost inhabit in my breast , 
▁ xxmaj leave not the mansion so long tenantless , 
▁ xxmaj lest , growing ruinous , the building fall 
▁ xxmaj and leave no memory of what it was ! 
▁ xxmaj repair me with thy presence , xxmaj silvia : 
▁ xxmaj thou gentle nymph , cherish thy forlorn swain . 
▁ xxmaj what halloing and what stir is this to - day ? 
▁ xxmaj these are my mates , that make their wills their law , 
▁ xxmaj have some unhappy passenger in chase . 
▁ xxmaj they love me well ; yet i have much to do 
▁ xxmaj to keep them from uncivil outrages . 
▁ xxmaj withdraw thee , xxmaj valentine . xxmaj who 's this comes here ? 
▁ [ steps aside ] 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup proteus , xxup silvia , and xxup julia as xxmaj sebastian 

▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj madam , this service i have done for you , 
▁ xxmaj though you respect not aught your servant doth , 
▁ xxmaj to hazard life , and rescue you from him 
▁ xxmaj that would have forc'd your honour and your love . 
▁ xxmaj vouchsafe me , for my meed , but one fair look ; 
▁ a smaller boon than this i can not beg , 
▁ xxmaj and less than this , i am sure , you can not give . 
▁ xxup valentine . [ aside ] xxmaj how like a dream is this i see and hear ! 
▁ xxmaj love , lend me patience to forbear awhile . 
▁ xxup silvia . o miserable , unhappy that i am ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj unhappy were you , madam , ere i came ; 
▁ xxmaj but by my coming i have made you happy . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj by thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy . 
▁ xxup julia . [ aside ] xxmaj and me , when he approacheth to your presence . 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj had i been seized by a hungry lion , 
▁ i would have been a breakfast to the beast 
▁ xxmaj rather than have false xxmaj proteus rescue me . 
▁ xxup o , heaven be judge how i love xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj whose life 's as tender to me as my soul ! 
▁ xxmaj and full as much , for more there can not be , 
▁ i do detest false , perjur'd xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxmaj therefore be gone ; solicit me no more . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj what dangerous action , stood it next to death , 
▁ xxmaj would i not undergo for one calm look ? 
▁ xxup o , ' tis the curse in love , and still approv'd , 
▁ xxmaj when women can not love where they 're belov'd ! 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj when xxmaj proteus can not love where he 's belov'd ! 
▁ xxmaj read over xxmaj julia 's heart , thy first best love , 
▁ xxmaj for whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith 
▁ xxmaj into a thousand oaths ; and all those oaths 
▁ xxmaj descended into perjury , to love me . 
▁ xxmaj thou hast no faith left now , unless thou'dst two , 
▁ xxmaj and that 's far worse than none ; better have none 
▁ xxmaj than plural faith , which is too much by one . 
▁ xxmaj thou counterfeit to thy true friend ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj in love , 
▁ xxmaj who respects friend ? 
▁ xxup silvia . xxmaj all men but xxmaj proteus . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj nay , if the gentle spirit of moving words 
▁ xxmaj can no way change you to a milder form , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll woo you like a soldier , at arms ' end , 
▁ xxmaj and love you ' gainst the nature of love- force ye . 
▁ xxup silvia . o heaven ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj i 'll force thee yield to my desire . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj ruffian ! let go that rude uncivil touch ; 
▁ xxmaj thou friend of an ill fashion ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj valentine ! 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj thou common friend , that 's without faith or love- 
▁ xxmaj for such is a friend now ; treacherous man , 
▁ xxmaj thou hast beguil'd my hopes ; nought but mine eye 
▁ xxmaj could have persuaded me . xxmaj now i dare not say 
▁ i have one friend alive : thou wouldst disprove me . 
▁ xxmaj who should be trusted , when one 's own right hand 
▁ xxmaj is perjured to the bosom ? xxmaj proteus , 
▁ i am sorry i must never trust thee more , 
▁ xxmaj but count the world a stranger for thy sake . 
▁ xxmaj the private wound is deepest . o time most accurst ! 
▁ ' mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst ! 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj my shame and guilt confounds me . 
▁ xxmaj forgive me , xxmaj valentine ; if hearty sorrow 
▁ xxmaj be a sufficient ransom for offence , 
▁ i tender ' t here ; i do as truly suffer 
▁ xxmaj as e'er i did commit . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj then i am paid ; 
▁ xxmaj and once again i do receive thee honest . 
▁ xxmaj who by repentance is not satisfied 
▁ xxmaj is nor of heaven nor earth , for these are pleas'd ; 
▁ xxmaj by penitence th ' xxmaj eternal 's wrath 's appeas'd . 
▁ xxmaj and , that my love may appear plain and free , 
▁ xxmaj all that was mine in xxmaj silvia i give thee . 
▁ xxup julia . o me unhappy ! [ swoons ] 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj look to the boy . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj why , boy ! why , wag ! how now ! 
▁ xxmaj what 's the matter ? xxmaj look up ; speak . 
▁ xxup julia . o good sir , my master charg'd me to deliver a ring to xxmaj madam 
▁ xxmaj silvia , which , out of my neglect , was never done . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj where is that ring , boy ? 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj here ' tis ; this is it . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj how ! let me see . xxmaj why , this is the ring i gave to xxmaj julia . 
▁ xxup julia . xxup o , cry you mercy , sir , i have mistook ; 
▁ xxmaj this is the ring you sent to xxmaj silvia . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj but how cam'st thou by this ring ? 
▁ xxmaj at my depart i gave this unto xxmaj julia . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and xxmaj julia herself did give it me ; 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj julia herself have brought it hither . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj how ! xxmaj julia ! 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths , 
▁ xxmaj and entertain'd 'em deeply in her heart . 
▁ xxmaj how oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root ! 
▁ o xxmaj proteus , let this habit make thee blush ! 
▁ xxmaj be thou asham'd that i have took upon me 
▁ xxmaj such an immodest raiment- if shame live 
▁ xxmaj in a disguise of love . 
▁ xxmaj it is the lesser blot , modesty finds , 
▁ xxmaj women to change their shapes than men their minds . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj than men their minds ! ' tis true . o heaven , were man 
▁ xxmaj but constant , he were perfect ! xxmaj that one error 
▁ xxmaj fills him with faults ; makes him run through all th ' sins : 
▁ xxmaj inconstancy falls off ere it begins . 
▁ xxmaj what is in xxmaj silvia 's face but i may spy 
▁ xxmaj more fresh in xxmaj julia 's with a constant eye ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj come , come , a hand from either . 
▁ xxmaj let me be blest to make this happy close ; 
▁ ' twere pity two such friends should be long foes . 
▁ xxup proteus . xxmaj bear witness , heaven , i have my wish for ever . 
▁ xxup julia . xxmaj and i mine . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup outlaws , with xxup duke and xxup thurio 

▁ xxup outlaw . a prize , a prize , a prize ! 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj forbear , forbear , i say ; it is my lord the xxmaj duke . 
▁ xxmaj your xxmaj grace is welcome to a man disgrac'd , 
▁ xxmaj banished xxmaj valentine . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine ! 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj yonder is xxmaj silvia ; and xxmaj silvia 's mine . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj thurio , give back , or else embrace thy death ; 
▁ xxmaj come not within the measure of my wrath ; 
▁ xxmaj do not name xxmaj silvia thine ; if once again , 
▁ xxmaj verona shall not hold thee . xxmaj here she stands 
▁ xxmaj take but possession of her with a touch- 
▁ i dare thee but to breathe upon my love . 
▁ xxup thurio . xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine , i care not for her , xxup i ; 
▁ i hold him but a fool that will endanger 
▁ xxmaj his body for a girl that loves him not . 
▁ i claim her not , and therefore she is thine . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj the more degenerate and base art thou 
▁ xxmaj to make such means for her as thou hast done 
▁ xxmaj and leave her on such slight conditions . 
▁ xxmaj now , by the honour of my ancestry , 
▁ i do applaud thy spirit , xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj and think thee worthy of an empress ' love . 
▁ xxmaj know then , i here forget all former griefs , 
▁ xxmaj cancel all grudge , repeal thee home again , 
▁ xxmaj plead a new state in thy unrivall'd merit , 
▁ xxmaj to which i thus subscribe : xxmaj sir xxmaj valentine , 
▁ xxmaj thou art a gentleman , and well deriv'd ; 
▁ xxmaj take thou thy xxmaj silvia , for thou hast deserv'd her . 
▁ xxup valentine . i thank your xxmaj grace ; the gift hath made me happy . 
▁ i now beseech you , for your daughter 's sake , 
▁ xxmaj to grant one boon that i shall ask of you . 
▁ xxup duke . i grant it for thine own , whate'er it be . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj these banish'd men , that i have kept withal , 
▁ xxmaj are men endu'd with worthy qualities ; 
▁ xxmaj forgive them what they have committed here , 
▁ xxmaj and let them be recall'd from their exile : 
▁ xxmaj they are reformed , civil , full of good , 
▁ xxmaj and fit for great employment , worthy lord . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj thou hast prevail'd ; i pardon them , and thee ; 
▁ xxmaj dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts . 
▁ xxmaj come , let us go ; we will include all jars 
▁ xxmaj with triumphs , mirth , and rare solemnity . 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj and , as we walk along , i dare be bold 
▁ xxmaj with our discourse to make your xxmaj grace to smile . 
▁ xxmaj what think you of this page , my lord ? 
▁ xxup duke . i think the boy hath grace in him ; he blushes . 
▁ xxup valentine . i warrant you , my lord- more grace than boy . 
▁ xxup duke . xxmaj what mean you by that saying ? 
▁ xxup valentine . xxmaj please you , xxmaj i 'll tell you as we pass along , 
▁ xxmaj that you will wonder what hath fortuned . 
▁ xxmaj come , xxmaj proteus , ' tis your penance but to hear 
▁ xxmaj the story of your loves discovered . 
▁ xxmaj that done , our day of marriage shall be yours ; 
▁ xxmaj one feast , one house , one mutual happiness ! xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1611 

 xxup the xxup winter 's xxup tale 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



 xxmaj dramatis xxmaj personae 

▁ xxup leontes , xxmaj king of xxmaj sicilia 
▁ xxup mamillius , his son , the young xxmaj prince of xxmaj sicilia 
▁ xxup camillo , lord of xxmaj sicilia 
▁ xxup antigonus , " " " 
▁ xxup cleomenes , " " " 
▁ xxup dion , " " " 
▁ xxup polixenes , xxmaj king of xxmaj bohemia 
▁ xxup florizel , his son , xxmaj prince of xxmaj bohemia 
▁ xxup archidamus , a lord of xxmaj bohemia 
▁ xxup old xxup shepherd , reputed father of xxmaj perdita 
▁ xxup clown , his son 
▁ xxup autolycus , a rogue 
▁ a xxup mariner 
▁ a xxup gaoler 
▁ xxup time , as xxmaj chorus 

▁ xxup hermione , xxmaj queen to xxmaj leontes 
▁ xxup perdita , daughter to xxmaj leontes and xxmaj hermione 
▁ xxup paulina , wife to xxmaj antigonus 
▁ xxup emilia , a lady attending on the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxup mopsa , shepherdess 
▁ xxup dorcas , " 

▁ xxmaj other xxmaj lords , xxmaj gentlemen , xxmaj ladies , xxmaj officers , xxmaj servants , xxmaj shepherds , 
▁ xxmaj shepherdesses 

▁ xxup scene : 
▁ xxmaj sicilia and xxmaj bohemia 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup i. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj the palace of xxup leontes 

 xxmaj enter xxup camillo and xxup archidamus 

▁ xxup archidamus . xxmaj if you shall chance , xxmaj camillo , to visit xxmaj bohemia , on the 
▁ like occasion whereon my services are now on foot , you shall see , 
▁ as i have said , great difference betwixt our xxmaj bohemia and your 
▁ xxmaj sicilia . 
▁ xxup camillo . i think this coming summer the xxmaj king of xxmaj sicilia means to 
▁ pay xxmaj bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him . 
▁ xxup archidamus . xxmaj wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be 
▁ justified in our loves ; for indeed- 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj beseech you- 
▁ xxup archidamus . xxmaj verily , i speak it in the freedom of my knowledge : we 
▁ can not with such magnificence , in so rare- i know not what to 
▁ say . xxmaj we will give you sleepy drinks , that your senses , 
▁ unintelligent of our insufficience , may , though they can not 
▁ praise us , as little accuse us . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj you pay a great deal too dear for what 's given freely . 
▁ xxup archidamus . xxmaj believe me , i speak as my understanding instructs me 
▁ and as mine honesty puts it to utterance . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj sicilia can not show himself overkind to xxmaj bohemia . xxmaj they were 
▁ train'd together in their childhoods ; and there rooted betwixt 
▁ them then such an affection which can not choose but branch now . 
▁ xxmaj since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made 
▁ separation of their society , their encounters , though not 
▁ personal , have been royally attorneyed with interchange of gifts , 
▁ letters , loving embassies ; that they have seem'd to be together , 
▁ though absent ; shook hands , as over a vast ; and embrac'd as it 
▁ were from the ends of opposed winds . xxmaj the heavens continue their 
▁ loves ! 
▁ xxup archidamus . i think there is not in the world either malice or 
▁ matter to alter it . xxmaj you have an unspeakable comfort of your young 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj mamillius ; it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that 
▁ ever came into my note . 
▁ xxup camillo . i very well agree with you in the hopes of him . xxmaj it is a 
▁ gallant child ; one that indeed physics the subject , makes old 
▁ hearts fresh ; they that went on crutches ere he was born desire 
▁ yet their life to see him a man . 
▁ xxup archidamus . xxmaj would they else be content to die ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj yes ; if there were no other excuse why they should desire 
▁ to live . 
▁ xxup archidamus . xxmaj if the xxmaj king had no son , they would desire to live on 
▁ crutches till he had one . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj the palace of xxup leontes 

 xxmaj enter xxup leontes , xxup polixenes , xxup hermione , xxup mamillius , xxup camillo , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj nine changes of the wat'ry star hath been 
▁ xxmaj the shepherd 's note since we have left our throne 
▁ xxmaj without a burden . xxmaj time as long again 
▁ xxmaj would be fill'd up , my brother , with our thanks ; 
▁ xxmaj and yet we should for perpetuity 
▁ xxmaj go hence in debt . xxmaj and therefore , like a cipher , 
▁ xxmaj yet standing in rich place , i multiply 
▁ xxmaj with one ' we thank you ' many thousands moe 
▁ xxmaj that go before it . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj stay your thanks a while , 
▁ xxmaj and pay them when you part . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj sir , that 's to - morrow . 
▁ i am question'd by my fears of what may chance 
▁ xxmaj or breed upon our absence , that may blow 
▁ xxmaj no sneaping winds at home , to make us say 
▁ ' this is put forth too truly . ' xxmaj besides , i have stay'd 
▁ xxmaj to tire your royalty . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj we are tougher , brother , 
▁ xxmaj than you can put us to't . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj no longer stay . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj one sev'night longer . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj very sooth , to - morrow . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj we 'll part the time between 's then ; and in that 
▁ xxmaj i 'll no gainsaying . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj press me not , beseech you , so . 
▁ xxmaj there is no tongue that moves , none , none i ' th ' world , 
▁ xxmaj so soon as yours could win me . xxmaj so it should now , 
▁ xxmaj were there necessity in your request , although 
▁ ' twere needful i denied it . xxmaj my affairs 
▁ xxmaj do even drag me homeward ; which to hinder 
▁ xxmaj were in your love a whip to me ; my stay 
▁ xxmaj to you a charge and trouble . xxmaj to save both , 
▁ xxmaj farewell , our brother . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj tongue - tied , our xxmaj queen ? xxmaj speak you . 
▁ xxup hermione . i had thought , sir , to have held my peace until 
▁ xxmaj you had drawn oaths from him not to stay . xxmaj you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj charge him too coldly . xxmaj tell him you are sure 
▁ xxmaj all in xxmaj bohemia 's well- this satisfaction 
▁ xxmaj the by - gone day proclaim'd . xxmaj say this to him , 
▁ xxmaj he 's beat from his best ward . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj well said , xxmaj hermione . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj to tell he longs to see his son were strong ; 
▁ xxmaj but let him say so then , and let him go ; 
▁ xxmaj but let him swear so , and he shall not stay ; 
▁ xxmaj we 'll thwack him hence with distaffs . 
▁ [ to xxup polixenes ] xxmaj yet of your royal presence xxmaj i 'll 
▁ adventure the borrow of a week . xxmaj when at xxmaj bohemia 
▁ xxmaj you take my lord , xxmaj i 'll give him my commission 
▁ xxmaj to let him there a month behind the gest 
▁ xxmaj prefix'd for 's parting.- xxmaj yet , good deed , xxmaj leontes , 
▁ i love thee not a jar o ' th ' clock behind 
▁ xxmaj what lady she her lord.- xxmaj you 'll stay ? 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj no , madam . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj nay , but you will ? 
▁ xxup polixenes . i may not , verily . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj verily ! 
▁ xxmaj you put me off with limber vows ; but xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj though you would seek t ' unsphere the stars with oaths , 
▁ xxmaj should yet say ' sir , no going . ' xxmaj verily , 
▁ xxmaj you shall not go ; a lady 's ' verily ' is 
▁ xxmaj as potent as a lord 's . xxmaj will go yet ? 
▁ xxmaj force me to keep you as a prisoner , 
▁ xxmaj not like a guest ; so you shall pay your fees 
▁ xxmaj when you depart , and save your thanks . xxmaj how say you ? 
▁ xxmaj my prisoner or my guest ? xxmaj by your dread ' verily , ' 
▁ xxmaj one of them you shall be . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj your guest , then , madam : 
▁ xxmaj to be your prisoner should import offending ; 
▁ xxmaj which is for me less easy to commit 
▁ xxmaj than you to punish . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj not your gaoler then , 
▁ xxmaj but your kind . hostess . xxmaj come , xxmaj i 'll question you 
▁ xxmaj of my lord 's tricks and yours when you were boys . 
▁ xxmaj you were pretty lordings then ! 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj we were , fair xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj two lads that thought there was no more behind 
▁ xxmaj but such a day to - morrow as to - day , 
▁ xxmaj and to be boy eternal . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj was not my lord 
▁ xxmaj the verier wag o ' th ' two ? 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj we were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i ' th ' sun 
▁ xxmaj and bleat the one at th ' other . xxmaj what we chang'd 
▁ xxmaj was innocence for innocence ; we knew not 
▁ xxmaj the doctrine of ill - doing , nor dream'd 
▁ xxmaj that any did . xxmaj had we pursu'd that life , 
▁ xxmaj and our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd 
▁ xxmaj with stronger blood , we should have answer'd heaven 
▁ xxmaj boldly ' not guilty , ' the imposition clear'd 
▁ xxmaj hereditary ours . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj by this we gather 
▁ xxmaj you have tripp'd since . 
▁ xxup polixenes . o my most sacred lady , 
▁ xxmaj temptations have since then been born to 's , for 
▁ xxmaj in those unfledg'd days was my wife a girl ; 
▁ xxmaj your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes 
▁ xxmaj of my young playfellow . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj grace to boot ! 
▁ xxmaj of this make no conclusion , lest you say 
▁ xxmaj your queen and i are devils . xxmaj yet , go on ; 
▁ xxmaj th ' offences we have made you do we 'll answer , 
▁ xxmaj if you first sinn'd with us , and that with us 
▁ xxmaj you did continue fault , and that you slipp'd not 
▁ xxmaj with any but with us . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj is he won yet ? 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj he 'll stay , my lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj at my request he would not . 
▁ xxmaj hermione , my dearest , thou never spok'st 
▁ xxmaj to better purpose . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj never ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj never but once . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj what ! xxmaj have i twice said well ? xxmaj when was't before ? 
▁ i prithee tell me ; cram 's with praise , and make 's 
▁ xxmaj as fat as tame things . xxmaj one good deed dying tongueless 
▁ xxmaj slaughters a thousand waiting upon that . 
▁ xxmaj our praises are our wages ; you may ride 's 
▁ xxmaj with one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere 
▁ xxmaj with spur we heat an acre . xxmaj but to th ' goal : 
▁ xxmaj my last good deed was to entreat his stay ; 
▁ xxmaj what was my first ? xxmaj it has an elder sister , 
▁ xxmaj or i mistake you . xxup o , would her name were xxmaj grace ! 
▁ xxmaj but once before i spoke to th ' purpose- xxmaj when ? 
▁ xxmaj nay , let me have't ; i long . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj why , that was when 
▁ xxmaj three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death , 
▁ xxmaj ere i could make thee open thy white hand 
▁ xxmaj and clap thyself my love ; then didst thou utter 
▁ ' i am yours for ever . ' 
▁ xxup hermione . ' tis xxmaj grace indeed . 
▁ xxmaj why , lo you now , i have spoke to th ' purpose twice : 
▁ xxmaj the one for ever earn'd a royal husband ; 
▁ xxmaj th ' other for some while a friend . 
▁ [ giving her hand to xxup polixenes ] 
▁ xxup leontes . [ aside ] xxmaj too hot , too hot ! 
▁ xxmaj to mingle friendship far is mingling bloods . 
▁ i have tremor cordis on me ; my heart dances , 
▁ xxmaj but not for joy , not joy . xxmaj this entertainment 
▁ xxmaj may a free face put on ; derive a liberty 
▁ xxmaj from heartiness , from bounty , fertile bosom , 
▁ xxmaj and well become the agent . ' t may , i grant ; 
▁ xxmaj but to be paddling palms and pinching fingers , 
▁ xxmaj as now they are , and making practis'd smiles 
▁ xxmaj as in a looking - glass ; and then to sigh , as ' twere 
▁ xxmaj the mort o ' th ' deer . xxup o , that is entertainment 
▁ xxmaj my bosom likes not , nor my brows ! xxmaj mamillius , 
▁ xxmaj art thou my boy ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxup i ' fecks ! 
▁ xxmaj why , that 's my bawcock . xxmaj what ! hast smutch'd thy nose ? 
▁ xxmaj they say it is a copy out of mine . xxmaj come , xxmaj captain , 
▁ xxmaj we must be neat- not neat , but cleanly , xxmaj captain . 
▁ xxmaj and yet the steer , the heifer , and the calf , 
▁ xxmaj are all call'd neat.- xxmaj still virginalling 
▁ xxmaj upon his palm?- xxmaj how now , you wanton calf , 
▁ xxmaj art thou my calf ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj yes , if you will , my lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that i have , 
▁ xxmaj to be full like me ; yet they say we are 
▁ xxmaj almost as like as eggs . xxmaj women say so , 
▁ xxmaj that will say anything . xxmaj but were they false 
▁ xxmaj as o'er - dy'd blacks , as wind , as waters- false 
▁ xxmaj as dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes 
▁ xxmaj no bourn ' twixt his and mine ; yet were it true 
▁ xxmaj to say this boy were like me . xxmaj come , sir page , 
▁ xxmaj look on me with your welkin eye . xxmaj sweet villain ! 
▁ xxmaj most dear'st ! my collop ! xxmaj can thy dam?- may't be ? 
▁ xxmaj affection ! thy intention stabs the centre . 
▁ xxmaj thou dost make possible things not so held , 
▁ xxmaj communicat'st with dreams- how can this be?- 
▁ xxmaj with what 's unreal thou coactive art , 
▁ xxmaj and fellow'st nothing . xxmaj then ' tis very credent 
▁ xxmaj thou mayst co - join with something ; and thou dost- 
▁ xxmaj and that beyond commission ; and i find it , 
▁ xxmaj and that to the infection of my brains 
▁ xxmaj and hard'ning of my brows . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj what means xxmaj sicilia ? 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj he something seems unsettled . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj how , my lord ! 
▁ xxmaj what cheer ? xxmaj how is't with you , best brother ? 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj you look 
▁ xxmaj as if you held a brow of much distraction . 
▁ xxmaj are you mov'd , my lord ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj no , in good earnest . 
▁ xxmaj how sometimes nature will betray its folly , 
▁ xxmaj its tenderness , and make itself a pastime 
▁ xxmaj to harder bosoms ! xxmaj looking on the lines 
▁ xxmaj of my boy 's face , methoughts i did recoil 
▁ xxmaj twenty - three years ; and saw myself unbreech'd , 
▁ xxmaj in my green velvet coat ; my dagger muzzl'd , 
▁ xxmaj lest it should bite its master and so prove , 
▁ xxmaj as ornaments oft do , too dangerous . 
▁ xxmaj how like , methought , i then was to this kernel , 
▁ xxmaj this squash , this gentleman . xxmaj mine honest friend , 
▁ xxmaj will you take eggs for money ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj no , my lord , xxmaj i 'll fight . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you will ? xxmaj why , happy man be 's dole ! xxmaj my brother , 
▁ xxmaj are you so fond of your young prince as we 
▁ xxmaj do seem to be of ours ? 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj if at home , sir , 
▁ xxmaj he 's all my exercise , my mirth , my matter ; 
▁ xxmaj now my sworn friend , and then mine enemy ; 
▁ xxmaj my parasite , my soldier , statesman , all . 
▁ xxmaj he makes a xxmaj july 's day short as xxmaj december , 
▁ xxmaj and with his varying childness cures in me 
▁ xxmaj thoughts that would thick my blood . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj so stands this squire 
▁ xxmaj offic'd with me . xxmaj we two will walk , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj and leave you to your graver steps . xxmaj hermione , 
▁ xxmaj how thou lov'st us show in our brother 's welcome ; 
▁ xxmaj let what is dear in xxmaj sicily be cheap ; 
▁ xxmaj next to thyself and my young rover , he 's 
▁ xxmaj apparent to my heart . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj if you would seek us , 
▁ xxmaj we are yours i ' th ' garden . xxmaj shall 's attend you there ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj to your own bents dispose you ; you 'll be found , 
▁ xxmaj be you beneath the sky . [ aside ] i am angling now , 
▁ xxmaj though you perceive me not how i give line . 
▁ xxmaj go to , go to ! 
▁ xxmaj how she holds up the neb , the bill to him ! 
▁ xxmaj and arms her with the boldness of a wife 
▁ xxmaj to her allowing husband ! 

▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup polixenes , xxup hermione , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxmaj gone already ! 
▁ xxmaj inch - thick , knee - deep , o'er head and ears a fork'd one ! 
▁ xxmaj go , play , boy , play ; thy mother plays , and i 
▁ xxmaj play too ; but so disgrac'd a part , whose issue 
▁ xxmaj will hiss me to my grave . xxmaj contempt and clamour 
▁ xxmaj will be my knell . xxmaj go , play , boy , play . xxmaj there have been , 
▁ xxmaj or i am much deceiv'd , cuckolds ere now ; 
▁ xxmaj and many a man there is , even at this present , 
▁ xxmaj now while i speak this , holds his wife by th ' arm 
▁ xxmaj that little thinks she has been sluic'd in 's absence , 
▁ xxmaj and his pond fish'd by his next neighbour , by 
▁ xxmaj sir xxmaj smile , his neighbour . xxmaj nay , there 's comfort in't , 
▁ xxmaj whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd , 
▁ xxmaj as mine , against their will . xxmaj should all despair 
▁ xxmaj that hath revolted wives , the tenth of mankind 
▁ xxmaj would hang themselves . xxmaj physic for't there 's none ; 
▁ xxmaj it is a bawdy planet , that will strike 
▁ xxmaj where ' tis predominant ; and ' tis pow'rfull , think it , 
▁ xxmaj from east , west , north , and south . xxmaj be it concluded , 
▁ xxmaj no barricado for a belly . xxmaj know't , 
▁ xxmaj it will let in and out the enemy 
▁ xxmaj with bag and baggage . xxmaj many thousand on 's 
▁ xxmaj have the disease , and feel't not . xxmaj how now , boy ! 
▁ xxup mamillius . i am like you , they say . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj why , that 's some comfort . 
▁ xxmaj what ! xxmaj camillo there ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj ay , my good lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj go play , xxmaj mamillius ; thou'rt an honest man . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup mamillius 
▁ xxmaj camillo , this great sir will yet stay longer . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj you had much ado to make his anchor hold ; 
▁ xxmaj when you cast out , it still came home . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj didst note it ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj he would not stay at your petitions ; made 
▁ xxmaj his business more material . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj didst perceive it ? 
▁ [ aside ] xxmaj they 're here with me already ; whisp'ring , rounding , 
▁ ' sicilia is a so - forth . ' ' tis far gone 
▁ xxmaj when i shall gust it last.- xxmaj how came't , xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj that he did stay ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj at the good xxmaj queen 's entreaty . 
▁ xxup leontes . ' at the xxmaj queen 's ' be't . ' good ' should be pertinent ; 
▁ xxmaj but so it is , it is not . xxmaj was this taken 
▁ xxmaj by any understanding pate but thine ? 
▁ xxmaj for thy conceit is soaking , will draw in 
▁ xxmaj more than the common blocks . xxmaj not noted , is't , 
▁ xxmaj but of the finer natures , by some severals 
▁ xxmaj of head - piece extraordinary ? xxmaj lower messes 
▁ xxmaj perchance are to this business purblind ? xxmaj say . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj business , my lord ? i think most understand 
▁ xxmaj bohemia stays here longer . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj ha ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj stays here longer . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj ay , but why ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj to satisfy your xxmaj highness , and the entreaties 
▁ xxmaj of our most gracious mistress . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj satisfy 
▁ xxmaj th ' entreaties of your mistress ! xxmaj satisfy ! 
▁ xxmaj let that suffice . i have trusted thee , xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj with all the nearest things to my heart , as well 
▁ xxmaj my chamber - councils , wherein , priest - like , thou 
▁ xxmaj hast cleans'd my bosom- i from thee departed 
▁ xxmaj thy penitent reform'd ; but we have been 
▁ xxmaj deceiv'd in thy integrity , deceiv'd 
▁ xxmaj in that which seems so . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj be it forbid , my lord ! 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj to bide upon't : thou art not honest ; or , 
▁ xxmaj if thou inclin'st that way , thou art a coward , 
▁ xxmaj which hoxes honesty behind , restraining 
▁ xxmaj from course requir'd ; or else thou must be counted 
▁ a servant grafted in my serious trust , 
▁ xxmaj and therein negligent ; or else a fool 
▁ xxmaj that seest a game play'd home , the rich stake drawn , 
▁ xxmaj and tak'st it all for jest . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj my gracious lord , 
▁ i may be negligent , foolish , and fearful : 
▁ xxmaj in every one of these no man is free 
▁ xxmaj but that his negligence , his folly , fear , 
▁ xxmaj among the infinite doings of the world , 
▁ xxmaj sometime puts forth . xxmaj in your affairs , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj if ever i were wilfull - negligent , 
▁ xxmaj it was my folly ; if industriously 
▁ i play'd the fool , it was my negligence , 
▁ xxmaj not weighing well the end ; if ever fearful 
▁ xxmaj to do a thing where i the issue doubted , 
▁ xxmaj whereof the execution did cry out 
▁ xxmaj against the non - performance , ' twas a fear 
▁ xxmaj which oft infects the wisest . xxmaj these , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj are such allow'd infirmities that honesty 
▁ xxmaj is never free of . xxmaj but , beseech your xxmaj grace , 
▁ xxmaj be plainer with me ; let me know my trespass 
▁ xxmaj by its own visage ; if i then deny it , 
▁ ' tis none of mine . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj ha ' not you seen , xxmaj camillo- 
▁ xxmaj but that 's past doubt ; you have , or your eye - glass 
▁ xxmaj is thicker than a cuckold 's horn- or heard- 
▁ xxmaj for to a vision so apparent rumour 
▁ xxmaj can not be mute- or thought- for cogitation 
▁ xxmaj resides not in that man that does not think- 
▁ xxmaj my wife is slippery ? xxmaj if thou wilt confess- 
▁ xxmaj or else be impudently negative , 
▁ xxmaj to have nor eyes nor ears nor thought- then say 
▁ xxmaj my wife 's a hobby - horse , deserves a name 
▁ xxmaj as rank as any flax - wench that puts to 
▁ xxmaj before her troth - plight . xxmaj say't and justify't . 
▁ xxup camillo . i would not be a stander - by to hear 
▁ xxmaj my sovereign mistress clouded so , without 
▁ xxmaj my present vengeance taken . xxmaj shrew my heart ! 
▁ xxmaj you never spoke what did become you less 
▁ xxmaj than this ; which to reiterate were sin 
▁ xxmaj as deep as that , though true . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj is whispering nothing ? 
▁ xxmaj is leaning cheek to cheek ? xxmaj is meeting noses ? 
▁ xxmaj kissing with inside lip ? xxmaj stopping the career 
▁ xxmaj of laughter with a sigh?- a note infallible 
▁ xxmaj of breaking honesty . xxmaj horsing foot on foot ? 
▁ xxmaj skulking in corners ? xxmaj wishing clocks more swift ; 
▁ xxmaj hours , minutes ; noon , midnight ? xxmaj and all eyes 
▁ xxmaj blind with the pin and web but theirs , theirs only , 
▁ xxmaj that would unseen be wicked- is this nothing ? 
▁ xxmaj why , then the world and all that 's in't is nothing ; 
▁ xxmaj the covering sky is nothing ; xxmaj bohemia nothing ; 
▁ xxmaj my is nothing ; nor nothing have these nothings , 
▁ xxmaj if this be nothing . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj good my lord , be cur'd 
▁ xxmaj of this diseas'd opinion , and betimes ; 
▁ xxmaj for ' tis most dangerous . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj say it be , ' tis true . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj no , no , my lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj it is ; you lie , you lie . 
▁ i say thou liest , xxmaj camillo , and i hate thee ; 
▁ xxmaj pronounce thee a gross lout , a mindless slave , 
▁ xxmaj or else a hovering temporizer that 
▁ xxmaj canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil , 
▁ xxmaj inclining to them both . xxmaj were my wife 's liver 
▁ xxmaj infected as her life , she would not live 
▁ xxmaj the running of one glass . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj who does her ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj why , he that wears her like her medal , hanging 
▁ xxmaj about his neck , xxmaj bohemia ; who- if i 
▁ xxmaj had servants true about me that bare eyes 
▁ xxmaj to see alike mine honour as their profits , 
▁ xxmaj their own particular thrifts , they would do that 
▁ xxmaj which should undo more doing . xxmaj ay , and thou , 
▁ xxmaj his cupbearer- whom i from meaner form 
▁ xxmaj have bench'd and rear'd to worship ; who mayst see , 
▁ xxmaj plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven , 
▁ xxmaj how i am gall'd- mightst bespice a cup 
▁ xxmaj to give mine enemy a lasting wink ; 
▁ xxmaj which draught to me were cordial . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj sir , my lord , 
▁ i could do this ; and that with no rash potion , 
▁ xxmaj but with a ling'ring dram that should not work 
▁ xxmaj maliciously like poison . xxmaj but i can not 
▁ xxmaj believe this crack to be in my dread mistress , 
▁ xxmaj so sovereignly being honourable . 
▁ i have lov'd thee- 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj make that thy question , and go rot ! 
▁ xxmaj dost think i am so muddy , so unsettled , 
▁ xxmaj to appoint myself in this vexation ; sully 
▁ xxmaj the purity and whiteness of my sheets- 
▁ xxmaj which to preserve is sleep , which being spotted 
▁ xxmaj is goads , thorns , nettles , tails of wasps ; 
▁ xxmaj give scandal to the blood o ' th ' xxmaj prince , my son- 
▁ xxmaj who i do think is mine , and love as mine- 
▁ xxmaj without ripe moving to ' t ? xxmaj would i do this ? 
▁ xxmaj could man so blench ? 
▁ xxup camillo . i must believe you , sir . 
▁ i do ; and will fetch off xxmaj bohemia for't ; 
▁ xxmaj provided that , when he 's remov'd , your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj will take again your queen as yours at first , 
▁ xxmaj even for your son 's sake ; and thereby for sealing 
▁ xxmaj the injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms 
▁ xxmaj known and allied to yours . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj thou dost advise me 
▁ xxmaj even so as i mine own course have set down . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll give no blemish to her honour , none . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj go then ; and with a countenance as clear 
▁ xxmaj as friendship wears at feasts , keep with xxmaj bohemia 
▁ xxmaj and with your queen . i am his cupbearer ; 
▁ xxmaj if from me he have wholesome beverage , 
▁ xxmaj account me not your servant . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj this is all : 
▁ xxmaj do't , and thou hast the one half of my heart ; 
▁ xxmaj do't not , thou split'st thine own . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj i 'll do't , my lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . i will seem friendly , as thou hast advis'd me . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup camillo . o miserable lady ! xxmaj but , for me , 
▁ xxmaj what case stand i in ? i must be the poisoner 
▁ xxmaj of good xxmaj polixenes ; and my ground to do't 
▁ xxmaj is the obedience to a master ; one 
▁ xxmaj who , in rebellion with himself , will have 
▁ xxmaj all that are his so too . xxmaj to do this deed , 
▁ xxmaj promotion follows . xxmaj if i could find example 
▁ xxmaj of thousands that had struck anointed kings 
▁ xxmaj and flourish'd after , xxmaj i 'd not do't ; but since 
▁ xxmaj nor brass , nor stone , nor parchment , bears not one , 
▁ xxmaj let villainy itself forswear't . i must 
▁ xxmaj forsake the court . xxmaj to do't , or no , is certain 
▁ xxmaj to me a break - neck . xxmaj happy star reign now ! 
▁ xxmaj here comes xxmaj bohemia . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup polixenes 

▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj this is strange . xxmaj methinks 
▁ xxmaj my favour here begins to warp . xxmaj not speak ? 
▁ xxmaj good day , xxmaj camillo . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj hail , most royal sir ! 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj what is the news i ' th ' court ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj none rare , my lord . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj the xxmaj king hath on him such a countenance 
▁ xxmaj as he had lost some province , and a region 
▁ xxmaj lov'd as he loves himself ; even now i met him 
▁ xxmaj with customary compliment , when he , 
▁ xxmaj wafting his eyes to th ' contrary and falling 
▁ a lip of much contempt , speeds from me ; 
▁ xxmaj so leaves me to consider what is breeding 
▁ xxmaj that changes thus his manners . 
▁ xxup camillo . i dare not know , my lord . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj how , dare not ! xxmaj do not . xxmaj do you know , and dare not 
▁ xxmaj be intelligent to me ? ' tis thereabouts ; 
▁ xxmaj for , to yourself , what you do know , you must , 
▁ xxmaj and can not say you dare not . xxmaj good xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj your chang'd complexions are to me a mirror 
▁ xxmaj which shows me mine chang'd too ; for i must be 
▁ a party in this alteration , finding