xxbos xxmaj myself thus alter'd with't . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj there is a sickness 
▁ xxmaj which puts some of us in distemper ; but 
▁ i can not name the disease ; and it is caught 
▁ xxmaj of you that yet are well . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj how ! caught of me ? 
▁ xxmaj make me not sighted like the basilisk ; 
▁ i have look'd on thousands who have sped the better 
▁ xxmaj by my regard , but kill'd none so . xxmaj camillo- 
▁ xxmaj as you are certainly a gentleman ; thereto 
▁ xxmaj clerk - like experienc'd , which no less adorns 
▁ xxmaj our gentry than our parents ' noble names , 
▁ xxmaj in whose success we are gentle- i beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj if you know aught which does behove my knowledge 
▁ xxmaj thereof to be inform'd , imprison't not 
▁ xxmaj in ignorant concealment . 
▁ xxup camillo . i may not answer . 
▁ xxup polixenes . a sickness caught of me , and yet i well ? 
▁ i must be answer'd . xxmaj dost thou hear , xxmaj camillo ? 
▁ i conjure thee , by all the parts of man 
▁ xxmaj which honour does acknowledge , whereof the least 
▁ xxmaj is not this suit of mine , that thou declare 
▁ xxmaj what incidency thou dost guess of harm 
▁ xxmaj is creeping toward me ; how far off , how near ; 
▁ xxmaj which way to be prevented , if to be ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , how best to bear it . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj sir , i will tell you ; 
▁ xxmaj since i am charg'd in honour , and by him 
▁ xxmaj that i think honourable . xxmaj therefore mark my counsel , 
▁ xxmaj which must be ev'n as swiftly followed as 
▁ i mean to utter it , or both yourself and me 
▁ xxmaj cry lost , and so goodnight . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj on , good xxmaj camillo . 
▁ xxup camillo . i am appointed him to murder you . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj by whom , xxmaj camillo ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj by the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj for what ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj he thinks , nay , with all confidence he swears , 
▁ xxmaj as he had seen ' t or been an instrument 
▁ xxmaj to vice you to't , that you have touch'd his queen 
▁ xxmaj forbiddenly . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxup o , then my best blood turn 
▁ xxmaj to an infected jelly , and my name 
▁ xxmaj be yok'd with his that did betray the xxmaj best ! 
▁ xxmaj turn then my freshest reputation to 
▁ a savour that may strike the dullest nostril 
▁ xxmaj where i arrive , and my approach be shunn'd , 
▁ xxmaj nay , hated too , worse than the great'st infection 
▁ xxmaj that e'er was heard or read ! 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj swear his thought over 
▁ xxmaj by each particular star in heaven and 
▁ xxmaj by all their influences , you may as well 
▁ xxmaj forbid the sea for to obey the moon 
▁ xxmaj as or by oath remove or counsel shake 
▁ xxmaj the fabric of his folly , whose foundation 
▁ xxmaj is pil'd upon his faith and will continue 
▁ xxmaj the standing of his body . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj how should this grow ? 
▁ xxup camillo . i know not ; but i am sure ' tis safer to 
▁ xxmaj avoid what 's grown than question how ' tis born . 
▁ xxmaj if therefore you dare trust my honesty , 
▁ xxmaj that lies enclosed in this trunk which you 
▁ xxmaj shall bear along impawn'd , away to - night . 
▁ xxmaj your followers i will whisper to the business ; 
▁ xxmaj and will , by twos and threes , at several posterns , 
▁ xxmaj clear them o ' th ' city . xxmaj for myself , xxmaj i 'll put 
▁ xxmaj my fortunes to your service , which are here 
▁ xxmaj by this discovery lost . xxmaj be not uncertain , 
▁ xxmaj for , by the honour of my parents , i 
▁ xxmaj have utt'red truth ; which if you seek to prove , 
▁ i dare not stand by ; nor shall you be safer 
▁ xxmaj than one condemn'd by the xxmaj king 's own mouth , thereon 
▁ xxmaj his execution sworn . 
▁ xxup polixenes . i do believe thee : 
▁ i saw his heart in 's face . xxmaj give me thy hand ; 
▁ xxmaj be pilot to me , and thy places shall 
▁ xxmaj still neighbour mine . xxmaj my ships are ready , and 
▁ xxmaj my people did expect my hence departure 
▁ xxmaj two days ago . xxmaj this jealousy 
▁ xxmaj is for a precious creature ; as she 's rare , 
▁ xxmaj must it be great ; and , as his person 's mighty , 
▁ xxmaj must it be violent ; and as he does conceive 
▁ xxmaj he is dishonour'd by a man which ever 
▁ xxmaj profess'd to him , why , his revenges must 
▁ xxmaj in that be made more bitter . xxmaj fear o'ershades me . 
▁ xxmaj good expedition be my friend , and comfort 
▁ xxmaj the gracious xxmaj queen , part of this theme , but nothing 
▁ xxmaj of his ill - ta'en suspicion ! xxmaj come , xxmaj camillo ; 
▁ i will respect thee as a father , if 
▁ xxmaj thou bear'st my life off hence . xxmaj let us avoid . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj it is in mine authority to command 
▁ xxmaj the keys of all the posterns . xxmaj please your xxmaj highness 
▁ xxmaj to take the urgent hour . xxmaj come , sir , away . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup ii . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj the palace of xxup leontes 

 xxmaj enter xxup hermione , xxup mamillius , and xxup ladies 

▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj take the boy to you ; he so troubles me , 
▁ ' tis past enduring . 
▁ xxup first xxup lady . xxmaj come , my gracious lord , 
▁ xxmaj shall i be your playfellow ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll none of you . 
▁ xxup first xxup lady . xxmaj why , my sweet lord ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj you 'll kiss me hard , and speak to me as if 
▁ i were a baby still . i love you better . 
▁ xxup second xxup lady . xxmaj and why so , my lord ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj not for because 
▁ xxmaj your brows are blacker ; yet black brows , they say , 
▁ xxmaj become some women best ; so that there be not 
▁ xxmaj too much hair there , but in a semicircle 
▁ xxmaj or a half - moon made with a pen . 
▁ xxup second xxup lady . xxmaj who taught't this ? 
▁ xxup mamillius . i learn'd it out of women 's faces . xxmaj pray now , 
▁ xxmaj what colour are your eyebrows ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lady . xxmaj blue , my lord . 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj nay , that 's a mock . i have seen a lady 's nose 
▁ xxmaj that has been blue , but not her eyebrows . 
▁ xxup first xxup lady . xxmaj hark ye : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj queen your mother rounds apace . xxmaj we shall 
▁ xxmaj present our services to a fine new prince 
▁ xxmaj one of these days ; and then you 'd wanton with us , 
▁ xxmaj if we would have you . 
▁ xxup second xxup lady . xxmaj she is spread of late 
▁ xxmaj into a goodly bulk . xxmaj good time encounter her ! 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj what wisdom stirs amongst you ? xxmaj come , sir , now 
▁ i am for you again . xxmaj pray you sit by us , 
▁ xxmaj and tell 's a tale . 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj merry or sad shall't be ? 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj as merry as you will . 
▁ xxup mamillius . a sad tale 's best for winter . i have one 
▁ xxmaj of sprites and goblins . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj let 's have that , good sir . 
▁ xxmaj come on , sit down ; come on , and do your best 
▁ xxmaj to fright me with your sprites ; you 're pow'rfull at it . 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj there was a man- 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj nay , come , sit down ; then on . 
▁ xxup mamillius . xxmaj dwelt by a churchyard- i will tell it softly ; 
▁ xxmaj yond crickets shall not hear it . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj come on then , 
▁ xxmaj and give't me in mine ear . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup leontes , xxup antigonus , xxup lords , and xxup others 

▁ xxup leontes . he met there ? his train ? xxmaj camillo with him ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj behind the tuft of pines i met them ; never 
▁ xxmaj saw i men scour so on their way . i ey'd them 
▁ xxmaj even to their ships . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj how blest am i 
▁ xxmaj in my just censure , in my true opinion ! 
▁ xxmaj alack , for lesser knowledge ! xxmaj how accurs'd 
▁ xxmaj in being so blest ! xxmaj there may be in the cup 
▁ a spider steep'd , and one may drink , depart , 
▁ xxmaj and yet partake no venom , for his knowledge 
▁ xxmaj is not infected ; but if one present 
▁ xxmaj th ' abhorr'd ingredient to his eye , make known 
▁ xxmaj how he hath drunk , he cracks his gorge , his sides , 
▁ xxmaj with violent hefts . i have drunk , and seen the spider . 
▁ xxmaj camillo was his help in this , his pander . 
▁ xxmaj there is a plot against my life , my crown ; 
▁ xxmaj all 's true that is mistrusted . xxmaj that false villain 
▁ xxmaj whom i employ'd was pre - employ'd by him ; 
▁ xxmaj he has discover'd my design , and i 
▁ xxmaj remain a pinch'd thing ; yea , a very trick 
▁ xxmaj for them to play at will . xxmaj how came the posterns 
▁ xxmaj so easily open ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj by his great authority ; 
▁ xxmaj which often hath no less prevail'd than so 
▁ xxmaj on your command . 
▁ xxup leontes . i know't too well . 
▁ xxmaj give me the boy . i am glad you did not nurse him ; 
▁ xxmaj though he does bear some signs of me , yet you 
▁ xxmaj have too much blood in him . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj what is this ? xxmaj sport ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj bear the boy hence ; he shall not come about her ; 
▁ xxmaj away with him ; and let her sport herself 
▁ [ mamillius is led out ] 
▁ xxmaj with that she 's big with- for ' tis xxmaj polixenes 
▁ xxmaj has made thee swell thus . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj but xxmaj i 'd say he had not , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll be sworn you would believe my saying , 
▁ xxmaj howe'er you lean to th ' nayward . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj look on her , mark her well ; be but about 
▁ xxmaj to say ' she is a goodly lady ' and 
▁ xxmaj the justice of your hearts will thereto ad 
▁ ' tis pity she 's not honest- honourable . ' 
▁ xxmaj praise her but for this her without - door form , 
▁ xxmaj which on my faith deserves high speech , and straight 
▁ xxmaj the shrug , the hum or ha , these petty brands 
▁ xxmaj that calumny doth use- xxup o , i am out!- 
▁ xxmaj that mercy does , for calumny will sear 
▁ xxmaj virtue itself- these shrugs , these hum 's and ha 's , 
▁ xxmaj when you have said she 's goodly , come between , 
▁ xxmaj ere you can say she 's honest . xxmaj but be't known , 
▁ xxmaj from him that has most cause to grieve it should be , 
▁ xxmaj she 's an adultress . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj should a villain say so , 
▁ xxmaj the most replenish'd villain in the world , 
▁ xxmaj he were as much more villain : you , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj do but mistake . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you have mistook , my lady , 
▁ xxmaj polixenes for xxmaj leontes . o thou thing ! 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj i 'll not call a creature of thy place , 
▁ xxmaj lest barbarism , making me the precedent , 
▁ xxmaj should a like language use to all degrees 
▁ xxmaj and mannerly distinguishment leave out 
▁ xxmaj betwixt the prince and beggar . i have said 
▁ xxmaj she 's an adultress ; i have said with whom . 
▁ xxmaj more , she 's a traitor ; and xxmaj camillo is 
▁ a federary with her , and one that knows 
▁ xxmaj what she should shame to know herself 
▁ xxmaj but with her most vile principal- that she 's 
▁ a bed - swerver , even as bad as those 
▁ xxmaj that vulgars give bold'st titles ; ay , and privy 
▁ xxmaj to this their late escape . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj no , by my life , 
▁ xxmaj privy to none of this . xxmaj how will this grieve you , 
▁ xxmaj when you shall come to clearer knowledge , that 
▁ xxmaj you thus have publish'd me ! xxmaj gentle my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you scarce can right me throughly then to say 
▁ xxmaj you did mistake . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj no ; if i mistake 
▁ xxmaj in those foundations which i build upon , 
▁ xxmaj the centre is not big enough to bear 
▁ a school - boy 's top . xxmaj away with her to prison . 
▁ xxmaj he who shall speak for her is afar off guilty 
▁ xxmaj but that he speaks . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj there 's some ill planet reigns . 
▁ i must be patient till the heavens look 
▁ xxmaj with an aspect more favourable . xxmaj good my lords , 
▁ i am not prone to weeping , as our sex 
▁ xxmaj commonly are- the want of which vain dew 
▁ xxmaj perchance shall dry your pities- but i have 
▁ xxmaj that honourable grief lodg'd here which burns 
▁ xxmaj worse than tears drown . xxmaj beseech you all , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj with thoughts so qualified as your charities 
▁ xxmaj shall best instruct you , measure me ; and so 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj king 's will be perform'd ! 
▁ xxup leontes . [ to the xxup guard ] xxmaj shall i be heard ? 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj who is't that goes with me ? xxmaj beseech your highness 
▁ xxmaj my women may be with me , for you see 
▁ xxmaj my plight requires it . xxmaj do not weep , good fools ; 
▁ xxmaj there is no cause ; when you shall know your mistress 
▁ xxmaj has deserv'd prison , then abound in tears 
▁ xxmaj as i come out : this action i now go on 
▁ xxmaj is for my better grace . xxmaj adieu , my lord . 
▁ i never wish'd to see you sorry ; now 
▁ i trust i shall . xxmaj my women , come ; you have leave . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj go , do our bidding ; hence ! 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup hermione , guarded , and xxup ladies 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj beseech your xxmaj highness , call the xxmaj queen again . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj be certain what you do , sir , lest your justice 
▁ xxmaj prove violence , in the which three great ones suffer , 
▁ xxmaj yourself , your queen , your son . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj for her , my lord , 
▁ i dare my life lay down- and will do't , sir , 
▁ xxmaj please you t ' accept it- that the xxmaj queen is spotless 
▁ xxup i ' th ' eyes of heaven and to you- i mean 
▁ xxmaj in this which you accuse her . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj if it prove 
▁ xxmaj she 's otherwise , xxmaj i 'll keep my stables where 
▁ i lodge my wife ; xxmaj i 'll go in couples with her ; 
▁ xxmaj than when i feel and see her no farther trust her ; 
▁ xxmaj for every inch of woman in the world , 
▁ xxmaj ay , every dram of woman 's flesh is false , 
▁ xxmaj if she be . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj hold your peaces . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj good my lord- 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj it is for you we speak , not for ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj you are abus'd , and by some putter - on 
▁ xxmaj that will be damn'd for't . xxmaj would i knew the villain ! 
▁ i would land - damn him . xxmaj be she honour - flaw'd- 
▁ i have three daughters : the eldest is eleven ; 
▁ xxmaj the second and the third , nine and some five ; 
▁ xxmaj if this prove true , they 'll pay for ' t. xxmaj by mine honour , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll geld 'em all ; fourteen they shall not see 
▁ xxmaj to bring false generations . xxmaj they are co - heirs ; 
▁ xxmaj and i had rather glib myself than they 
▁ xxmaj should not produce fair issue . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj cease ; no more . 
▁ xxmaj you smell this business with a sense as cold 
▁ xxmaj as is a dead man 's nose ; but i do see't and feel't 
▁ xxmaj as you feel doing thus ; and see withal 
▁ xxmaj the instruments that feel . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj if it be so , 
▁ xxmaj we need no grave to bury honesty ; 
▁ xxmaj there 's not a grain of it the face to sweeten 
▁ xxmaj of the whole dungy earth . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj what ! xxmaj lack i credit ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . i had rather you did lack than xxup i , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj upon this ground ; and more it would content me 
▁ xxmaj to have her honour true than your suspicion , 
▁ xxmaj be blam'd for't how you might . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj why , what need we 
▁ xxmaj commune with you of this , but rather follow 
▁ xxmaj our forceful instigation ? xxmaj our prerogative 
▁ xxmaj calls not your counsels ; but our natural goodness 
▁ xxmaj imparts this ; which , if you- or stupified 
▁ xxmaj or seeming so in skill- can not or will not 
▁ xxmaj relish a truth like us , inform yourselves 
▁ xxmaj we need no more of your advice . xxmaj the matter , 
▁ xxmaj the loss , the gain , the ord'ring on't , is all 
▁ xxmaj properly ours . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj and i wish , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj you had only in your silent judgment tried it , 
▁ xxmaj without more overture . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj how could that be ? 
▁ xxmaj either thou art most ignorant by age , 
▁ xxmaj or thou wert born a fool . xxmaj camillo 's flight , 
▁ xxmaj added to their familiarity- 
▁ xxmaj which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture , 
▁ xxmaj that lack'd sight only , nought for approbation 
▁ xxmaj but only seeing , all other circumstances 
▁ xxmaj made up to th ' deed- doth push on this proceeding . 
▁ xxmaj yet , for a greater confirmation- 
▁ xxmaj for , in an act of this importance , ' twere 
▁ xxmaj most piteous to be wild- i have dispatch'd in post 
▁ xxmaj to sacred xxmaj delphos , to xxmaj apollo 's temple , 
▁ xxmaj cleomenes and xxmaj dion , whom you know 
▁ xxmaj of stuff'd sufficiency . xxmaj now , from the oracle 
▁ xxmaj they will bring all , whose spiritual counsel had , 
▁ xxmaj shall stop or spur me . xxmaj have i done well ? 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj well done , my lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj though i am satisfied , and need no more 
▁ xxmaj than what i know , yet shall the oracle 
▁ xxmaj give rest to th ' minds of others such as he 
▁ xxmaj whose ignorant credulity will not 
▁ xxmaj come up to th ' truth . xxmaj so have we thought it good 
▁ xxmaj from our free person she should be confin'd , 
▁ xxmaj lest that the treachery of the two fled hence 
▁ xxmaj be left her to perform . xxmaj come , follow us ; 
▁ xxmaj we are to speak in public ; for this business 
▁ xxmaj will raise us all . 
▁ xxup antigonus . [ aside ] xxmaj to laughter , as i take it , 
▁ xxmaj if the good truth were known . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj sicilia . a prison 

 xxmaj enter xxup paulina , a xxup gentleman , and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj the keeper of the prison- call to him ; 
▁ xxmaj let him have knowledge who i am . xxmaj exit xxup gentleman 
▁ xxmaj good lady ! 
▁ xxmaj no court in xxmaj europe is too good for thee ; 
▁ xxmaj what dost thou then in prison ? 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gentleman with the xxup gaoler 

▁ xxmaj now , good sir , 
▁ xxmaj you know me , do you not ? 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj for a worthy lady , 
▁ xxmaj and one who much i honour . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj pray you , then , 
▁ xxmaj conduct me to the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup gaoler . i may not , madam ; 
▁ xxmaj to the contrary i have express commandment . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj here 's ado , to lock up honesty and honour from 
▁ xxmaj th ' access of gentle visitors ! xxmaj is't lawful , pray you , 
▁ xxmaj to see her women- any of them ? xxmaj emilia ? 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj so please you , madam , 
▁ xxmaj to put apart these your attendants , 
▁ xxmaj shall bring xxmaj emilia forth . 
▁ xxup paulina . i pray now , call her . 
▁ xxmaj withdraw yourselves . xxmaj exeunt xxup attendants 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj and , madam , 
▁ i must be present at your conference . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj well , be't so , prithee . xxmaj exit xxup gaoler 
▁ xxmaj here 's such ado to make no stain a stain 
▁ xxmaj as passes colouring . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup gaoler , with xxup emilia 

▁ xxmaj dear gentlewoman , 
▁ xxmaj how fares our gracious lady ? 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj as well as one so great and so forlorn 
▁ xxmaj may hold together . xxmaj on her frights and griefs , 
▁ xxmaj which never tender lady hath borne greater , 
▁ xxmaj she is , something before her time , deliver'd . 
▁ xxup paulina . a boy ? 
▁ xxup emilia . a daughter , and a goodly babe , 
▁ xxmaj lusty , and like to live . xxmaj the xxmaj queen receives 
▁ xxmaj much comfort in't ; says ' my poor prisoner , 
▁ i am as innocent as you . ' 
▁ xxup paulina . i dare be sworn . 
▁ xxmaj these dangerous unsafe lunes i ' th ' xxmaj king , beshrew them ! 
▁ xxmaj he must be told on't , and he shall . xxmaj the office 
▁ xxmaj becomes a woman best ; xxmaj i 'll take't upon me ; 
▁ xxmaj if i prove honey - mouth'd , let my tongue blister , 
▁ xxmaj and never to my red - look'd anger be 
▁ xxmaj the trumpet any more . xxmaj pray you , xxmaj emilia , 
▁ xxmaj commend my best obedience to the xxmaj queen ; 
▁ xxmaj if she dares trust me with her little babe , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll show't the xxmaj king , and undertake to be 
▁ xxmaj her advocate to th ' loud'st . xxmaj we do not know 
▁ xxmaj how he may soften at the sight o ' th ' child : 
▁ xxmaj the silence often of pure innocence 
▁ xxmaj persuades when speaking fails . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj most worthy madam , 
▁ xxmaj your honour and your goodness is so evident 
▁ xxmaj that your free undertaking can not miss 
▁ a thriving issue ; there is no lady living 
▁ xxmaj so meet for this great errand . xxmaj please your ladyship 
▁ xxmaj to visit the next room , xxmaj i 'll presently 
▁ xxmaj acquaint the xxmaj queen of your most noble offer 
▁ xxmaj who but to - day hammer'd of this design , 
▁ xxmaj but durst not tempt a minister of honour , 
▁ xxmaj lest she should be denied . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj tell her , xxmaj emilia , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll use that tongue i have ; if wit flow from't 
▁ xxmaj as boldness from my bosom , let't not be doubted 
▁ i shall do good . 
▁ xxup emilia . xxmaj now be you blest for it ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll to the xxmaj queen . xxmaj please you come something nearer . 
▁ xxup gaoler . xxmaj madam , if't please the xxmaj queen to send the babe , 
▁ i know not what i shall incur to pass it , 
▁ xxmaj having no warrant . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj you need not fear it , sir . 
▁ xxmaj this child was prisoner to the womb , and is 
▁ xxmaj by law and process of great xxmaj nature thence 
▁ xxmaj freed and enfranchis'd- not a party to 
▁ xxmaj the anger of the xxmaj king , nor guilty of , 
▁ xxmaj if any be , the trespass of the xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup gaoler . i do believe it . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj do not you fear . xxmaj upon mine honour , i 
▁ xxmaj will stand betwixt you and danger . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj the palace of xxup leontes 

 xxmaj enter xxup leontes , xxup antigonus , xxup lords , and xxup servants 

▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj nor night nor day no rest ! xxmaj it is but weakness 
▁ xxmaj to bear the matter thus- mere weakness . xxmaj if 
▁ xxmaj the cause were not in being- part o ' th ' cause , 
▁ xxmaj she , th ' adultress ; for the harlot king 
▁ xxmaj is quite beyond mine arm , out of the blank 
▁ xxmaj and level of my brain , plot - proof ; but she 
▁ i can hook to me- say that she were gone , 
▁ xxmaj given to the fire , a moiety of my rest 
▁ xxmaj might come to me again . xxmaj who 's there ? 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj my lord ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj how does the boy ? 
▁ xxup first xxup servant . xxmaj he took good rest to - night ; 
▁ ' tis hop'd his sickness is discharg'd . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj to see his nobleness ! 
▁ xxmaj conceiving the dishonour of his mother , 
▁ xxmaj he straight declin'd , droop'd , took it deeply , 
▁ xxmaj fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself , 
▁ xxmaj threw off his spirit , his appetite , his sleep , 
▁ xxmaj and downright languish'd . xxmaj leave me solely . xxmaj go , 
▁ xxmaj see how he fares . [ exit xxup servant ] xxmaj fie , fie ! no thought of him ! 
▁ xxmaj the very thought of my revenges that way 
▁ xxmaj recoil upon me- in himself too mighty , 
▁ xxmaj and in his parties , his alliance . xxmaj let him be , 
▁ xxmaj until a time may serve ; for present vengeance , 
▁ xxmaj take it on her . xxmaj camillo and xxmaj polixenes 
▁ xxmaj laugh at me , make their pastime at my sorrow . 
▁ xxmaj they should not laugh if i could reach them ; nor 
▁ xxmaj shall she , within my pow'r . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup paulina , with a xxup child 

▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj you must not enter . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj nay , rather , good my lords , be second to me . 
▁ xxmaj fear you his tyrannous passion more , alas , 
▁ xxmaj than the xxmaj queen 's life ? a gracious innocent soul , 
▁ xxmaj more free than he is jealous . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj that 's enough . 
▁ xxup second xxup servant . xxmaj madam , he hath not slept to - night ; commanded 
▁ xxmaj none should come at him . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj not so hot , good sir ; 
▁ i come to bring him sleep . ' tis such as you , 
▁ xxmaj that creep like shadows by him , and do sigh 
▁ xxmaj at each his needless heavings- such as you 
▁ xxmaj nourish the cause of his awaking : i 
▁ xxmaj do come with words as medicinal as true , 
▁ xxmaj honest as either , to purge him of that humour 
▁ xxmaj that presses him from sleep . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj what noise there , ho ? 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj no noise , my lord ; but needful conference 
▁ xxmaj about some gossips for your xxmaj highness . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj how ! 
▁ xxmaj away with that audacious lady ! xxmaj antigonus , 
▁ i charg'd thee that she should not come about me ; 
▁ i knew she would . 
▁ xxup antigonus . i told her so , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj on your displeasure 's peril , and on mine , 
▁ xxmaj she should not visit you . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj what , canst not rule her ? 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj from all dishonesty he can : in this , 
▁ xxmaj unless he take the course that you have done- 
▁ xxmaj commit me for committing honour- trust it , 
▁ xxmaj he shall not rule me . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj la you now , you hear ! 
▁ xxmaj when she will take the rein , i let her run ; 
▁ xxmaj but she 'll not stumble . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj good my liege , i come- 
▁ xxmaj and i beseech you hear me , who professes 
▁ xxmaj myself your loyal servant , your physician , 
▁ xxmaj your most obedient counsellor ; yet that dares 
▁ xxmaj less appear so , in comforting your evils , 
▁ xxmaj than such as most seem yours- i say i come 
▁ xxmaj from your good xxmaj queen . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj good xxmaj queen ! 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj good xxmaj queen , my lord , good xxmaj queen- i say good xxmaj queen ; 
▁ xxmaj and would by combat make her good , so were i 
▁ a man , the worst about you . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj force her hence . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj let him that makes but trifles of his eyes 
▁ xxmaj first hand me . xxmaj on mine own accord xxmaj i 'll off ; 
▁ xxmaj but first xxmaj i 'll do my errand . xxmaj the good xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj for she is good , hath brought you forth a daughter ; 
▁ xxmaj here ' tis ; commends it to your blessing . 
▁ [ laying down the child ] 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj out ! 
▁ a mankind witch ! xxmaj hence with her , out o ' door ! 
▁ a most intelligencing bawd ! 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj not so . 
▁ i am as ignorant in that as you 
▁ xxmaj in so entitling me ; and no less honest 
▁ xxmaj than you are mad ; which is enough , xxmaj i 'll warrant , 
▁ xxmaj as this world goes , to pass for honest . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj traitors ! 
▁ xxmaj will you not push her out ? xxmaj give her the bastard . 
▁ [ to xxup antigonus ] xxmaj thou dotard , thou art woman - tir'd , unroosted 
▁ xxmaj by thy xxmaj dame xxmaj partlet here . xxmaj take up the bastard ; 
▁ xxmaj take't up , i say ; give't to thy crone . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj for ever 
▁ xxmaj unvenerable be thy hands , if thou 
▁ xxmaj tak'st up the xxmaj princess by that forced baseness 
▁ xxmaj which he has put upon't ! 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj he dreads his wife . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj so i would you did ; then ' twere past all doubt 
▁ xxmaj you 'd call your children yours . 
▁ xxup leontes . a nest of traitors ! 
▁ xxup antigonus . i am none , by this good light . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj nor xxup i ; nor any 
▁ xxmaj but one that 's here ; and that 's himself ; for he 
▁ xxmaj the sacred honour of himself , his xxmaj queen 's , 
▁ xxmaj his hopeful son 's , his babe 's , betrays to slander , 
▁ xxmaj whose sting is sharper than the sword 's ; and will not- 
▁ xxmaj for , as the case now stands , it is a curse 
▁ xxmaj he can not be compell'd to ' t- once remove 
▁ xxmaj the root of his opinion , which is rotten 
▁ xxmaj as ever oak or stone was sound . 
▁ xxup leontes . a callat 
▁ xxmaj of boundless tongue , who late hath beat her husband , 
▁ xxmaj and now baits me ! xxmaj this brat is none of mine ; 
▁ xxmaj it is the issue of xxmaj polixenes . 
▁ xxmaj hence with it , and together with the dam 
▁ xxmaj commit them to the fire . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj it is yours . 
▁ xxmaj and , might we lay th ' old proverb to your charge , 
▁ xxmaj so like you ' tis the worse . xxmaj behold , my lords , 
▁ xxmaj although the print be little , the whole matter 
▁ xxmaj and copy of the father- eye , nose , lip , 
▁ xxmaj the trick of 's frown , his forehead ; nay , the valley , 
▁ xxmaj the pretty dimples of his chin and cheek ; his smiles ; 
▁ xxmaj the very mould and frame of hand , nail , finger . 
▁ xxmaj and thou , good goddess xxmaj nature , which hast made it 
▁ xxmaj so like to him that got it , if thou hast 
▁ xxmaj the ordering of the mind too , ' mongst all colours 
▁ xxmaj no yellow in't , lest she suspect , as he does , 
▁ xxmaj her children not her husband 's ! 
▁ xxup leontes . a gross hag ! 
▁ xxmaj and , lozel , thou art worthy to be hang'd 
▁ xxmaj that wilt not stay her tongue . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj hang all the husbands 
▁ xxmaj that can not do that feat , you 'll leave yourself 
▁ xxmaj hardly one subject . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj once more , take her hence . 
▁ xxup paulina . a most unworthy and unnatural lord 
▁ xxmaj can do no more . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj i 'll ha ' thee burnt . 
▁ xxup paulina . i care not . 
▁ xxmaj it is an heretic that makes the fire , 
▁ xxmaj not she which burns in't . xxmaj i 'll not call you tyrant 
▁ xxmaj but this most cruel usage of your xxmaj queen- 
▁ xxmaj not able to produce more accusation 
▁ xxmaj than your own weak - hing'd fancy- something savours 
▁ xxmaj of tyranny , and will ignoble make you , 
▁ xxmaj yea , scandalous to the world . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj on your allegiance , 
▁ xxmaj out of the chamber with her ! xxmaj were i a tyrant , 
▁ xxmaj where were her life ? xxmaj she durst not call me so , 
▁ xxmaj if she did know me one . xxmaj away with her ! 
▁ xxup paulina . i pray you , do not push me ; xxmaj i 'll be gone . 
▁ xxmaj look to your babe , my lord ; ' tis yours . xxmaj jove send her 
▁ a better guiding spirit ! xxmaj what needs these hands ? 
▁ xxmaj you that are thus so tender o'er his follies 
▁ xxmaj will never do him good , not one of you . 
▁ xxmaj so , so . xxmaj farewell ; we are gone . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj thou , traitor , hast set on thy wife to this . 
▁ xxmaj my child ! xxmaj away with't . xxmaj even thou , that hast 
▁ a heart so tender o'er it , take it hence , 
▁ xxmaj and see it instantly consum'd with fire ; 
▁ xxmaj even thou , and none but thou . xxmaj take it up straight . 
▁ xxmaj within this hour bring me word ' tis done , 
▁ xxmaj and by good testimony , or xxmaj i 'll seize thy life , 
▁ xxmaj with that thou else call'st thine . xxmaj if thou refuse , 
▁ xxmaj and wilt encounter with my wrath , say so ; 
▁ xxmaj the bastard brains with these my proper hands 
▁ xxmaj shall i dash out . xxmaj go , take it to the fire ; 
▁ xxmaj for thou set'st on thy wife . 
▁ xxup antigonus . i did not , sir . 
▁ xxmaj these lords , my noble fellows , if they please , 
▁ xxmaj can clear me in't . 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj we can . xxmaj my royal liege , 
▁ xxmaj he is not guilty of her coming hither . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you 're liars all . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj beseech your xxmaj highness , give us better credit . 
▁ xxmaj we have always truly serv'd you ; and beseech 
▁ xxmaj so to esteem of us ; and on our knees we beg , 
▁ xxmaj as recompense of our dear services 
▁ xxmaj past and to come , that you do change this purpose , 
▁ xxmaj which being so horrible , so bloody , must 
▁ xxmaj lead on to some foul issue . xxmaj we all kneel . 
▁ xxup leontes . i am a feather for each wind that blows . 
▁ xxmaj shall i live on to see this bastard kneel 
▁ xxmaj and call me father ? xxmaj better burn it now 
▁ xxmaj than curse it then . xxmaj but be it ; let it live . 
▁ xxmaj it shall not neither . [ to xxup antigonus ] xxmaj you , xxmaj sir , come you hither . 
▁ xxmaj you that have been so tenderly officious 
▁ xxmaj with xxmaj lady xxmaj margery , your midwife there , 
▁ xxmaj to save this bastard 's life- for ' tis a bastard , 
▁ xxmaj so sure as this beard 's grey- what will you adventure 
▁ xxmaj to save this brat 's life ? 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj anything , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj that my ability may undergo , 
▁ xxmaj and nobleness impose . xxmaj at least , thus much : 
▁ xxmaj i 'll pawn the little blood which i have left 
▁ xxmaj to save the innocent- anything possible . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj it shall be possible . xxmaj swear by this sword 
▁ xxmaj thou wilt perform my bidding . 
▁ xxup antigonus . i will , my lord . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj mark , and perform it- seest thou ? xxmaj for the fail 
▁ xxmaj of any point in't shall not only be 
▁ xxmaj death to thyself , but to thy lewd - tongu'd wife , 
▁ xxmaj whom for this time we pardon . xxmaj we enjoin thee , 
▁ xxmaj as thou art liegeman to us , that thou carry 
▁ xxmaj this female bastard hence ; and that thou bear it 
▁ xxmaj to some remote and desert place , quite out 
▁ xxmaj of our dominions ; and that there thou leave it , 
▁ xxmaj without more mercy , to it own protection 
▁ xxmaj and favour of the climate . xxmaj as by strange fortune 
▁ xxmaj it came to us , i do in justice charge thee , 
▁ xxmaj on thy soul 's peril and thy body 's torture , 
▁ xxmaj that thou commend it strangely to some place 
▁ xxmaj where chance may nurse or end it . xxmaj take it up . 
▁ xxup antigonus . i swear to do this , though a present death 
▁ xxmaj had been more merciful . xxmaj come on , poor babe . 
▁ xxmaj some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens 
▁ xxmaj to be thy nurses ! xxmaj wolves and bears , they say , 
▁ xxmaj casting their savageness aside , have done 
▁ xxmaj like offices of pity . xxmaj sir , be prosperous 
▁ xxmaj in more than this deed does require ! xxmaj and blessing 
▁ xxmaj against this cruelty fight on thy side , 
▁ xxmaj poor thing , condemn'd to loss ! xxmaj exit with the child 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj no , xxmaj i 'll not rear 
▁ xxmaj another 's issue . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj please your xxmaj highness , posts 
▁ xxmaj from those you sent to th ' oracle are come 
▁ xxmaj an hour since . xxmaj cleomenes and xxmaj dion , 
▁ xxmaj being well arriv'd from xxmaj delphos , are both landed , 
▁ xxmaj hasting to th ' court . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj so please you , sir , their speed 
▁ xxmaj hath been beyond account . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj twenty - three days 
▁ xxmaj they have been absent ; ' tis good speed ; foretells 
▁ xxmaj the great xxmaj apollo suddenly will have 
▁ xxmaj the truth of this appear . xxmaj prepare you , lords ; 
▁ xxmaj summon a session , that we may arraign 
▁ xxmaj our most disloyal lady ; for , as she hath 
▁ xxmaj been publicly accus'd , so shall she have 
▁ a just and open trial . xxmaj while she lives , 
▁ xxmaj my heart will be a burden to me . xxmaj leave me ; 
▁ xxmaj and think upon my bidding . xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxrep 3 i . xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj on the road to the xxmaj capital 

 xxmaj enter xxup cleomenes and xxup dion 

▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj the climate 's delicate , the air most sweet , 
▁ xxmaj fertile the isle , the temple much surpassing 
▁ xxmaj the common praise it bears . 
▁ xxup dion . i shall report , 
▁ xxmaj for most it caught me , the celestial habits- 
▁ xxmaj methinks i so should term them- and the reverence 
▁ xxmaj of the grave wearers . xxup o , the sacrifice ! 
▁ xxmaj how ceremonious , solemn , and unearthly , 
▁ xxmaj it was i ' th ' off'ring ! 
▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj but of all , the burst 
▁ xxmaj and the ear - deaf'ning voice o ' th ' oracle , 
▁ xxmaj kin to xxmaj jove 's thunder , so surpris'd my sense 
▁ xxmaj that i was nothing . 
▁ xxup dion . xxmaj if th ' event o ' th ' journey 
▁ xxmaj prove as successful to the xxmaj queen- xxup o , be't so!- 
▁ xxmaj as it hath been to us rare , pleasant , speedy , 
▁ xxmaj the time is worth the use on't . 
▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj great xxmaj apollo 
▁ xxmaj turn all to th ' best ! xxmaj these proclamations , 
▁ xxmaj so forcing faults upon xxmaj hermione , 
▁ i little like . 
▁ xxup dion . xxmaj the violent carriage of it 
▁ xxmaj will clear or end the business . xxmaj when the oracle- 
▁ xxmaj thus by xxmaj apollo 's great divine seal'd up- 
▁ xxmaj shall the contents discover , something rare 
▁ xxmaj even then will rush to knowledge . xxmaj go ; fresh horses . 
▁ xxmaj and gracious be the issue ! xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj sicilia . a court of justice 

 xxmaj enter xxup leontes , xxup lords , and xxup officers 

▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj this sessions , to our great grief we pronounce , 
▁ xxmaj even pushes ' gainst our heart- the party tried , 
▁ xxmaj the daughter of a king , our wife , and one 
▁ xxmaj of us too much belov'd . xxmaj let us be clear'd 
▁ xxmaj of being tyrannous , since we so openly 
▁ xxmaj proceed in justice , which shall have due course , 
▁ xxmaj even to the guilt or the purgation . 
▁ xxmaj produce the prisoner . 
▁ xxup officer . xxmaj it is his xxmaj highness ' pleasure that the xxmaj queen 
▁ xxmaj appear in person here in court . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup hermione , as to her trial , xxup paulina , and xxup ladies 

▁ xxmaj silence ! 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj read the indictment . 
▁ xxup officer . [ reads ] ' hermione , xxmaj queen to the worthy xxmaj leontes , xxmaj king of 
▁ xxmaj sicilia , thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason , in 
▁ committing adultery with xxmaj polixenes , xxmaj king of xxmaj bohemia ; and 
▁ conspiring with xxmaj camillo to take away the life of our sovereign 
▁ lord the xxmaj king , thy royal husband : the pretence whereof being by 
▁ circumstances partly laid open , thou , xxmaj hermione , contrary to the 
▁ faith and allegiance of true subject , didst counsel and aid them , 
▁ for their better safety , to fly away by night . ' 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj since what i am to say must be but that 
▁ xxmaj which contradicts my accusation , and 
▁ xxmaj the testimony on my part no other 
▁ xxmaj but what comes from myself , it shall scarce boot me 
▁ xxmaj to say ' not guilty . ' xxmaj mine integrity 
▁ xxmaj being counted falsehood shall , as i express it , 
▁ xxmaj be so receiv'd . xxmaj but thus- if pow'rs divine 
▁ xxmaj behold our human actions , as they do , 
▁ i doubt not then but innocence shall make 
▁ xxmaj false accusation blush , and tyranny 
▁ xxmaj tremble at patience . xxmaj you , my lord , best know- 
▁ xxmaj who least will seem to do so- my past life 
▁ xxmaj hath been as continent , as chaste , as true , 
▁ xxmaj as i am now unhappy ; which is more 
▁ xxmaj than history can pattern , though devis'd 
▁ xxmaj and play'd to take spectators ; for behold me- 
▁ a fellow of the royal bed , which owe 
▁ a moiety of the throne , a great king 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj the mother to a hopeful prince- here standing 
▁ xxmaj to prate and talk for life and honour fore 
▁ xxmaj who please to come and hear . xxmaj for life , i prize it 
▁ xxmaj as i weigh grief , which i would spare ; for honour , 
▁ ' tis a derivative from me to mine , 
▁ xxmaj and only that i stand for . i appeal 
▁ xxmaj to your own conscience , sir , before xxmaj polixenes 
▁ xxmaj came to your court , how i was in your grace , 
▁ xxmaj how merited to be so ; since he came , 
▁ xxmaj with what encounter so uncurrent i 
▁ xxmaj have strain'd t ' appear thus ; if one jot beyond 
▁ xxmaj the bound of honour , or in act or will 
▁ xxmaj that way inclining , hard'ned be the hearts 
▁ xxmaj of all that hear me , and my near'st of kin 
▁ xxmaj cry fie upon my grave ! 
▁ xxup leontes . i ne'er heard yet 
▁ xxmaj that any of these bolder vices wanted 
▁ xxmaj less impudence to gainsay what they did 
▁ xxmaj than to perform it first . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj that 's true enough ; 
▁ xxmaj though ' tis a saying , sir , not due to me . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you will not own it . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj more than mistress of 
▁ xxmaj which comes to me in name of fault , i must not 
▁ xxmaj at all acknowledge . xxmaj for xxmaj polixenes , 
▁ xxmaj with whom i am accus'd , i do confess 
▁ i lov'd him as in honour he requir'd ; 
▁ xxmaj with such a kind of love as might become 
▁ a lady like me ; with a love even such , 
▁ xxmaj so and no other , as yourself commanded ; 
▁ xxmaj which not to have done , i think had been in me 
▁ xxmaj both disobedience and ingratitude 
▁ xxmaj to you and toward your friend ; whose love had spoke , 
▁ xxmaj ever since it could speak , from an infant , freely , 
▁ xxmaj that it was yours . xxmaj now for conspiracy : 
▁ i know not how it tastes , though it be dish'd 
▁ xxmaj for me to try how ; all i know of it 
▁ xxmaj is that xxmaj camillo was an honest man ; 
▁ xxmaj and why he left your court , the gods themselves , 
▁ xxmaj wotting no more than xxup i , are ignorant . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you knew of his departure , as you know 
▁ xxmaj what you have underta'en to do in 's absence . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj you speak a language that i understand not . 
▁ xxmaj my life stands in the level of your dreams , 
▁ xxmaj which xxmaj i 'll lay down . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj your actions are my dreams . 
▁ xxmaj you had a bastard by xxmaj polixenes , 
▁ xxmaj and i but dream'd it . xxmaj as you were past all shame- 
▁ xxmaj those of your fact are so- so past all truth ; 
▁ xxmaj which to deny concerns more than avails ; for as 
▁ xxmaj thy brat hath been cast out , like to itself , 
▁ xxmaj no father owning it- which is indeed 
▁ xxmaj more criminal in thee than it- so thou 
▁ xxmaj shalt feel our justice ; in whose easiest passage 
▁ xxmaj look for no less than death . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj sir , spare your threats . 
▁ xxmaj the bug which you would fright me with i seek . 
▁ xxmaj to me can life be no commodity . 
▁ xxmaj the crown and comfort of my life , your favour , 
▁ i do give lost , for i do feel it gone , 
▁ xxmaj but know not how it went ; my second joy 
▁ xxmaj and first fruits of my body , from his presence 
▁ i am barr'd , like one infectious ; my third comfort , 
▁ xxmaj starr'd most unluckily , is from my breast- 
▁ xxmaj the innocent milk in it most innocent mouth- 
▁ xxmaj hal'd out to murder ; myself on every post 
▁ xxmaj proclaim'd a strumpet ; with immodest hatred 
▁ xxmaj the child - bed privilege denied , which ' longs 
▁ xxmaj to women of all fashion ; lastly , hurried 
▁ xxmaj here to this place , i ' th ' open air , before 
▁ i have got strength of limit . xxmaj now , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj tell me what blessings i have here alive 
▁ xxmaj that i should fear to die . xxmaj therefore proceed . 
▁ xxmaj but yet hear this- mistake me not : no life , 
▁ i prize it not a straw , but for mine honour 
▁ xxmaj which i would free- if i shall be condemn'd 
▁ xxmaj upon surmises , all proofs sleeping else 
▁ xxmaj but what your jealousies awake , i tell you 
▁ ' tis rigour , and not law . xxmaj your honours all , 
▁ i do refer me to the oracle : 
▁ xxmaj apollo be my judge ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj this your request 
▁ xxmaj is altogether just . xxmaj therefore , bring forth , 
▁ xxmaj and in xxmaj apollo 's name , his oracle . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt certain xxup officers 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj the xxmaj emperor of xxmaj russia was my father ; 
▁ o that he were alive , and here beholding 
▁ xxmaj his daughter 's trial ! that he did but see 
▁ xxmaj the flatness of my misery ; yet with eyes 
▁ xxmaj of pity , not revenge ! 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup officers , with xxup cleomenes and xxup dion 

▁ xxup officer . xxmaj you here shall swear upon this sword of justice 
▁ xxmaj that you , xxmaj cleomenes and xxmaj dion , have 
▁ xxmaj been both at xxmaj delphos , and from thence have brought 
▁ xxmaj this seal'd - up oracle , by the hand deliver'd 
▁ xxmaj of great xxmaj apollo 's priest ; and that since then 
▁ xxmaj you have not dar'd to break the holy seal 
▁ xxmaj nor read the secrets in't . 
▁ xxup cleomenes , xxup dion . xxmaj all this we swear . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj break up the seals and read . 
▁ xxup officer . [ reads ] ' hermione is chaste ; xxmaj polixenes blameless ; 
▁ xxmaj camillo a true subject ; xxmaj leontes a jealous tyrant ; his innocent 
▁ babe truly begotten ; and the xxmaj king shall live without an heir , if 
▁ that which is lost be not found . ' 
▁ xxup lords . xxmaj now blessed be the great xxmaj apollo ! 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj praised ! 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj hast thou read truth ? 
▁ xxup officer . xxmaj ay , my lord ; even so 
▁ xxmaj as it is here set down . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj there is no truth at all i ' th ' oracle . 
▁ xxmaj the sessions shall proceed . xxmaj this is mere falsehood . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj my lord the xxmaj king , the xxmaj king ! 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj what is the business ? 
▁ xxup servant . o sir , i shall be hated to report it : 
▁ xxmaj the xxmaj prince your son , with mere conceit and fear 
▁ xxmaj of the xxmaj queen 's speed , is gone . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj how ! xxmaj gone ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj is dead . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj apollo 's angry ; and the heavens themselves 
▁ xxmaj do strike at my injustice . [ hermione swoons ] 
▁ xxmaj how now , there ! 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj this news is mortal to the xxmaj queen . xxmaj look down 
▁ xxmaj and see what death is doing . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj take her hence . 
▁ xxmaj her heart is but o'ercharg'd ; she will recover . 
▁ i have too much believ'd mine own suspicion . 
▁ xxmaj beseech you tenderly apply to her 
▁ xxmaj some remedies for life . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup paulina and xxup ladies with xxup hermione 
▁ xxmaj apollo , pardon 
▁ xxmaj my great profaneness ' gainst thine oracle . 
▁ xxmaj i 'll reconcile me to xxmaj polixenes , 
▁ xxmaj new woo my queen , recall the good xxmaj camillo- 
▁ xxmaj whom i proclaim a man of truth , of mercy . 
▁ xxmaj for , being transported by my jealousies 
▁ xxmaj to bloody thoughts and to revenge , i chose 
▁ xxmaj camillo for the minister to poison 
▁ xxmaj my friend xxmaj polixenes ; which had been done 
▁ xxmaj but that the good mind of xxmaj camillo tardied 
▁ xxmaj my swift command , though i with death and with 
▁ xxmaj reward did threaten and encourage him , 
▁ xxmaj not doing it and being done . xxmaj he , most humane 
▁ xxmaj and fill'd with honour , to my kingly guest 
▁ xxmaj unclasp'd my practice , quit his fortunes here , 
▁ xxmaj which you knew great , and to the certain hazard 
▁ xxmaj of all incertainties himself commended , 
▁ xxmaj no richer than his honour . xxmaj how he glisters 
▁ xxmaj thorough my rust ! xxmaj and how his piety 
▁ xxmaj does my deeds make the blacker ! 
▁
▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup paulina 

▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj woe the while ! 
▁ xxup o , cut my lace , lest my heart , cracking it , 
▁ xxmaj break too ! 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj what fit is this , good lady ? 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj what studied torments , tyrant , hast for me ? 
▁ xxmaj what wheels , racks , fires ? what flaying , boiling 
▁ xxmaj in leads or oils ? xxmaj what old or newer torture 
▁ xxmaj must i receive , whose every word deserves 
▁ xxmaj to taste of thy most worst ? xxmaj thy tyranny 
▁ xxmaj together working with thy jealousies , 
▁ xxmaj fancies too weak for boys , too green and idle 
▁ xxmaj for girls of nine- xxup o , think what they have done , 
▁ xxmaj and then run mad indeed , stark mad ; for all 
▁ xxmaj thy by - gone fooleries were but spices of it . 
▁ xxmaj that thou betray'dst xxmaj polixenes , ' twas nothing ; 
▁ xxmaj that did but show thee , of a fool , inconstant , 
▁ xxmaj and damnable ingrateful . xxmaj nor was't much 
▁ xxmaj thou wouldst have poison'd good xxmaj camillo 's honour , 
▁ xxmaj to have him kill a king- poor trespasses , 
▁ xxmaj more monstrous standing by ; whereof i reckon 
▁ xxmaj the casting forth to crows thy baby daughter 
▁ xxmaj to be or none or little , though a devil 
▁ xxmaj would have shed water out of fire ere done't ; 
▁ xxmaj nor is't directly laid to thee , the death 
▁ xxmaj of the young xxmaj prince , whose honourable thoughts- 
▁ xxmaj thoughts high for one so tender- cleft the heart 
▁ xxmaj that could conceive a gross and foolish sire 
▁ xxmaj blemish'd his gracious dam . xxmaj this is not , no , 
▁ xxmaj laid to thy answer ; but the last- o lords , 
▁ xxmaj when i have said , cry ' woe!'- the xxmaj queen , the xxmaj queen , 
▁ xxmaj the sweet'st , dear'st creature 's dead ; and vengeance 
▁ xxmaj for't not dropp'd down yet . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj the higher pow'rs forbid ! 
▁ xxup paulina . i say she 's dead ; xxmaj i 'll swear't . xxmaj if word nor oath 
▁ xxmaj prevail not , go and see . xxmaj if you can bring 
▁ xxmaj tincture or lustre in her lip , her eye , 
▁ xxmaj heat outwardly or breath within , xxmaj i 'll serve you 
▁ xxmaj as i would do the gods . xxmaj but , o thou tyrant ! 
▁ xxmaj do not repent these things , for they are heavier 
▁ xxmaj than all thy woes can stir ; therefore betake thee 
▁ xxmaj to nothing but despair . a thousand knees