xxbos xxmaj ten thousand years together , naked , fasting , 
▁ xxmaj upon a barren mountain , and still winter 
▁ xxmaj in storm perpetual , could not move the gods 
▁ xxmaj to look that way thou wert . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj go on , go on . 
▁ xxmaj thou canst not speak too much ; i have deserv'd 
▁ xxmaj all tongues to talk their bitt'rest . 
▁ xxup first xxup lord . xxmaj say no more ; 
▁ xxmaj howe'er the business goes , you have made fault 
▁ xxup i ' th ' boldness of your speech . 
▁ xxup paulina . i am sorry for't . 
▁ xxmaj all faults i make , when i shall come to know them . 
▁ i do repent . xxmaj alas , i have show'd too much 
▁ xxmaj the rashness of a woman ! xxmaj he is touch'd 
▁ xxmaj to th ' noble heart . xxmaj what 's gone and what 's past help 
▁ xxmaj should be past grief . xxmaj do not receive affliction 
▁ xxmaj at my petition ; i beseech you , rather 
▁ xxmaj let me be punish'd that have minded you 
▁ xxmaj of what you should forget . xxmaj now , good my liege , 
▁ xxmaj sir , royal sir , forgive a foolish woman . 
▁ xxmaj the love i bore your queen- lo , fool again ! 
▁ xxmaj i 'll speak of her no more , nor of your children ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll not remember you of my own lord , 
▁ xxmaj who is lost too . xxmaj take your patience to you , 
▁ xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll say nothing . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj thou didst speak but well 
▁ xxmaj when most the truth ; which i receive much better 
▁ xxmaj than to be pitied of thee . xxmaj prithee , bring me 
▁ xxmaj to the dead bodies of my queen and son . 
▁ xxmaj one grave shall be for both . xxmaj upon them shall 
▁ xxmaj the causes of their death appear , unto 
▁ xxmaj our shame perpetual . xxmaj once a day xxmaj i 'll visit 
▁ xxmaj the chapel where they lie ; and tears shed there 
▁ xxmaj shall be my recreation . xxmaj so long as nature 
▁ xxmaj will bear up with this exercise , so long 
▁ i daily vow to use it . xxmaj come , and lead me 
▁ xxmaj to these sorrows . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj bohemia . xxmaj the sea - coast 

 xxmaj enter xxup antigonus with the xxup child , and a xxup mariner 

▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj thou art perfect then our ship hath touch'd upon 
▁ xxmaj the deserts of xxmaj bohemia ? 
▁ xxup mariner . xxmaj ay , my lord , and fear 
▁ xxmaj we have landed in ill time ; the skies look grimly 
▁ xxmaj and threaten present blusters . xxmaj in my conscience , 
▁ xxmaj the heavens with that we have in hand are angry 
▁ xxmaj and frown upon ' s. 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj their sacred wills be done ! xxmaj go , get aboard ; 
▁ xxmaj look to thy bark . xxmaj i 'll not be long before 
▁ i call upon thee . 
▁ xxup mariner . xxmaj make your best haste ; and go not 
▁ xxmaj too far i ' th ' land ; ' tis like to be loud weather ; 
▁ xxmaj besides , this place is famous for the creatures 
▁ xxmaj of prey that keep upon't . 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj go thou away ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll follow instantly . 
▁ xxup mariner . i am glad at heart 
▁ xxmaj to be so rid o ' th ' business . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup antigonus . xxmaj come , poor babe . 
▁ i have heard , but not believ'd , the spirits o ' th ' dead 
▁ xxmaj may walk again . xxmaj if such thing be , thy mother 
▁ xxmaj appear'd to me last night ; for ne'er was dream 
▁ xxmaj so like a waking . xxmaj to me comes a creature , 
▁ xxmaj sometimes her head on one side some another- 
▁ i never saw a vessel of like sorrow , 
▁ xxmaj so fill'd and so becoming ; in pure white robes , 
▁ xxmaj like very sanctity , she did approach 
▁ xxmaj my cabin where i lay ; thrice bow'd before me ; 
▁ xxmaj and , gasping to begin some speech , her eyes 
▁ xxmaj became two spouts ; the fury spent , anon 
▁ xxmaj did this break from her : ' good xxmaj antigonus , 
▁ xxmaj since fate , against thy better disposition , 
▁ xxmaj hath made thy person for the thrower - out 
▁ xxmaj of my poor babe , according to thine oath , 
▁ xxmaj places remote enough are in xxmaj bohemia , 
▁ xxmaj there weep , and leave it crying ; and , for the babe 
▁ xxmaj is counted lost for ever , xxmaj perdita 
▁ i prithee call't . xxmaj for this ungentle business , 
▁ xxmaj put on thee by my lord , thou ne'er shalt see 
▁ xxmaj thy wife xxmaj paulina more . ' so , with shrieks , 
▁ xxmaj she melted into air . xxmaj affrighted much , 
▁ i did in time collect myself , and thought 
▁ xxmaj this was so and no slumber . xxmaj dreams are toys ; 
▁ xxmaj yet , for this once , yea , superstitiously , 
▁ i will be squar'd by this . i do believe 
▁ xxmaj hermione hath suffer'd death , and that 
▁ xxmaj apollo would , this being indeed the issue 
▁ xxmaj of xxmaj king xxmaj polixenes , it should here be laid , 
▁ xxmaj either for life or death , upon the earth 
▁ xxmaj of its right father . xxmaj blossom , speed thee well ! 
▁ [ laying down the child ] 
▁ xxmaj there lie , and there thy character ; there these 
▁ [ laying down a bundle ] 
▁ xxmaj which may , if fortune please , both breed thee , pretty , 
▁ xxmaj and still rest thine . xxmaj the storm begins . xxmaj poor wretch , 
▁ xxmaj that for thy mother 's fault art thus expos'd 
▁ xxmaj to loss and what may follow ! xxmaj weep i can not , 
▁ xxmaj but my heart bleeds ; and most accurs'd am i 
▁ xxmaj to be by oath enjoin'd to this . xxmaj farewell ! 
▁ xxmaj the day frowns more and more . xxmaj thou'rt like to have 
▁ a lullaby too rough ; i never saw 
▁ xxmaj the heavens so dim by day . [ noise of hunt within ] a savage 
▁ clamour ! 
▁ xxmaj well may i get aboard ! xxmaj this is the chase ; 
▁ i am gone for ever . xxmaj exit , pursued by a bear 

▁ xxmaj enter an old xxup shepherd 

▁ xxup shepherd . i would there were no age between ten and three and 
▁ twenty , or that youth would sleep out the rest ; for there is 
▁ nothing in the between but getting wenches with child , wronging 
▁ the ancientry , stealing , fighting- [ horns ] xxmaj hark you now ! xxmaj would 
▁ any but these boil'd brains of nineteen and two and twenty hunt 
▁ this weather ? xxmaj they have scar'd away two of my best sheep , which i 
▁ fear the wolf will sooner find than the master . xxmaj if any where i 
▁ have them , ' tis by the sea - side , browsing of ivy . xxmaj good luck , an't 
▁ be thy will ! xxmaj what have we here ? [ taking up the child ] xxmaj mercy 
▁ on 's , a barne ! a very pretty barne . a boy or a child , i wonder ? a 
▁ pretty one ; a very pretty one- sure , some scape . xxmaj though i am not 
▁ bookish , yet i can read waiting - gentlewoman in the scape . xxmaj this 
▁ has been some stair - work , some trunk - work , some behind - door - work ; 
▁ they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here . xxmaj i 'll 
▁ take it up for pity ; yet xxmaj i 'll tarry till my son come ; he halloo'd 
▁ but even now . xxmaj whoa - ho - hoa ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clown 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj hilloa , loa ! 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj what , art so near ? xxmaj if thou'lt see a thing to talk on when 
▁ thou art dead and rotten , come hither . xxmaj what ail'st thou , man ? 
▁ xxup clown . i have seen two such sights , by sea and by land ! xxmaj but i am 
▁ not to say it is a sea , for it is now the sky ; betwixt the 
▁ firmament and it you can not thrust a bodkin 's point . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj why , boy , how is it ? 
▁ xxup clown . i would you did but see how it chafes , how it rages , how it 
▁ takes up the shore ! xxmaj but that 's not to the point . xxup o , the most 
▁ piteous cry of the poor souls ! xxmaj sometimes to see 'em , and not to 
▁ see 'em ; now the ship boring the moon with her mainmast , and anon 
▁ swallowed with yeast and froth , as you 'd thrust a cork into a 
▁ hogshead . xxmaj and then for the land service- to see how the bear tore 
▁ out his shoulder - bone ; how he cried to me for help , and said his 
▁ name was xxmaj antigonus , a nobleman ! xxmaj but to make an end of the ship- 
▁ to see how the sea flap - dragon'd it ; but first , how the poor 
▁ souls roared , and the sea mock'd them ; and how the poor gentleman 
▁ roared , and the bear mock'd him , both roaring louder than the sea 
▁ or weather . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj name of mercy , when was this , boy ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj now , now ; i have not wink'd since i saw these sights ; the 
▁ men are not yet cold under water , nor the bear half din'd on the 
▁ gentleman ; he 's at it now . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj would i had been by to have help'd the old man ! 
▁ xxup clown . i would you had been by the ship - side , to have help'd her ; 
▁ there your charity would have lack'd footing . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj heavy matters , heavy matters ! xxmaj but look thee here , boy . 
▁ xxmaj now bless thyself ; thou met'st with things dying , i with things 
▁ new - born . xxmaj here 's a sight for thee ; look thee , a bearing - cloth for 
▁ a squire 's child ! xxmaj look thee here ; take up , take up , boy ; open't . 
▁ xxmaj so , let 's see- it was told me i should be rich by the fairies . 
▁ xxmaj this is some changeling . xxmaj open't . xxmaj what 's within , boy ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you 're a made old man ; if the sins of your youth are 
▁ forgiven you , you 're well to live . xxmaj gold ! all gold ! 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj this is fairy gold , boy , and ' twill prove so . xxmaj up with't , 
▁ keep it close . xxmaj home , home , the next way ! xxmaj we are lucky , boy ; and 
▁ to be so still requires nothing but secrecy . xxmaj let my sheep go . 
▁ xxmaj come , good boy , the next way home . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj go you the next way with your findings . xxmaj i 'll go see if the 
▁ bear be gone from the gentleman , and how much he hath eaten . xxmaj they 
▁ are never curst but when they are hungry . xxmaj if there be any of him 
▁ left , xxmaj i 'll bury it . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj that 's a good deed . xxmaj if thou mayest discern by that which 
▁ is left of him what he is , fetch me to th ' sight of him . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj marry , will xxup i ; and you shall help to put him i ' th ' ground . 
▁ xxup shepherd . ' tis a lucky day , boy ; and we 'll do good deeds on't . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup iv . xxup scene xxup i. 

 xxmaj enter xxup time , the xxup chorus 

▁ xxup time . xxup i , that please some , try all , both joy and terror 
▁ xxmaj of good and bad , that makes and unfolds error , 
▁ xxmaj now take upon me , in the name of xxmaj time , 
▁ xxmaj to use my wings . xxmaj impute it not a crime 
▁ xxmaj to me or my swift passage that i slide 
▁ xxmaj o'er sixteen years , and leave the growth untried 
▁ xxmaj of that wide gap , since it is in my pow'r 
▁ xxmaj to o'erthrow law , and in one self - born hour 
▁ xxmaj to plant and o'erwhelm custom . xxmaj let me pass 
▁ xxmaj the same i am , ere ancient'st order was 
▁ xxmaj or what is now receiv'd . i witness to 
▁ xxmaj the times that brought them in ; so shall i do 
▁ xxmaj to th ' freshest things now reigning , and make stale 
▁ xxmaj the glistering of this present , as my tale 
▁ xxmaj now seems to it . xxmaj your patience this allowing , 
▁ i turn my glass , and give my scene such growing 
▁ xxmaj as you had slept between . xxmaj leontes leaving- 
▁ xxmaj th ' effects of his fond jealousies so grieving 
▁ xxmaj that he shuts up himself- imagine me , 
▁ xxmaj gentle spectators , that i now may be 
▁ xxmaj in fair xxmaj bohemia ; and remember well 
▁ i mention'd a son o ' th ' xxmaj king 's , which xxmaj florizel 
▁ i now name to you ; and with speed so pace 
▁ xxmaj to speak of xxmaj perdita , now grown in grace 
▁ xxmaj equal with wond'ring . xxmaj what of her ensues 
▁ i list not prophesy ; but let xxmaj time 's news 
▁ xxmaj be known when ' tis brought forth . a shepherd 's daughter , 
▁ xxmaj and what to her adheres , which follows after , 
▁ xxmaj is th ' argument of xxmaj time . xxmaj of this allow , 
▁ xxmaj if ever you have spent time worse ere now ; 
▁ xxmaj if never , yet that xxmaj time himself doth say 
▁ xxmaj he wishes earnestly you never may . xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj bohemia . xxmaj the palace of xxup polixenes 

 xxmaj enter xxup polixenes and xxup camillo 

▁ xxup polixenes . i pray thee , good xxmaj camillo , be no more importunate : ' tis 
▁ a sickness denying thee anything ; a death to grant this . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj it is fifteen years since i saw my country ; though i have 
▁ for the most part been aired abroad , i desire to lay my bones 
▁ there . xxmaj besides , the penitent xxmaj king , my master , hath sent for me ; 
▁ to whose feeling sorrows i might be some allay , or i o'erween to 
▁ think so , which is another spur to my departure . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj as thou lov'st me , xxmaj camillo , wipe not out the rest of thy 
▁ services by leaving me now . xxmaj the need i have of thee thine own 
▁ goodness hath made . xxmaj better not to have had thee than thus to want 
▁ thee ; thou , having made me businesses which none without thee can 
▁ sufficiently manage , must either stay to execute them thyself , or 
▁ take away with thee the very services thou hast done ; which if i 
▁ have not enough considered- as too much i cannot- to be more 
▁ thankful to thee shall be my study ; and my profit therein the 
▁ heaping friendships . xxmaj of that fatal country xxmaj sicilia , prithee , 
▁ speak no more ; whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance 
▁ of that penitent , as thou call'st him , and reconciled king , my 
▁ brother ; whose loss of his most precious queen and children are 
▁ even now to be afresh lamented . xxmaj say to me , when saw'st thou the 
▁ xxmaj prince xxmaj florizel , my son ? xxmaj kings are no less unhappy , their issue 
▁ not being gracious , than they are in losing them when they have 
▁ approved their virtues . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj sir , it is three days since i saw the xxmaj prince . xxmaj what his 
▁ happier affairs may be are to me unknown ; but i have missingly 
▁ noted he is of late much retired from court , and is less frequent 
▁ to his princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared . 
▁ xxup polixenes . i have considered so much , xxmaj camillo , and with some care , 
▁ so far that i have eyes under my service which look upon his 
▁ removedness ; from whom i have this intelligence , that he is 
▁ seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd- a man , they say , 
▁ that from very nothing , and beyond the imagination of his 
▁ neighbours , is grown into an unspeakable estate . 
▁ xxup camillo . i have heard , sir , of such a man , who hath a daughter of 
▁ most rare note . xxmaj the report of her is extended more than can be 
▁ thought to begin from such a cottage . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj that 's likewise part of my intelligence ; but , i fear , the 
▁ angle that plucks our son thither . xxmaj thou shalt accompany us to the 
▁ place ; where we will , not appearing what we are , have some 
▁ question with the shepherd ; from whose simplicity i think it not 
▁ uneasy to get the cause of my son 's resort thither . xxmaj prithee be my 
▁ present partner in this business , and lay aside the thoughts of 
▁ xxmaj sicilia . 
▁ xxup camillo . i willingly obey your command . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj my best xxmaj camillo ! xxmaj we must disguise ourselves . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj bohemia . a road near the xxup shepherd 's cottage 

 xxmaj enter xxup autolycus , singing 

▁ xxmaj when daffodils begin to peer , 
▁ xxmaj with heigh ! the doxy over the dale , 
▁ xxmaj why , then comes in the sweet o ' the year , 
▁ xxmaj for the red blood reigns in the winter 's pale . 

▁ xxmaj the white sheet bleaching on the hedge , 
▁ xxmaj with heigh ! the sweet birds , xxup o , how they sing ! 
▁ xxmaj doth set my pugging tooth on edge , 
▁ xxmaj for a quart of ale is a dish for a king . 

▁ xxmaj the lark , that tirra - lirra chants , 
▁ xxmaj with heigh ! with heigh ! the thrush and the jay , 
▁ xxmaj are summer songs for me and my aunts , 
▁ xxmaj while we lie tumbling in the hay . 

▁ i have serv'd xxmaj prince xxmaj florizel , and in my time wore three - pile ; 
▁ but now i am out of service . 

▁ xxmaj but shall i go mourn for that , my dear ? 
▁ xxmaj the pale moon shines by night ; 
▁ xxmaj and when i wander here and there , 
▁ i then do most go right . 

▁ xxmaj if tinkers may have leave to live , 
▁ xxmaj and bear the sow - skin budget , 
▁ xxmaj then my account i well may give 
▁ xxmaj and in the stocks avouch it . 

▁ xxmaj my traffic is sheets ; when the kite builds , look to lesser linen . 
▁ xxmaj my father nam'd me xxmaj autolycus ; who , being , i as am , litter'd under 
▁ xxmaj mercury , was likewise a snapper - up of unconsidered trifles . xxmaj with 
▁ die and drab i purchas'd this caparison ; and my revenue is the 
▁ silly - cheat . xxmaj gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway ; 
▁ beating and hanging are terrors to me ; for the life to come , i 
▁ sleep out the thought of it . a prize ! a prize ! 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup clown 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj let me see : every ' leven wether tods ; every tod yields pound 
▁ and odd shilling ; fifteen hundred shorn , what comes the wool to ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . [ aside ] xxmaj if the springe hold , the cock 's mine . 
▁ xxup clown . i can not do ' t without counters . xxmaj let me see : what am i to 
▁ buy for our sheep - shearing feast ? xxmaj three pound of sugar , five 
▁ pound of currants , rice- what will this sister of mine do with 
▁ rice ? xxmaj but my father hath made her mistress of the feast , and she 
▁ lays it on . xxmaj she hath made me four and twenty nosegays for the 
▁ shearers- three - man song - men all , and very good ones ; but they 
▁ are most of them means and bases ; but one xxmaj puritan amongst them , 
▁ and he sings psalms to hornpipes . i must have saffron to colour 
▁ the warden pies ; mace ; dates- none , that 's out of my note ; 
▁ nutmegs , seven ; race or two of ginger , but that i may beg ; four 
▁ pound of prunes , and as many of raisins o ' th ' sun . 
▁ xxup autolycus . [ grovelling on the ground ] o that ever i was born ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxup i ' th ' name of me ! 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxup o , help me , help me ! xxmaj pluck but off these rags ; and then , 
▁ death , death ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj alack , poor soul ! thou hast need of more rags to lay on 
▁ thee , rather than have these off . 
▁ xxup autolycus . o sir , the loathsomeness of them offend me more than the 
▁ stripes i have received , which are mighty ones and millions . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj alas , poor man ! a million of beating may come to a great 
▁ matter . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i am robb'd , sir , and beaten ; my money and apparel ta'en 
▁ from me , and these detestable things put upon me . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj what , by a horseman or a footman ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . a footman , sweet sir , a footman . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj indeed , he should be a footman , by the garments he has left 
▁ with thee ; if this be a horseman 's coat , it hath seen very hot 
▁ service . xxmaj lend me thy hand , xxmaj i 'll help thee . xxmaj come , lend me thy 
▁ hand . [ helping him up ] 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxup o , good sir , tenderly , xxup o ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj alas , poor soul ! 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxup o , good sir , softly , good sir ; i fear , sir , my shoulder 
▁ blade is out . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj how now ! xxmaj canst stand ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj softly , dear sir [ picks his pocket ] ; good sir , softly . 
▁ xxmaj you ha ' done me a charitable office . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj dost lack any money ? i have a little money for thee . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj no , good sweet sir ; no , i beseech you , sir . i have a 
▁ kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence , unto whom i was 
▁ going ; i shall there have money or anything i want . xxmaj offer me no 
▁ money , i pray you ; that kills my heart . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj what manner of fellow was he that robb'd you ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . a fellow , sir , that i have known to go about with 
▁ troll - my - dames ; i knew him once a servant of the xxmaj prince . i can not 
▁ tell , good sir , for which of his virtues it was , but he was 
▁ certainly whipt out of the court . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj his vices , you would say ; there 's no virtue whipt out of the 
▁ court . xxmaj they cherish it to make it stay there ; and yet it will no 
▁ more but abide . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj vices , i would say , sir . i know this man well ; he hath 
▁ been since an ape - bearer ; then a process - server , a bailiff ; then 
▁ he compass'd a motion of the xxmaj prodigal xxmaj son , and married a tinker 's 
▁ wife within a mile where my land and living lies ; and , having 
▁ flown over many knavish professions , he settled only in rogue . 
▁ xxmaj some call him xxmaj autolycus . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj out upon him ! prig , for my life , prig ! xxmaj he haunts wakes , 
▁ fairs , and bear - baitings . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj very true , sir ; he , sir , he ; that 's the rogue that put 
▁ me into this apparel . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj not a more cowardly rogue in all xxmaj bohemia ; if you had but 
▁ look'd big and spit at him , he 'd have run . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i must confess to you , sir , i am no fighter ; i am false 
▁ of heart that way , and that he knew , i warrant him . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj how do you now ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj sweet sir , much better than i was ; i can stand and walk . 
▁ i will even take my leave of you and pace softly towards my 
▁ kinsman 's . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj shall i bring thee on the way ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj no , good - fac'd sir ; no , sweet sir . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj then fare thee well . i must go buy spices for our 
▁ sheep - shearing . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj prosper you , sweet sir ! xxmaj exit xxup clown 
▁ xxmaj your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice . xxmaj i 'll be with 
▁ you at your sheep - shearing too . xxmaj if i make not this cheat bring 
▁ out another , and the shearers prove sheep , let me be unroll'd , 
▁ and my name put in the book of virtue ! 
▁ [ sings ] 
▁ xxmaj jog on , jog on , the footpath way , 
▁ xxmaj and merrily hent the stile - a ; 
▁ a merry heart goes all the day , 
▁ xxmaj your sad tires in a mile - a. xxmaj exit 




 xxup scene xxup iv . 
 xxmaj bohemia . xxmaj the xxup shepherd 's cottage 

 xxmaj enter xxup florizel and xxup perdita 

▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj these your unusual weeds to each part of you 
▁ xxmaj do give a life- no shepherdess , but xxmaj flora 
▁ xxmaj peering in xxmaj april 's front . xxmaj this your sheep - shearing 
▁ xxmaj is as a meeting of the petty gods , 
▁ xxmaj and you the xxmaj queen on't . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj sir , my gracious lord , 
▁ xxmaj to chide at your extremes it not becomes me- 
▁ xxup o , pardon that i name them ! xxmaj your high self , 
▁ xxmaj the gracious mark o ' th ' land , you have obscur'd 
▁ xxmaj with a swain 's wearing ; and me , poor lowly maid , 
▁ xxmaj most goddess - like prank'd up . xxmaj but that our feasts 
▁ xxmaj in every mess have folly , and the feeders 
▁ xxmaj digest it with a custom , i should blush 
▁ xxmaj to see you so attir'd ; swoon , i think , 
▁ xxmaj to show myself a glass . 
▁ xxup florizel . i bless the time 
▁ xxmaj when my good falcon made her flight across 
▁ xxmaj thy father 's ground . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj now xxmaj jove afford you cause ! 
▁ xxmaj to me the difference forges dread ; your greatness 
▁ xxmaj hath not been us'd to fear . xxmaj even now i tremble 
▁ xxmaj to think your father , by some accident , 
▁ xxmaj should pass this way , as you did . xxup o , the xxmaj fates ! 
▁ xxmaj how would he look to see his work , so noble , 
▁ xxmaj vilely bound up ? xxmaj what would he say ? xxmaj or how 
▁ xxmaj should xxup i , in these my borrowed flaunts , behold 
▁ xxmaj the sternness of his presence ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj apprehend 
▁ xxmaj nothing but jollity . xxmaj the gods themselves , 
▁ xxmaj humbling their deities to love , have taken 
▁ xxmaj the shapes of beasts upon them : xxmaj jupiter 
▁ xxmaj became a bull and bellow'd ; the green xxmaj neptune 
▁ a ram and bleated ; and the fire - rob'd god , 
▁ xxmaj golden xxmaj apollo , a poor humble swain , 
▁ xxmaj as i seem now . xxmaj their transformations 
▁ xxmaj were never for a piece of beauty rarer , 
▁ xxmaj nor in a way so chaste , since my desires 
▁ xxmaj run not before mine honour , nor my lusts 
▁ xxmaj burn hotter than my faith . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxup o , but , sir , 
▁ xxmaj your resolution can not hold when ' tis 
▁ xxmaj oppos'd , as it must be , by th ' pow'r of the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxmaj one of these two must be necessities , 
▁ xxmaj which then will speak , that you must change this purpose , 
▁ xxmaj or i my life . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj thou dearest xxmaj perdita , 
▁ xxmaj with these forc'd thoughts , i prithee , darken not 
▁ xxmaj the mirth o ' th ' feast . xxmaj or xxmaj i 'll be thine , my fair , 
▁ xxmaj or not my father 's ; for i can not be 
▁ xxmaj mine own , nor anything to any , if 
▁ i be not thine . xxmaj to this i am most constant , 
▁ xxmaj though destiny say no . xxmaj be merry , gentle ; 
▁ xxmaj strangle such thoughts as these with any thing 
▁ xxmaj that you behold the while . xxmaj your guests are coming . 
▁ xxmaj lift up your countenance , as it were the day 
▁ xxmaj of celebration of that nuptial which 
▁ xxmaj we two have sworn shall come . 
▁ xxup perdita . o xxmaj lady xxmaj fortune , 
▁ xxmaj stand you auspicious ! 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj see , your guests approach . 
▁ xxmaj address yourself to entertain them sprightly , 
▁ xxmaj and let 's be red with mirth . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup shepherd , with xxup polixenes and xxup camillo , disguised ; 
▁ xxup clown , xxup mopsa , xxup dorcas , with xxup others 

▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj fie , daughter ! xxmaj when my old wife liv'd , upon 
▁ xxmaj this day she was both pantler , butler , cook ; 
▁ xxmaj both dame and servant ; welcom'd all ; serv'd all ; 
▁ xxmaj would sing her song and dance her turn ; now here 
▁ xxmaj at upper end o ' th ' table , now i ' th ' middle ; 
▁ xxmaj on his shoulder , and his ; her face o ' fire 
▁ xxmaj with labour , and the thing she took to quench it 
▁ xxmaj she would to each one sip . xxmaj you are retired , 
▁ xxmaj as if you were a feasted one , and not 
▁ xxmaj the hostess of the meeting . xxmaj pray you bid 
▁ xxmaj these unknown friends to 's welcome , for it is 
▁ a way to make us better friends , more known . 
▁ xxmaj come , quench your blushes , and present yourself 
▁ xxmaj that which you are , xxmaj mistress o ' th ' xxmaj feast . xxmaj come on , 
▁ xxmaj and bid us welcome to your sheep - shearing , 
▁ xxmaj as your good flock shall prosper . 
▁ xxup perdita . [ to xxup polixenes ] xxmaj sir , welcome . 
▁ xxmaj it is my father 's will i should take on me 
▁ xxmaj the hostess - ship o ' th ' day . [ to xxup camillo ] 
▁ xxmaj you 're welcome , sir . 
▁ xxmaj give me those flow'rs there , xxmaj dorcas . xxmaj reverend sirs , 
▁ xxmaj for you there 's rosemary and rue ; these keep 
▁ xxmaj seeming and savour all the winter long . 
▁ xxmaj grace and remembrance be to you both ! 
▁ xxmaj and welcome to our shearing . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj shepherdess- 
▁ a fair one are you- well you fit our ages 
▁ xxmaj with flow'rs of winter . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj sir , the year growing ancient , 
▁ xxmaj not yet on summer 's death nor on the birth 
▁ xxmaj of trembling winter , the fairest flow'rs o ' th ' season 
▁ xxmaj are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors , 
▁ xxmaj which some call nature 's bastards . xxmaj of that kind 
▁ xxmaj our rustic garden 's barren ; and i care not 
▁ xxmaj to get slips of them . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj wherefore , gentle maiden , 
▁ xxmaj do you neglect them ? 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj for i have heard it said 
▁ xxmaj there is an art which in their piedness shares 
▁ xxmaj with great creating nature . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj say there be ; 
▁ xxmaj yet nature is made better by no mean 
▁ xxmaj but nature makes that mean ; so over that art 
▁ xxmaj which you say adds to nature , is an art 
▁ xxmaj that nature makes . xxmaj you see , sweet maid , we marry 
▁ a gentler scion to the wildest stock , 
▁ xxmaj and make conceive a bark of baser kind 
▁ xxmaj by bud of nobler race . xxmaj this is an art 
▁ xxmaj which does mend nature- change it rather ; but 
▁ xxmaj the art itself is nature . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj so it is . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj then make your garden rich in gillyvors , 
▁ xxmaj and do not call them bastards . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj i 'll not put 
▁ xxmaj the dibble in earth to set one slip of them ; 
▁ xxmaj no more than were i painted i would wish 
▁ xxmaj this youth should say ' twere well , and only therefore 
▁ xxmaj desire to breed by me . xxmaj here 's flow'rs for you : 
▁ xxmaj hot lavender , mints , savory , marjoram ; 
▁ xxmaj the marigold , that goes to bed wi ' th ' sun , 
▁ xxmaj and with him rises weeping ; these are flow'rs 
▁ xxmaj of middle summer , and i think they are given 
▁ xxmaj to men of middle age . xxmaj y'are very welcome . 
▁ xxup camillo . i should leave grazing , were i of your flock , 
▁ xxmaj and only live by gazing . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj out , alas ! 
▁ xxmaj you 'd be so lean that blasts of xxmaj january 
▁ xxmaj would blow you through and through . xxmaj now , my fair'st friend , 
▁ i would i had some flow'rs o ' th ' spring that might 
▁ xxmaj become your time of day- and yours , and yours , 
▁ xxmaj that wear upon your virgin branches yet 
▁ xxmaj your maidenheads growing . o xxmaj proserpina , 
▁ xxmaj from the flowers now that , frighted , thou let'st fall 
▁ xxmaj from xxmaj dis 's waggon!- daffodils , 
▁ xxmaj that come before the swallow dares , and take 
▁ xxmaj the winds of xxmaj march with beauty ; violets , dim 
▁ xxmaj but sweeter than the lids of xxmaj juno 's eyes 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj cytherea 's breath ; pale primroses , 
▁ xxmaj that die unmarried ere they can behold 
▁ xxmaj bright xxmaj phoebus in his strength- a malady 
▁ xxmaj most incident to maids ; bold oxlips , and 
▁ xxmaj the crown - imperial ; lilies of all kinds , 
▁ xxmaj the flow'r - de - luce being one . xxup o , these i lack 
▁ xxmaj to make you garlands of , and my sweet friend 
▁ xxmaj to strew him o'er and o'er ! 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj what , like a corse ? 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj no ; like a bank for love to lie and play on ; 
▁ xxmaj not like a corse ; or if- not to be buried , 
▁ xxmaj but quick , and in mine arms . xxmaj come , take your flow'rs . 
▁ xxmaj methinks i play as i have seen them do 
▁ xxmaj in xxmaj whitsun pastorals . xxmaj sure , this robe of mine 
▁ xxmaj does change my disposition . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj what you do 
▁ xxmaj still betters what is done . xxmaj when you speak , sweet , 
▁ xxmaj i 'd have you do it ever . xxmaj when you sing , 
▁ xxmaj i 'd have you buy and sell so ; so give alms ; 
▁ xxmaj pray so ; and , for the ord'ring your affairs , 
▁ xxmaj to sing them too . xxmaj when you do dance , i wish you 
▁ a wave o ' th ' sea , that you might ever do 
▁ xxmaj nothing but that ; move still , still so , 
▁ xxmaj and own no other function . xxmaj each your doing , 
▁ xxmaj so singular in each particular , 
▁ xxmaj crowns what you are doing in the present deeds , 
▁ xxmaj that all your acts are queens . 
▁ xxup perdita . o xxmaj doricles , 
▁ xxmaj your praises are too large . xxmaj but that your youth , 
▁ xxmaj and the true blood which peeps fairly through't , 
▁ xxmaj do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd , 
▁ xxmaj with wisdom i might fear , my xxmaj doricles , 
▁ xxmaj you woo'd me the false way . 
▁ xxup florizel . i think you have 
▁ xxmaj as little skill to fear as i have purpose 
▁ xxmaj to put you to't . xxmaj but , come ; our dance , i pray . 
▁ xxmaj your hand , my xxmaj perdita ; so turtles pair 
▁ xxmaj that never mean to part . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj i 'll swear for 'em . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj this is the prettiest low - born lass that ever 
▁ xxmaj ran on the green - sward ; nothing she does or seems 
▁ xxmaj but smacks of something greater than herself , 
▁ xxmaj too noble for this place . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj he tells her something 
▁ xxmaj that makes her blood look out . xxmaj good sooth , she is 
▁ xxmaj the queen of curds and cream . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj come on , strike up . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj mopsa must be your mistress ; marry , garlic , 
▁ xxmaj to mend her kissing with ! 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj now , in good time ! 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj not a word , a word ; we stand upon our manners . 
▁ xxmaj come , strike up . [ music ] 

▁ xxmaj here a dance xxmaj of xxup shepherds and xxup shepherdesses 

▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj pray , good shepherd , what fair swain is this 
▁ xxmaj which dances with your daughter ? 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj they call him xxmaj doricles , and boasts himself 
▁ xxmaj to have a worthy feeding ; but i have it 
▁ xxmaj upon his own report , and i believe it : 
▁ xxmaj he looks like sooth . xxmaj he says he loves my daughter ; 
▁ i think so too ; for never gaz'd the moon 
▁ xxmaj upon the water as he 'll stand and read , 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere my daughter 's eyes ; and , to be plain , 
▁ i think there is not half a kiss to choose 
▁ xxmaj who loves another best . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj she dances featly . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj so she does any thing ; though i report it 
▁ xxmaj that should be silent . xxmaj if young xxmaj doricles 
▁ xxmaj do light upon her , she shall bring him that 
▁ xxmaj which he not dreams of . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup servant 
▁
▁ xxup servant . o master , if you did but hear the pedlar at the door , you 
▁ would never dance again after a tabor and pipe ; no , the bagpipe 
▁ could not move you . xxmaj he sings several tunes faster than you 'll 
▁ tell money ; he utters them as he had eaten ballads , and all men 's 
▁ ears grew to his tunes . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj he could never come better ; he shall come in . i love a 
▁ ballad but even too well , if it be doleful matter merrily set 
▁ down , or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he hath songs for man or woman of all sizes ; no milliner 
▁ can so fit his customers with gloves . xxmaj he has the prettiest 
▁ love - songs for maids ; so without bawdry , which is strange ; with 
▁ such delicate burdens of dildos and fadings , ' jump her and thump 
▁ her ' ; and where some stretch - mouth'd rascal would , as it were , 
▁ mean mischief , and break a foul gap into the matter , he makes the 
▁ maid to answer ' whoop , do me no harm , good man'- puts him off , 
▁ slights him , with ' whoop , do me no harm , good man . ' 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj this is a brave fellow . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj believe me , thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow . 
▁ xxmaj has he any unbraided wares ? 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj he hath ribbons of all the colours i ' th ' rainbow ; points , 
▁ more than all the lawyers in xxmaj bohemia can learnedly handle , though 
▁ they come to him by th ' gross ; inkles , caddisses , cambrics , 
▁ lawns . xxmaj why he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses ; you 
▁ would think a smock were she - angel , he so chants to the 
▁ sleeve - hand and the work about the square on't . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj prithee bring him in ; and let him approach singing . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup servant 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you have of these pedlars that have more in them than you 'd 
▁ think , sister . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj ay , good brother , or go about to think . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup autolycus , xxmaj singing 

▁ xxmaj lawn as white as driven snow ; 
▁ xxmaj cypress black as e'er was crow ; 
▁ xxmaj gloves as sweet as damask roses ; 
▁ xxmaj masks for faces and for noses ; 
▁ xxmaj bugle bracelet , necklace amber , 
▁ xxmaj perfume for a lady 's chamber ; 
▁ xxmaj golden quoifs and stomachers , 
▁ xxmaj for my lads to give their dears ; 
▁ xxmaj pins and poking - sticks of steel- 
▁ xxmaj what maids lack from head to heel . 
▁ xxmaj come , buy of me , come ; come buy , come buy ; 
▁ xxmaj buy , lads , or else your lasses cry . 
▁ xxmaj come , buy . 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj if i were not in love with xxmaj mopsa , thou shouldst take no 
▁ money of me ; but being enthrall'd as i am , it will also be the 
▁ bondage of certain ribbons and gloves . 
▁ xxup mopsa . i was promis'd them against the feast ; but they come not too 
▁ late now . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj he hath promis'd you more than that , or there be liars . 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj he hath paid you all he promis'd you . xxmaj may be he has paid you 
▁ more , which will shame you to give him again . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj is there no manners left among maids ? xxmaj will they wear their 
▁ plackets where they should bear their faces ? xxmaj is there not 
▁ milking - time , when you are going to bed , or kiln - hole , to whistle 
▁ off these secrets , but you must be tittle - tattling before all our 
▁ guests ? ' tis well they are whisp'ring . xxmaj clammer your tongues , and 
▁ not a word more . 
▁ xxup mopsa . i have done . xxmaj come , you promis'd me a tawdry - lace , and a pair 
▁ of sweet gloves . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj have i not told thee how i was cozen'd by the way , and lost 
▁ all my money ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj and indeed , sir , there are cozeners abroad ; therefore it 
▁ behoves men to be wary . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj fear not thou , man ; thou shalt lose nothing here . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i hope so , sir ; for i have about me many parcels of 
▁ charge . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj what hast here ? xxmaj ballads ? 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj pray now , buy some . i love a ballad in print a - life , for 
▁ then we are sure they are true . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj here 's one to a very doleful tune : how a usurer 's wife 
▁ was brought to bed of twenty money - bags at a burden , and how she 
▁ long'd to eat adders ' heads and toads carbonado'd . 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj is it true , think you ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj very true , and but a month old . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj bless me from marrying a usurer ! 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj here 's the midwife 's name to't , one xxmaj mistress xxmaj taleporter , 
▁ and five or six honest wives that were present . xxmaj why should i 
▁ carry lies abroad ? 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj pray you now , buy it . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj come on , lay it by ; and let 's first see moe ballads ; we 'll 
▁ buy the other things anon . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj here 's another ballad , of a fish that appeared upon the 
▁ coast on xxmaj wednesday the fourscore of xxmaj april , forty thousand fathom 
▁ above water , and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of 
▁ maids . xxmaj it was thought she was a woman , and was turn'd into a cold 
▁ fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that lov'd her . 
▁ xxmaj the ballad is very pitiful , and as true . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj is it true too , think you ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj five justices ' hands at it ; and witnesses more than my 
▁ pack will hold . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj lay it by too . xxmaj another . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj this is a merry ballad , but a very pretty one . 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj let 's have some merry ones . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj why , this is a passing merry one , and goes to the tune 
▁ of ' two maids wooing a man . ' xxmaj there 's scarce a maid westward but 
▁ she sings it ; ' tis in request , i can tell you . 
▁ xxup mopsa . can both sing it . xxmaj if thou'lt bear a part , thou shalt hear ; 
▁ ' tis in three parts . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj we had the tune on't a month ago . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i can bear my part ; you must know ' tis my occupation . 
▁ xxmaj have at it with you . 

▁ xxup song 

▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj get you hence , for i must go 
▁ xxmaj where it fits not you to know . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj whither ? 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxup o , whither ? 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj whither ? 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj it becomes thy oath full well 
▁ xxmaj thou to me thy secrets tell . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj me too ! xxmaj let me go thither 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj or thou goest to th ' grange or mill . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj if to either , thou dost ill . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj neither . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj what , neither ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj neither . 
▁ xxup dorcas . xxmaj thou hast sworn my love to be . 
▁ xxup mopsa . xxmaj thou hast sworn it more to me . 
▁ xxmaj then whither goest ? xxmaj say , whither ? 

▁ xxup clown . xxmaj we 'll have this song out anon by ourselves ; my father and 
▁ the gentlemen are in sad talk , and we 'll not trouble them . xxmaj come , 
▁ bring away thy pack after me . xxmaj wenches , xxmaj i 'll buy for you both . 
▁ xxmaj pedlar , let 's have the first choice . xxmaj follow me , girls . 
▁ xxmaj exit with xxup dorcas and xxup mopsa 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj and you shall pay well for 'em . 
▁ xxmaj exit xxup autolycus , xxmaj singing 

▁ xxmaj will you buy any tape , 
▁ xxmaj or lace for your cape , 
▁ xxmaj my dainty duck , my dear - a ? 
▁ xxmaj any silk , any thread , 
▁ xxmaj any toys for your head , 
▁ xxmaj of the new'st and fin'st , fin'st wear - a ? 
▁ xxmaj come to the pedlar ; 
▁ xxmaj money 's a meddler 
▁ xxmaj that doth utter all men 's ware - a. 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup servant 

▁ xxup servant . xxmaj master , there is three carters , three shepherds , three 
▁ neat - herds , three swineherds , that have made themselves all men 
▁ of hair ; they call themselves xxmaj saltiers , and they have dance which 
▁ the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols , because they are not 
▁ in't ; but they themselves are o ' th ' mind , if it be not too rough 
▁ for some that know little but bowling , it will please 
▁ plentifully . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj away ! xxmaj we 'll none on't ; here has been too much homely 
▁ foolery already . i know , sir , we weary you . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj you weary those that refresh us . xxmaj pray , let 's see these 
▁ four threes of herdsmen . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj one three of them , by their own report , sir , hath danc'd 
▁ before the xxmaj king ; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve 
▁ foot and a half by th ' squier . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj leave your prating ; since these good men are pleas'd , let 
▁ them come in ; but quickly now . 
▁ xxup servant . xxmaj why , they stay at door , sir . xxmaj exit 

▁ xxmaj here a dance of twelve xxup satyrs 

▁ xxup polixenes . [ to xxup shepherd ] xxup o , father , you 'll know more of that 
▁ hereafter . 
▁ [ to xxup camillo ] xxmaj is it not too far gone ? ' tis time to part them . 
▁ xxmaj he 's simple and tells much . [ to xxup florizel ] xxmaj how now , fair 
▁ shepherd ! 
▁ xxmaj your heart is full of something that does take 
▁ xxmaj your mind from feasting . xxmaj sooth , when i was young 
▁ xxmaj and handed love as you do , i was wo nt 
▁ xxmaj to load my she with knacks ; i would have ransack'd 
▁ xxmaj the pedlar 's silken treasury and have pour'd it 
▁ xxmaj to her acceptance : you have let him go 
▁ xxmaj and nothing marted with him . xxmaj if your lass 
▁ xxmaj interpretation should abuse and call this 
▁ xxmaj your lack of love or bounty , you were straited 
▁ xxmaj for a reply , at least if you make a care 
▁ xxmaj of happy holding her . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj old sir , i know 
▁ xxmaj she prizes not such trifles as these are . 
▁ xxmaj the gifts she looks from me are pack'd and lock'd 
▁ xxmaj up in my heart , which i have given already , 
▁ xxmaj but not deliver'd . xxup o , hear me breathe my life 
▁ xxmaj before this ancient sir , whom , it should seem , 
▁ xxmaj hath sometime lov'd . i take thy hand- this hand , 
▁ xxmaj as soft as dove 's down and as white as it , 
▁ xxmaj or xxmaj ethiopian 's tooth , or the fann'd snow that 's bolted 
▁ xxmaj by th ' northern blasts twice o'er . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj what follows this ? 
▁ xxmaj how prettily the young swain seems to wash 
▁ xxmaj the hand was fair before ! i have put you out . 
▁ xxmaj but to your protestation ; let me hear 
▁ xxmaj what you profess . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj do , and be witness to't . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj and this my neighbour too ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj and he , and more 
▁ xxmaj than he , and men- the earth , the heavens , and all : 
▁ xxmaj that , were i crown'd the most imperial monarch , 
▁ xxmaj thereof most worthy , were i the fairest youth 
▁ xxmaj that ever made eye swerve , had force and knowledge 
▁ xxmaj more than was ever man 's , i would not prize them 
▁ xxmaj without her love ; for her employ them all ; 
▁ xxmaj commend them and condemn them to her service 
▁ xxmaj or to their own perdition . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj fairly offer'd . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj this shows a sound affection . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj but , my daughter , 
▁ xxmaj say you the like to him ? 
▁ xxup perdita . i can not speak 
▁ xxmaj so well , nothing so well ; no , nor mean better . 
▁ xxmaj by th ' pattern of mine own thoughts i cut out 
▁ xxmaj the purity of his . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj take hands , a bargain ! 
▁ xxmaj and , friends unknown , you shall bear witness to't : 
▁ i give my daughter to him , and will make 
▁ xxmaj her portion equal his . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxup o , that must be 
▁ xxup i ' th ' virtue of your daughter . xxmaj one being dead , 
▁ i shall have more than you can dream of yet ; 
▁ xxmaj enough then for your wonder . xxmaj but come on , 
▁ xxmaj contract us fore these witnesses . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj come , your hand ; 
▁ xxmaj and , daughter , yours . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj soft , swain , awhile , beseech you ; 
▁ xxmaj have you a father ? 
▁ xxup florizel . i have , but what of him ? 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj knows he of this ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj he neither does nor shall . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj methinks a father 
▁ xxmaj is at the nuptial of his son a guest 
▁ xxmaj that best becomes the table . xxmaj pray you , once more , 
▁ xxmaj is not your father grown incapable 
▁ xxmaj of reasonable affairs ? xxmaj is he not stupid 
▁ xxmaj with age and alt'ring rheums ? xxmaj can he speak , hear , 
▁ xxmaj know man from man , dispute his own estate ? 
▁ xxmaj lies he not bed - rid , and again does nothing 
▁ xxmaj but what he did being childish ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj no , good sir ; 
▁ xxmaj he has his health , and ampler strength indeed 
▁ xxmaj than most have of his age . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj by my white beard , 
▁ xxmaj you offer him , if this be so , a wrong 
▁ xxmaj something unfilial . xxmaj reason my son 
▁ xxmaj should choose himself a wife ; but as good reason 
▁ xxmaj the father- all whose joy is nothing else 
▁ xxmaj but fair posterity- should hold some counsel 
▁ xxmaj in such a business . 
▁ xxup florizel . i yield all this ; 
▁ xxmaj but , for some other reasons , my grave sir , 
▁ xxmaj which ' tis not fit you know , i not acquaint 
▁ xxmaj my father of this business . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj let him know't . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj he shall not . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj prithee let him . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj no , he must not . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj let him , my son ; he shall not need to grieve 
▁ xxmaj at knowing of thy choice . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj come , come , he must not . 
▁ xxmaj mark our contract . 
▁ xxup polixenes . [ discovering himself ] xxmaj mark your divorce , young sir , 
▁ xxmaj whom son i dare not call ; thou art too base 
▁ xxmaj to be acknowledg'd- thou a sceptre 's heir , 
▁ xxmaj that thus affects a sheep - hook ! xxmaj thou , old traitor , 
▁ i am sorry that by hanging thee i can but 
▁ xxmaj shorten thy life one week . xxmaj and thou , fresh piece 
▁ xxmaj of excellent witchcraft , who of force must know 
▁ xxmaj the royal fool thou cop'st with- 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxup o , my heart ! 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj i 'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers and made 
▁ xxmaj more homely than thy state . xxmaj for thee , fond boy , 
▁ xxmaj if i may ever know thou dost but sigh 
▁ xxmaj that thou no more shalt see this knack- as never 
▁ i mean thou shalt- we 'll bar thee from succession ; 
▁ xxmaj not hold thee of our blood , no , not our kin , 
▁ xxmaj farre than xxmaj deucalion off . xxmaj mark thou my words . 
▁ xxmaj follow us to the court . xxmaj thou churl , for this time , 
▁ xxmaj though full of our displeasure , yet we free thee 
▁ xxmaj from the dead blow of it . xxmaj and you , enchantment , 
▁ xxmaj worthy enough a herdsman- yea , him too 
▁ xxmaj that makes himself , but for our honour therein , 
▁ xxmaj unworthy thee- if ever henceforth thou 
▁ xxmaj these rural latches to his entrance open , 
▁ xxmaj or hoop his body more with thy embraces , 
▁ i will devise a death as cruel for thee 
▁ xxmaj as thou art tender to't . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj even here undone ! 
▁ i was not much afeard ; for once or twice 
▁ i was about to speak and tell him plainly 
▁ xxmaj the self - same sun that shines upon his court 
▁ xxmaj hides not his visage from our cottage , but 
▁ xxmaj looks on alike . [ to xxup florizel ] xxmaj will't please you , sir , be gone ? 
▁ i told you what would come of this . xxmaj beseech you , 
▁ xxmaj of your own state take care . xxmaj this dream of mine- 
▁ xxmaj being now awake , xxmaj i 'll queen it no inch farther , 
▁ xxmaj but milk my ewes and weep . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj why , how now , father ! 
▁ xxmaj speak ere thou diest . 
▁ xxup shepherd . i can not speak nor think , 
▁ xxmaj nor dare to know that which i know . [ to xxup florizel ] o sir , 
▁ xxmaj you have undone a man of fourscore - three 
▁ xxmaj that thought to fill his grave in quiet , yea , 
▁ xxmaj to die upon the bed my father died , 
▁ xxmaj to lie close by his honest bones ; but now 
▁ xxmaj some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me 
▁ xxmaj where no priest shovels in dust . [ to xxup perdita ] o cursed wretch , 
▁ xxmaj that knew'st this was the xxmaj prince , and wouldst adventure 
▁ xxmaj to mingle faith with him!- xxmaj undone , undone ! 
▁ xxmaj if i might die within this hour , i have liv'd 
▁ xxmaj to die when i desire . xxmaj exit 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj why look you so upon me ? 
▁ i am but sorry , not afeard ; delay'd , 
▁ xxmaj but nothing alt'red . xxmaj what i was , i am : 
▁ xxmaj more straining on for plucking back ; not following 
▁ xxmaj my leash unwillingly . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj gracious , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj you know your father 's temper . xxmaj at this time 
▁ xxmaj he will allow no speech- which i do guess 
▁ xxmaj you do not purpose to him- and as hardly 
▁ xxmaj will he endure your sight as yet , i fear ; 
▁ xxmaj then , till the fury of his xxmaj highness settle , 
▁ xxmaj come not before him . 
▁ xxup florizel . i not purpose it . 
▁ i think xxmaj camillo ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj even he , my lord . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj how often have i told you ' twould be thus ! 
▁ xxmaj how often said my dignity would last 
▁ xxmaj but till ' twere known ! 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj it can not fail but by 
▁ xxmaj the violation of my faith ; and then 
▁ xxmaj let nature crush the sides o ' th ' earth together 
▁ xxmaj and mar the seeds within ! xxmaj lift up thy looks . 
▁ xxmaj from my succession wipe me , father ; i 
▁ xxmaj am heir to my affection . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj be advis'd . 
▁ xxup florizel . i am- and by my fancy ; if my reason 
▁ xxmaj will thereto be obedient , i have reason ; 
▁ xxmaj if not , my senses , better pleas'd with madness , 
▁ xxmaj do bid it welcome . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj this is desperate , sir . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj so call it ; but it does fulfil my vow : 
▁ i needs must think it honesty . xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj not for xxmaj bohemia , nor the pomp that may 
▁ xxmaj be thereat glean'd , for all the sun sees or 
▁ xxmaj the close earth wombs , or the profound seas hides 
▁ xxmaj in unknown fathoms , will i break my oath 
▁ xxmaj to this my fair belov'd . xxmaj therefore , i pray you , 
▁ xxmaj as you have ever been my father 's honour'd friend , 
▁ xxmaj when he shall miss me- as , in faith , i mean not 
▁ xxmaj to see him any more- cast your good counsels 
▁ xxmaj upon his passion . xxmaj let myself and xxmaj fortune 
▁ xxmaj tug for the time to come . xxmaj this you may know , 
▁ xxmaj and so deliver : i am put to sea 
▁ xxmaj with her who here i can not hold on shore .