xxbos xxmaj and most opportune to her need i have 
▁ a vessel rides fast by , but not prepar'd 
▁ xxmaj for this design . xxmaj what course i mean to hold 
▁ xxmaj shall nothing benefit your knowledge , nor 
▁ xxmaj concern me the reporting . 
▁ xxup camillo . o my lord , 
▁ i would your spirit were easier for advice . 
▁ xxmaj or stronger for your need . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj hark , xxmaj perdita . [ takes her aside ] 
▁ [ to xxup camillo ] xxmaj i 'll hear you by and by . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj he 's irremovable , 
▁ xxmaj resolv'd for flight . xxmaj now were i happy if 
▁ xxmaj his going i could frame to serve my turn , 
▁ xxmaj save him from danger , do him love and honour , 
▁ xxmaj purchase the sight again of dear xxmaj sicilia 
▁ xxmaj and that unhappy king , my master , whom 
▁ i so much thirst to see . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj now , good xxmaj camillo , 
▁ i am so fraught with curious business that 
▁ i leave out ceremony . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj sir , i think 
▁ xxmaj you have heard of my poor services i ' th ' love 
▁ xxmaj that i have borne your father ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj very nobly 
▁ xxmaj have you deserv'd . xxmaj it is my father 's music 
▁ xxmaj to speak your deeds ; not little of his care 
▁ xxmaj to have them recompens'd as thought on . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj well , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj if you may please to think i love the xxmaj king , 
▁ xxmaj and through him what 's nearest to him , which is 
▁ xxmaj your gracious self , embrace but my direction . 
▁ xxmaj if your more ponderous and settled project 
▁ xxmaj may suffer alteration , on mine honour , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll point you where you shall have such receiving 
▁ xxmaj as shall become your xxmaj highness ; where you may 
▁ xxmaj enjoy your mistress , from the whom , i see , 
▁ xxmaj there 's no disjunction to be made but by , 
▁ xxmaj as heavens forfend ! your ruin- marry her ; 
▁ xxmaj and with my best endeavours in your absence 
▁ xxmaj your discontenting father strive to qualify , 
▁ xxmaj and bring him up to liking . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj how , xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj may this , almost a miracle , be done ? 
▁ xxmaj that i may call thee something more than man , 
▁ xxmaj and after that trust to thee . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj have you thought on 
▁ a place whereto you 'll go ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj not any yet ; 
▁ xxmaj but as th ' unthought - on accident is guilty 
▁ xxmaj to what we wildly do , so we profess 
▁ xxmaj ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies 
▁ xxmaj of every wind that blows . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj then list to me . 
▁ xxmaj this follows , if you will not change your purpose 
▁ xxmaj but undergo this flight : make for xxmaj sicilia , 
▁ xxmaj and there present yourself and your fair princess- 
▁ xxmaj for so , i see , she must be- fore xxmaj leontes . 
▁ xxmaj she shall be habited as it becomes 
▁ xxmaj the partner of your bed . xxmaj methinks i see 
▁ xxmaj leontes opening his free arms and weeping 
▁ xxmaj his welcomes forth ; asks thee there ' son , forgiveness ! ' 
▁ xxmaj as ' twere i ' th ' father 's person ; kisses the hands 
▁ xxmaj of your fresh princess ; o'er and o'er divides him 
▁ ' twixt his unkindness and his kindness- th ' one 
▁ xxmaj he chides to hell , and bids the other grow 
▁ xxmaj faster than thought or time . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj worthy xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj what colour for my visitation shall i 
▁ xxmaj hold up before him ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj sent by the xxmaj king your father 
▁ xxmaj to greet him and to give him comforts . xxmaj sir , 
▁ xxmaj the manner of your bearing towards him , with 
▁ xxmaj what you as from your father shall deliver , 
▁ xxmaj things known betwixt us three , xxmaj i 'll write you down ; 
▁ xxmaj the which shall point you forth at every sitting 
▁ xxmaj what you must say , that he shall not perceive 
▁ xxmaj but that you have your father 's bosom there 
▁ xxmaj and speak his very heart . 
▁ xxup florizel . i am bound to you . 
▁ xxmaj there is some sap in this . 
▁ xxup camillo . a course more promising 
▁ xxmaj than a wild dedication of yourselves 
▁ xxmaj to unpath'd waters , undream'd shores , most certain 
▁ xxmaj to miseries enough ; no hope to help you , 
▁ xxmaj but as you shake off one to take another ; 
▁ xxmaj nothing so certain as your anchors , who 
▁ xxmaj do their best office if they can but stay you 
▁ xxmaj where you 'll be loath to be . xxmaj besides , you know 
▁ xxmaj prosperity 's the very bond of love , 
▁ xxmaj whose fresh complexion and whose heart together 
▁ xxmaj affliction alters . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj one of these is true : 
▁ i think affliction may subdue the cheek , 
▁ xxmaj but not take in the mind . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj yea , say you so ? 
▁ xxmaj there shall not at your father 's house these seven years 
▁ xxmaj be born another such . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj my good xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj she is as forward of her breeding as 
▁ xxmaj she is i ' th ' rear o ' our birth . 
▁ xxup camillo . i can not say ' tis pity 
▁ xxmaj she lacks instructions , for she seems a mistress 
▁ xxmaj to most that teach . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj your pardon , sir ; for this 
▁ xxmaj i 'll blush you thanks . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj my prettiest xxmaj perdita ! 
▁ xxmaj but , xxup o , the thorns we stand upon ! xxmaj camillo- 
▁ xxmaj preserver of my father , now of me ; 
▁ xxmaj the medicine of our house- how shall we do ? 
▁ xxmaj we are not furnish'd like xxmaj bohemia 's son ; 
▁ xxmaj nor shall appear in xxmaj sicilia . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj fear none of this . i think you know my fortunes 
▁ xxmaj do all lie there . xxmaj it shall be so my care 
▁ xxmaj to have you royally appointed as if 
▁ xxmaj the scene you play were mine . xxmaj for instance , sir , 
▁ xxmaj that you may know you shall not want- one word . 
▁ [ they talk aside ] 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup autolycus 

▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj ha , ha ! what a fool xxmaj honesty is ! and xxmaj trust , his sworn 
▁ brother , a very simple gentleman ! i have sold all my trumpery ; 
▁ not a counterfeit stone , not a ribbon , glass , pomander , brooch , 
▁ table - book , ballad , knife , tape , glove , shoe - tie , bracelet , 
▁ horn - ring , to keep my pack from fasting . xxmaj they throng who should 
▁ buy first , as if my trinkets had been hallowed and brought a 
▁ benediction to the buyer ; by which means i saw whose purse was 
▁ best in picture ; and what i saw , to my good use i rememb'red . xxmaj my 
▁ clown , who wants but something to be a reasonable man , grew so in 
▁ love with the wenches ' song that he would not stir his pettitoes 
▁ till he had both tune and words , which so drew the rest of the 
▁ herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears . xxmaj you might 
▁ have pinch'd a placket , it was senseless ; ' twas nothing to geld a 
▁ codpiece of a purse ; i would have fil'd keys off that hung in 
▁ chains . xxmaj no hearing , no feeling , but my sir 's song , and admiring 
▁ the nothing of it . xxmaj so that in this time of lethargy i pick'd and 
▁ cut most of their festival purses ; and had not the old man come 
▁ in with whoobub against his daughter and the xxmaj king 's son and 
▁ scar'd my choughs from the chaff , i had not left a purse alive in 
▁ the whole army . 

▁ xxup camillo , xxup florizel , and xxup perdita come forward 

▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj nay , but my letters , by this means being there 
▁ xxmaj so soon as you arrive , shall clear that doubt . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj and those that you 'll procure from xxmaj king xxmaj leontes ? 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj shall satisfy your father . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj happy be you ! 
▁ xxmaj all that you speak shows fair . 
▁ xxup camillo . [ seeing xxup autolycus ] xxmaj who have we here ? 
▁ xxmaj we 'll make an instrument of this ; omit 
▁ xxmaj nothing may give us aid . 
▁ xxup autolycus . [ aside ] xxmaj if they have overheard me now- why , hanging . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj how now , good fellow ! xxmaj why shak'st thou so ? 
▁ xxmaj fear not , man ; here 's no harm intended to thee . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i am a poor fellow , sir . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj why , be so still ; here 's nobody will steal that from thee . 
▁ xxmaj yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange ; 
▁ therefore discase thee instantly- thou must think there 's a 
▁ necessity in't- and change garments with this gentleman . xxmaj though 
▁ the pennyworth on his side be the worst , yet hold thee , there 's 
▁ some boot . [ giving money ] 
▁ xxup autolycus . i am a poor fellow , sir . [ aside ] i know ye well 
▁ enough . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj nay , prithee dispatch . xxmaj the gentleman is half flay'd 
▁ already . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj are you in camest , sir ? [ aside ] i smell the trick 
▁ on't . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj dispatch , i prithee . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj indeed , i have had earnest ; but i can not with conscience 
▁ take it . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj unbuckle , unbuckle . 

▁ xxup florizel and xxup autolycus exchange garments 

▁ xxmaj fortunate mistress- let my prophecy 
▁ xxmaj come home to ye!- you must retire yourself 
▁ xxmaj into some covert ; take your sweetheart 's hat 
▁ xxmaj and pluck it o'er your brows , muffle your face , 
▁ xxmaj dismantle you , and , as you can , disliken 
▁ xxmaj the truth of your own seeming , that you may- 
▁ xxmaj for i do fear eyes over- to shipboard 
▁ xxmaj get undescried . 
▁ xxup perdita . i see the play so lies 
▁ xxmaj that i must bear a part . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj no remedy . 
▁ xxmaj have you done there ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj should i now meet my father , 
▁ xxmaj he would not call me son . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj nay , you shall have no hat . 
▁ [ giving it to xxup perdita ] 
▁ xxmaj come , lady , come . xxmaj farewell , my friend . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj adieu , sir . 
▁ xxup florizel . o xxmaj perdita , what have we twain forgot ! 
▁ xxmaj pray you a word . [ they converse apart ] 
▁ xxup camillo . [ aside ] xxmaj what i do next shall be to tell the xxmaj king 
▁ xxmaj of this escape , and whither they are bound ; 
▁ xxmaj wherein my hope is i shall so prevail 
▁ xxmaj to force him after ; in whose company 
▁ i shall re - view xxmaj sicilia , for whose sight 
▁ i have a woman 's longing . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj fortune speed us ! 
▁ xxmaj thus we set on , xxmaj camillo , to th ' sea - side . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj the swifter speed the better . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup florizel , xxup perdita , and xxup camillo 
▁ xxup autolycus . i understand the business , i hear it . xxmaj to have an open 
▁ ear , a quick eye , and a nimble hand , is necessary for a 
▁ cut - purse ; a good nose is requisite also , to smell out work for 
▁ th ' other senses . i see this is the time that the unjust man doth 
▁ thrive . xxmaj what an exchange had this been without boot ! xxmaj what a boot 
▁ is here with this exchange ! xxmaj sure , the gods do this year connive 
▁ at us , and we may do anything extempore . xxmaj the xxmaj prince himself is 
▁ about a piece of iniquity- stealing away from his father with his 
▁ clog at his heels . xxmaj if i thought it were a piece of honesty to 
▁ acquaint the xxmaj king withal , i would not do't . i hold it the more 
▁ knavery to conceal it ; and therein am i constant to my 
▁ profession . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup clown and xxup shepherd 

▁ xxmaj aside , aside- here is more matter for a hot brain . xxmaj every lane 's 
▁ end , every shop , church , session , hanging , yields a careful man 
▁ work . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj see , see ; what a man you are now ! xxmaj there is no other way but 
▁ to tell the xxmaj king she 's a changeling and none of your flesh and 
▁ blood . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj nay , but hear me . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj nay- but hear me . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj go to , then . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj she being none of your flesh and blood , your flesh and blood 
▁ has not offended the xxmaj king ; and so your flesh and blood is not to 
▁ be punish'd by him . xxmaj show those things you found about her , those 
▁ secret things- all but what she has with her . xxmaj this being done , 
▁ let the law go whistle ; i warrant you . 
▁ xxup shepherd . i will tell the xxmaj king all , every word- yea , and his son 's 
▁ pranks too ; who , i may say , is no honest man , neither to his 
▁ father nor to me , to go about to make me the xxmaj king 's 
▁ brother - in - law . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj indeed , brother - in - law was the farthest off you could have 
▁ been to him ; and then your blood had been the dearer by i know 
▁ how much an ounce . 
▁ xxup autolycus . [ aside ] xxmaj very wisely , puppies ! 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj well , let us to the xxmaj king . xxmaj there is that in this fardel 
▁ will make him scratch his beard . 
▁ xxup autolycus . [ aside ] i know not what impediment this complaint may 
▁ be to the flight of my master . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj pray heartily he be at palace . 
▁ xxup autolycus . [ aside ] xxmaj though i am not naturally honest , i am so 
▁ sometimes by chance . xxmaj let me pocket up my pedlar 's excrement . 
▁ [ takes off his false beard ] xxmaj how now , rustics ! xxmaj whither are you 
▁ bound ? 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj to th ' palace , an it like your worship . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj your affairs there , what , with whom , the condition of 
▁ that fardel , the place of your dwelling , your names , your ages , 
▁ of what having , breeding , and anything that is fitting to be 
▁ known- discover . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj we are but plain fellows , sir . 
▁ xxup autolycus . a lie : you are rough and hairy . xxmaj let me have no lying ; it 
▁ becomes none but tradesmen , and they often give us soldiers the 
▁ lie ; but we pay them for it with stamped coin , not stabbing 
▁ steel ; therefore they do not give us the lie . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj your worship had like to have given us one , if you had not 
▁ taken yourself with the manner . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj are you a courtier , an't like you , sir ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj whether it like me or no , i am a courtier . xxmaj seest thou 
▁ not the air of the court in these enfoldings ? xxmaj hath not my gait in 
▁ it the measure of the court ? xxmaj receives not thy nose court - odour 
▁ from me ? xxmaj reflect i not on thy baseness court - contempt ? xxmaj think'st 
▁ thou , for that i insinuate , that toaze from thee thy business , i 
▁ am therefore no courtier ? i am courtier cap - a - pe , and one that 
▁ will either push on or pluck back thy business there ; whereupon i 
▁ command the to open thy affair . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj my business , sir , is to the xxmaj king . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj what advocate hast thou to him ? 
▁ xxup shepherd . i know not , an't like you . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj advocate 's the court - word for a pheasant ; say you have none . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj none , sir ; i have no pheasant , cock nor hen . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj how blessed are we that are not simple men ! 
▁ xxmaj yet nature might have made me as these are , 
▁ xxmaj therefore i will not disdain . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj this can not be but a great courtier . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj his garments are rich , but he wears them not handsomely . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj he seems to be the more noble in being fantastical . 
▁ a great man , xxmaj i 'll warrant ; i know by the picking on 's teeth . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj the fardel there ? xxmaj what 's i ' th ' fardel ? xxmaj wherefore that 
▁ box ? 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj sir , there lies such secrets in this fardel and box which 
▁ none must know but the xxmaj king ; and which he shall know within this 
▁ hour , if i may come to th ' speech of him . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj age , thou hast lost thy labour . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj why , xxmaj sir ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj the xxmaj king is not at the palace ; he is gone aboard a new 
▁ ship to purge melancholy and air himself ; for , if thou be'st 
▁ capable of things serious , thou must know the xxmaj king is full of 
▁ grief . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj so ' tis said , sir- about his son , that should have 
▁ married a shepherd 's daughter . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj if that shepherd be not in hand - fast , let him fly ; the 
▁ curses he shall have , the tortures he shall feel , will break the 
▁ back of man , the heart of monster . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj think you so , sir ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy and 
▁ vengeance bitter ; but those that are germane to him , though 
▁ remov'd fifty times , shall all come under the hangman- which , 
▁ though it be great pity , yet it is necessary . xxmaj an old 
▁ sheep - whistling rogue , a ram - tender , to offer to have his 
▁ daughter come into grace ! xxmaj some say he shall be ston'd ; but that 
▁ death is too soft for him , say xxup i. xxmaj draw our throne into a 
▁ sheep - cote!- all deaths are too few , the sharpest too easy . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj has the old man e'er a son , sir , do you hear , an't like you , 
▁ sir ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj he has a son- who shall be flay'd alive ; then ' nointed 
▁ over with honey , set on the head of a wasp 's nest ; then stand 
▁ till he be three quarters and a dram dead ; then recover'd again 
▁ with aqua - vitae or some other hot infusion ; then , raw as he is , 
▁ and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims , shall he be set 
▁ against a brick wall , the sun looking with a southward eye upon 
▁ him , where he is to behold him with flies blown to death . xxmaj but 
▁ what talk we of these traitorly rascals , whose miseries are to be 
▁ smil'd at , their offences being so capital ? xxmaj tell me , for you seem 
▁ to be honest plain men , what you have to the xxmaj king . xxmaj being 
▁ something gently consider'd , xxmaj i 'll bring you where he is aboard , 
▁ tender your persons to his presence , whisper him in your behalfs ; 
▁ and if it be in man besides the xxmaj king to effect your suits , here 
▁ is man shall do it . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj he seems to be of great authority . xxmaj close with him , give him 
▁ gold ; and though authority be a stubborn bear , yet he is oft led 
▁ by the nose with gold . xxmaj show the inside of your purse to the 
▁ outside of his hand , and no more ado . xxmaj remember- ston'd and flay'd 
▁ alive . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj an't please you , sir , to undertake the business for us , 
▁ here is that gold i have . xxmaj i 'll make it as much more , and leave 
▁ this young man in pawn till i bring it you . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj after i have done what i promised ? 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj ay , sir . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj well , give me the moiety . xxmaj are you a party in this 
▁ business ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj in some sort , sir ; but though my case be a pitiful one , i 
▁ hope i shall not be flay'd out of it . 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxup o , that 's the case of the shepherd 's son ! xxmaj hang him , 
▁ he 'll be made an example . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj comfort , good comfort ! xxmaj we must to the xxmaj king and show our 
▁ strange sights . xxmaj he must know ' tis none of your daughter nor my 
▁ sister ; we are gone else . xxmaj sir , i will give you as much as this 
▁ old man does , when the business is performed ; and remain , as he 
▁ says , your pawn till it be brought you . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i will trust you . xxmaj walk before toward the sea - side ; go on 
▁ the right - hand ; i will but look upon the hedge , and follow you . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj we are blest in this man , as i may say , even blest . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj let 's before , as he bids us . xxmaj he was provided to do us 
▁ good . xxmaj exeunt xxup shepherd and xxup clown 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj if i had a mind to be honest , i see xxmaj fortune would not 
▁ suffer me : she drops booties in my mouth . i am courted now with a 
▁ double occasion- gold , and a means to do the xxmaj prince my master 
▁ good ; which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement ? i 
▁ will bring these two moles , these blind ones , aboard him . xxmaj if he 
▁ think it fit to shore them again , and that the complaint they 
▁ have to the xxmaj king concerns him nothing , let him call me rogue for 
▁ being so far officious ; for i am proof against that title , and 
▁ what shame else belongs to't . xxmaj to him will i present them . xxmaj there 
▁ may be matter in it . xxmaj exit 




 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxup act xxup v. xxup scene xxup i. 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj the palace of xxup leontes 

 xxmaj enter xxup leontes , xxup cleomenes , xxup dion , xxup paulina , and xxup others 

▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj sir , you have done enough , and have perform'd 
▁ a saint - like sorrow . xxmaj no fault could you make 
▁ xxmaj which you have not redeem'd ; indeed , paid down 
▁ xxmaj more penitence than done trespass . xxmaj at the last , 
▁ xxmaj do as the heavens have done : forget your evil ; 
▁ xxmaj with them forgive yourself . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj whilst i remember 
▁ xxmaj her and her virtues , i can not forget 
▁ xxmaj my blemishes in them , and so still think of 
▁ xxmaj the wrong i did myself ; which was so much 
▁ xxmaj that heirless it hath made my kingdom , and 
▁ xxmaj destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man 
▁ xxmaj bred his hopes out of . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj true , too true , my lord . 
▁ xxmaj if , one by one , you wedded all the world , 
▁ xxmaj or from the all that are took something good 
▁ xxmaj to make a perfect woman , she you kill'd 
▁ xxmaj would be unparallel'd . 
▁ xxup leontes . i think so . xxmaj kill'd ! 
▁ xxmaj she i kill'd ! i did so ; but thou strik'st me 
▁ xxmaj sorely , to say i did . xxmaj it is as bitter 
▁ xxmaj upon thy tongue as in my thought . xxmaj now , good now , 
▁ xxmaj say so but seldom . 
▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj not at all , good lady . 
▁ xxmaj you might have spoken a thousand things that would 
▁ xxmaj have done the time more benefit , and grac'd 
▁ xxmaj your kindness better . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj you are one of those 
▁ xxmaj would have him we d again . 
▁ xxup dion . xxmaj if you would not so , 
▁ xxmaj you pity not the state , nor the remembrance 
▁ xxmaj of his most sovereign name ; consider little 
▁ xxmaj what dangers , by his xxmaj highness ' fail of issue , 
▁ xxmaj may drop upon his kingdom and devour 
▁ xxmaj incertain lookers - on . xxmaj what were more holy 
▁ xxmaj than to rejoice the former queen is well ? 
▁ xxmaj what holier than , for royalty 's repair , 
▁ xxmaj for present comfort , and for future good , 
▁ xxmaj to bless the bed of majesty again 
▁ xxmaj with a sweet fellow to't ? 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj there is none worthy , 
▁ xxmaj respecting her that 's gone . xxmaj besides , the gods 
▁ xxmaj will have fulfill'd their secret purposes ; 
▁ xxmaj for has not the divine xxmaj apollo said , 
▁ xxmaj is't not the tenour of his oracle , 
▁ xxmaj that xxmaj king xxmaj leontes shall not have an heir 
▁ xxmaj till his lost child be found ? xxmaj which that it shall , 
▁ xxmaj is all as monstrous to our human reason 
▁ xxmaj as my xxmaj antigonus to break his grave 
▁ xxmaj and come again to me ; who , on my life , 
▁ xxmaj did perish with the infant . ' tis your counsel 
▁ xxmaj my lord should to the heavens be contrary , 
▁ xxmaj oppose against their wills . [ to xxup leontes ] xxmaj care not for issue ; 
▁ xxmaj the crown will find an heir . xxmaj great xxmaj alexander 
▁ xxmaj left his to th ' worthiest ; so his successor 
▁ xxmaj was like to be the best . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj good xxmaj paulina , 
▁ xxmaj who hast the memory of xxmaj hermione , 
▁ i know , in honour , o that ever i 
▁ xxmaj had squar'd me to thy counsel ! xxmaj then , even now , 
▁ i might have look'd upon my queen 's full eyes , 
▁ xxmaj have taken treasure from her lips- 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj and left them 
▁ xxmaj more rich for what they yielded . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj thou speak'st truth . 
▁ xxmaj no more such wives ; therefore , no wife . xxmaj one worse , 
▁ xxmaj and better us'd , would make her sainted spirit 
▁ xxmaj again possess her corpse , and on this stage , 
▁ xxmaj where we offend her now , appear soul - vex'd , 
▁ xxmaj and begin ' why to me'- 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj had she such power , 
▁ xxmaj she had just cause . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj she had ; and would incense me 
▁ xxmaj to murder her i married . 
▁ xxup paulina . i should so . 
▁ xxmaj were i the ghost that walk'd , xxmaj i 'd bid you mark 
▁ xxmaj her eye , and tell me for what dull part in't 
▁ xxmaj you chose her ; then xxmaj i 'd shriek , that even your ears 
▁ xxmaj should rift to hear me ; and the words that follow'd 
▁ xxmaj should be ' remember mine . ' 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj stars , stars , 
▁ xxmaj and all eyes else dead coals ! xxmaj fear thou no wife ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll have no wife , xxmaj paulina . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj will you swear 
▁ xxmaj never to marry but by my free leave ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj never , xxmaj paulina ; so be blest my spirit ! 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj then , good my lords , bear witness to his oath . 
▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj you tempt him over - much . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj unless another , 
▁ xxmaj as like xxmaj hermione as is her picture , 
▁ xxmaj affront his eye . 
▁ xxup cleomenes . xxmaj good madam- 
▁ xxup paulina . i have done . 
▁ xxmaj yet , if my lord will marry- if you will , sir , 
▁ xxmaj no remedy but you will- give me the office 
▁ xxmaj to choose you a queen . xxmaj she shall not be so young 
▁ xxmaj as was your former ; but she shall be such 
▁ xxmaj as , walk'd your first queen 's ghost , it should take joy 
▁ xxmaj to see her in your arms . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj my true xxmaj paulina , 
▁ xxmaj we shall not marry till thou bid'st us . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj that 
▁ xxmaj shall be when your first queen 's again in breath ; 
▁ xxmaj never till then . 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup gentleman 

▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj one that gives out himself xxmaj prince xxmaj florizel , 
▁ xxmaj son of xxmaj polixenes , with his princess- she 
▁ xxmaj the fairest i have yet beheld- desires access 
▁ xxmaj to your high presence . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj what with him ? xxmaj he comes not 
▁ xxmaj like to his father 's greatness . xxmaj his approach , 
▁ xxmaj so out of circumstance and sudden , tells us 
▁ ' tis not a visitation fram'd , but forc'd 
▁ xxmaj by need and accident . xxmaj what train ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj but few , 
▁ xxmaj and those but mean . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj his princess , say you , with him ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj ay ; the most peerless piece of earth , i think , 
▁ xxmaj that e'er the sun shone bright on . 
▁ xxup paulina . o xxmaj hermione , 
▁ xxmaj as every present time doth boast itself 
▁ xxmaj above a better gone , so must thy grave 
▁ xxmaj give way to what 's seen now ! xxmaj sir , you yourself 
▁ xxmaj have said and writ so , but your writing now 
▁ xxmaj is colder than that theme : ' she had not been , 
▁ xxmaj nor was not to be equall'd . ' xxmaj thus your verse 
▁ xxmaj flow'd with her beauty once ; ' tis shrewdly ebb'd , 
▁ xxmaj to say you have seen a better . 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj pardon , madam . 
▁ xxmaj the one i have almost forgot- your pardon ; 
▁ xxmaj the other , when she has obtain'd your eye , 
▁ xxmaj will have your tongue too . xxmaj this is a creature , 
▁ xxmaj would she begin a sect , might quench the zeal 
▁ xxmaj of all professors else , make proselytes 
▁ xxmaj of who she but bid follow . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj how ! not women ? 
▁ xxup gentleman . xxmaj women will love her that she is a woman 
▁ xxmaj more worth than any man ; men , that she is 
▁ xxmaj the rarest of all women . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj go , xxmaj cleomenes ; 
▁ xxmaj yourself , assisted with your honour'd friends , 
▁ xxmaj bring them to our embracement . xxmaj exeunt 
▁ xxmaj still , ' tis strange 
▁ xxmaj he thus should steal upon us . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj had our prince , 
▁ xxmaj jewel of children , seen this hour , he had pair'd 
▁ xxmaj well with this lord ; there was not full a month 
▁ xxmaj between their births . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj prithee no more ; cease . xxmaj thou know'st 
▁ xxmaj he dies to me again when talk'd of . xxmaj sure , 
▁ xxmaj when i shall see this gentleman , thy speeches 
▁ xxmaj will bring me to consider that which may 
▁ xxmaj unfurnish me of reason . 

▁ xxmaj re - enter xxup cleomenes , with xxup florizel , xxup perdita , and 
▁ xxup attendants 

▁ xxmaj they are come . 
▁ xxmaj your mother was most true to wedlock , xxmaj prince ; 
▁ xxmaj for she did print your royal father off , 
▁ xxmaj conceiving you . xxmaj were i but twenty - one , 
▁ xxmaj your father 's image is so hit in you 
▁ xxmaj his very air , that i should call you brother , 
▁ xxmaj as i did him , and speak of something wildly 
▁ xxmaj by us perform'd before . xxmaj most dearly welcome ! 
▁ xxmaj and your fair princess- goddess ! xxup o , alas ! 
▁ i lost a couple that ' twixt heaven and earth 
▁ xxmaj might thus have stood begetting wonder as 
▁ xxmaj you , gracious couple , do . xxmaj and then i lost- 
▁ xxmaj all mine own folly- the society , 
▁ xxmaj amity too , of your brave father , whom , 
▁ xxmaj though bearing misery , i desire my life 
▁ xxmaj once more to look on him . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj by his command 
▁ xxmaj have i here touch'd xxmaj sicilia , and from him 
▁ xxmaj give you all greetings that a king , at friend , 
▁ xxmaj can send his brother ; and , but infirmity , 
▁ xxmaj which waits upon worn times , hath something seiz'd 
▁ xxmaj his wish'd ability , he had himself 
▁ xxmaj the lands and waters ' twixt your throne and his 
▁ xxmaj measur'd , to look upon you ; whom he loves , 
▁ xxmaj he bade me say so , more than all the sceptres 
▁ xxmaj and those that bear them living . 
▁ xxup leontes . o my brother- 
▁ xxmaj good gentleman!- the wrongs i have done thee stir 
▁ xxmaj afresh within me ; and these thy offices , 
▁ xxmaj so rarely kind , are as interpreters 
▁ xxmaj of my behind - hand slackness ! xxmaj welcome hither , 
▁ xxmaj as is the spring to th ' earth . xxmaj and hath he too 
▁ xxmaj expos'd this paragon to th ' fearful usage , 
▁ xxmaj at least ungentle , of the dreadful xxmaj neptune , 
▁ xxmaj to greet a man not worth her pains , much less 
▁ xxmaj th ' adventure of her person ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj good , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj she came from xxmaj libya . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj where the warlike xxmaj smalus , 
▁ xxmaj that noble honour'd lord , is fear'd and lov'd ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj most royal sir , from thence ; from him whose daughter 
▁ xxmaj his tears proclaim'd his , parting with her ; thence , 
▁ a prosperous south - wind friendly , we have cross'd , 
▁ xxmaj to execute the charge my father gave me 
▁ xxmaj for visiting your xxmaj highness . xxmaj my best train 
▁ i have from your xxmaj sicilian shores dismiss'd ; 
▁ xxmaj who for xxmaj bohemia bend , to signify 
▁ xxmaj not only my success in xxmaj libya , sir , 
▁ xxmaj but my arrival and my wife 's in safety 
▁ xxmaj here where we are . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj the blessed gods 
▁ xxmaj purge all infection from our air whilst you 
▁ xxmaj do climate here ! xxmaj you have a holy father , 
▁ a graceful gentleman , against whose person , 
▁ xxmaj so sacred as it is , i have done sin , 
▁ xxmaj for which the heavens , taking angry note , 
▁ xxmaj have left me issueless ; and your father 's blest , 
▁ xxmaj as he from heaven merits it , with you , 
▁ xxmaj worthy his goodness . xxmaj what might i have been , 
▁ xxmaj might i a son and daughter now have look'd on , 
▁ xxmaj such goodly things as you ! 

▁ xxmaj enter a xxup lord 

▁ xxup lord . xxmaj most noble sir , 
▁ xxmaj that which i shall report will bear no credit , 
▁ xxmaj were not the proof so nigh . xxmaj please you , great sir , 
▁ xxmaj bohemia greets you from himself by me ; 
▁ xxmaj desires you to attach his son , who has- 
▁ xxmaj his dignity and duty both cast off- 
▁ xxmaj fled from his father , from his hopes , and with 
▁ a shepherd 's daughter . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj where 's xxmaj bohemia ? xxmaj speak . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj here in your city ; i now came from him . 
▁ i speak amazedly ; and it becomes 
▁ xxmaj my marvel and my message . xxmaj to your court 
▁ xxmaj whiles he was hast'ning- in the chase , it seems , 
▁ xxmaj of this fair couple- meets he on the way 
▁ xxmaj the father of this seeming lady and 
▁ xxmaj her brother , having both their country quitted 
▁ xxmaj with this young prince . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj camillo has betray'd me ; 
▁ xxmaj whose honour and whose honesty till now 
▁ xxmaj endur'd all weathers . 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj lay't so to his charge ; 
▁ xxmaj he 's with the xxmaj king your father . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj who ? xxmaj camillo ? 
▁ xxup lord . xxmaj camillo , sir ; i spake with him ; who now 
▁ xxmaj has these poor men in question . xxmaj never saw i 
▁ xxmaj wretches so quake . xxmaj they kneel , they kiss the earth ; 
▁ xxmaj forswear themselves as often as they speak . 
▁ xxmaj bohemia stops his ears , and threatens them 
▁ xxmaj with divers deaths in death . 
▁ xxup perdita . o my poor father ! 
▁ xxmaj the heaven sets spies upon us , will not have 
▁ xxmaj our contract celebrated . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj you are married ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj we are not , sir , nor are we like to be ; 
▁ xxmaj the stars , i see , will kiss the valleys first . 
▁ xxmaj the odds for high and low 's alike . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj my lord , 
▁ xxmaj is this the daughter of a king ? 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj she is , 
▁ xxmaj when once she is my wife . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj that ' once , ' i see by your good father 's speed , 
▁ xxmaj will come on very slowly . i am sorry , 
▁ xxmaj most sorry , you have broken from his liking 
▁ xxmaj where you were tied in duty ; and as sorry 
▁ xxmaj your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty , 
▁ xxmaj that you might well enjoy her . 
▁ xxup florizel . xxmaj dear , look up . 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj fortune , visible an enemy , 
▁ xxmaj should chase us with my father , pow'r no jot 
▁ xxmaj hath she to change our loves . xxmaj beseech you , sir , 
▁ xxmaj remember since you ow'd no more to time 
▁ xxmaj than i do now . xxmaj with thought of such affections , 
▁ xxmaj step forth mine advocate ; at your request 
▁ xxmaj my father will grant precious things as trifles . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj would he do so , xxmaj i 'd beg your precious mistress , 
▁ xxmaj which he counts but a trifle . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj sir , my liege , 
▁ xxmaj your eye hath too much youth in't . xxmaj not a month 
▁ xxmaj fore your queen died , she was more worth such gazes 
▁ xxmaj than what you look on now . 
▁ xxup leontes . i thought of her 
▁ xxmaj even in these looks i made . [ to xxup florizel ] xxmaj but your petition 
▁ xxmaj is yet unanswer'd . i will to your father . 
▁ xxmaj your honour not o'erthrown by your desires , 
▁ i am friend to them and you . xxmaj upon which errand 
▁ i now go toward him ; therefore , follow me , 
▁ xxmaj and mark what way i make . xxmaj come , good my lord . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxup ii . 
 xxmaj sicilia . xxmaj before the palace of xxup leontes 

 xxmaj enter xxup autolycus and a xxup gentleman 

▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj beseech you , sir , were you present at this relation ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . i was by at the opening of the fardel , heard the 
▁ old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it ; whereupon , after 
▁ a little amazedness , we were all commanded out of the chamber ; 
▁ only this , methought i heard the shepherd say he found the child . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i would most gladly know the issue of it . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . i make a broken delivery of the business ; but the 
▁ changes i perceived in the xxmaj king and xxmaj camillo were very notes of 
▁ admiration . xxmaj they seem'd almost , with staring on one another , to 
▁ tear the cases of their eyes ; there was speech in their dumbness , 
▁ language in their very gesture ; they look'd as they had heard of 
▁ a world ransom'd , or one destroyed . a notable passion of wonder 
▁ appeared in them ; but the wisest beholder that knew no more but 
▁ seeing could not say if th ' importance were joy or sorrow- but in 
▁ the extremity of the one it must needs be . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup gentleman 

▁ xxmaj here comes a gentleman that happily knows more . xxmaj the news , xxmaj rogero ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj nothing but bonfires . xxmaj the oracle is fulfill'd : 
▁ the xxmaj king 's daughter is found . xxmaj such a deal of wonder is broken out 
▁ within this hour that ballad - makers can not be able to express it . 

▁ xxmaj enter another xxup gentleman 

▁ xxmaj here comes the xxmaj lady xxmaj paulina 's steward ; he can deliver you more . 
▁ xxmaj how goes it now , sir ? xxmaj this news , which is call'd true , is so like 
▁ an old tale that the verity of it is in strong suspicion . xxmaj has the 
▁ xxmaj king found his heir ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj most true , if ever truth were pregnant by 
▁ circumstance . xxmaj that which you hear you 'll swear you see , there is 
▁ such unity in the proofs . xxmaj the mantle of xxmaj queen xxmaj hermione 's ; her 
▁ jewel about the neck of it ; the letters of xxmaj antigonus found with 
▁ it , which they know to be his character ; the majesty of the 
▁ creature in resemblance of the mother ; the affection of nobleness 
▁ which nature shows above her breeding ; and many other evidences- 
▁ proclaim her with all certainty to be the xxmaj king 's daughter . xxmaj did 
▁ you see the meeting of the two kings ? 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj no . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj then you have lost a sight which was to be seen , 
▁ can not be spoken of . xxmaj there might you have beheld one joy crown 
▁ another , so and in such manner that it seem'd sorrow wept to take 
▁ leave of them ; for their joy waded in tears . xxmaj there was casting up 
▁ of eyes , holding up of hands , with countenance of such 
▁ distraction that they were to be known by garment , not by favour . 
▁ xxmaj our king , being ready to leap out of himself for joy of his found 
▁ daughter , as if that joy were now become a loss , cries ' o , thy 
▁ mother , thy mother ! ' then asks xxmaj bohemia forgiveness ; then embraces 
▁ his son - in - law ; then again worries he his daughter with clipping 
▁ her . xxmaj now he thanks the old shepherd , which stands by like a 
▁ weather - bitten conduit of many kings ' reigns . i never heard of 
▁ such another encounter , which lames report to follow it and 
▁ undoes description to do it . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . xxmaj what , pray you , became of xxmaj antigonus , that carried 
▁ hence the child ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj like an old tale still , which will have matter to 
▁ rehearse , though credit be asleep and not an ear open : he was 
▁ torn to pieces with a bear . xxmaj this avouches the shepherd 's son , who 
▁ has not only his innocence , which seems much , to justify him , but 
▁ a handkerchief and rings of his that xxmaj paulina knows . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj what became of his bark and his followers ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj wreck'd the same instant of their master 's death , 
▁ and in the view of the shepherd ; so that all the instruments 
▁ which aided to expose the child were even then lost when it was 
▁ found . xxmaj but , xxup o , the noble combat that ' twixt joy and sorrow was 
▁ fought in xxmaj paulina ! xxmaj she had one eye declin'd for the loss of her 
▁ husband , another elevated that the oracle was fulfill'd . xxmaj she 
▁ lifted the xxmaj princess from the earth , and so locks her in embracing 
▁ as if she would pin her to her heart , that she might no more be 
▁ in danger of losing . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj the dignity of this act was worth the audience of 
▁ kings and princes ; for by such was it acted . 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj one of the prettiest touches of all , and that 
▁ which angl'd for mine eyes- caught the water , though not the 
▁ fish- was , when at the relation of the xxmaj queen 's death , with the 
▁ manner how she came to't bravely confess'd and lamented by the 
▁ xxmaj king , how attentivenes wounded his daughter ; till , from one sign 
▁ of dolour to another , she did with an ' alas!'- i would fain say- 
▁ bleed tears ; for i am sure my heart wept blood . xxmaj who was most 
▁ marble there changed colour ; some swooned , all sorrowed . xxmaj if all 
▁ the world could have seen't , the woe had been universal . 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj are they returned to the court ? 
▁ xxup third xxup gentleman . xxmaj no . xxmaj the xxmaj princess hearing of her mother 's statue , 
▁ which is in the keeping of xxmaj paulina- a piece many years in doing 
▁ and now newly perform'd by that rare xxmaj italian master , xxmaj julio 
▁ xxmaj romano , who , had he himself eternity and could put breath into 
▁ his work , would beguile nature of her custom , so perfectly he is 
▁ her ape . xxmaj he so near to xxmaj hermione hath done xxmaj hermione that they say 
▁ one would speak to her and stand in hope of answer- thither with 
▁ all greediness of affection are they gone , and there they intend 
▁ to sup . 
▁ xxup second xxup gentleman . i thought she had some great matter there in 
▁ hand ; for she hath privately twice or thrice a day , ever since 
▁ the death of xxmaj hermione , visited that removed house . xxmaj shall we 
▁ thither , and with our company piece the rejoicing ? 
▁ xxup first xxup gentleman . xxmaj who would be thence that has the benefit of 
▁ access ? xxmaj every wink of an eye some new grace will be born . xxmaj our 
▁ absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge . xxmaj let 's along . 
▁ xxmaj exeunt xxup gentlemen 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj now , had i not the dash of my former life in me , would 
▁ preferment drop on my head . i brought the old man and his son 
▁ aboard the xxmaj prince ; told him i heard them talk of a fardel and i 
▁ know not what ; but he at that time over - fond of the shepherd 's 
▁ daughter- so he then took her to be- who began to be much 
▁ sea - sick , and himself little better , extremity of weather 
▁ continuing , this mystery remained undiscover'd . xxmaj but ' tis all one 
▁ to me ; for had i been the finder - out of this secret , it would not 
▁ have relish'd among my other discredits . 

▁ xxmaj enter xxup shepherd and xxup clown 

▁ xxmaj here come those i have done good to against my will , and already 
▁ appearing in the blossoms of their fortune . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj come , boy ; i am past moe children , but thy sons and 
▁ daughters will be all gentlemen born . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj you are well met , sir . xxmaj you denied to fight with me this 
▁ other day , because i was no gentleman born . xxmaj see you these 
▁ clothes ? xxmaj say you see them not and think me still no gentleman 
▁ born . xxmaj you were best say these robes are not gentlemen born . xxmaj give 
▁ me the lie , do ; and try whether i am not now a gentleman born . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i know you are now , sir , a gentleman born . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay , and have been so any time these four hours . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj and so have xxup i , boy . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj so you have ; but i was a gentleman born before my father ; 
▁ for the xxmaj king 's son took me by the hand and call'd me brother ; and 
▁ then the two kings call'd my father brother ; and then the xxmaj prince , 
▁ my brother , and the xxmaj princess , my sister , call'd my father father . 
▁ xxmaj and so we wept ; and there was the first gentleman - like tears that 
▁ ever we shed . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj we may live , son , to shed many more . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay ; or else ' twere hard luck , being in so preposterous 
▁ estate as we are . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i humbly beseech you , sir , to pardon me all the faults i 
▁ have committed to your worship , and to give me your good report 
▁ to the xxmaj prince my master . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj prithee , son , do ; for we must be gentle , now we are 
▁ gentlemen . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj thou wilt amend thy life ? 
▁ xxup autolycus . xxmaj ay , an it like your good worship . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj give me thy hand . i will swear to the xxmaj prince thou art as 
▁ honest a true fellow as any is in xxmaj bohemia . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj you may say it , but not swear it . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj not swear it , now i am a gentleman ? xxmaj let boors and franklins 
▁ say it : xxmaj i 'll swear it . 
▁ xxup shepherd . xxmaj how if it be false , son ? 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj if it be ne'er so false , a true gentleman may swear it in 
▁ the behalf of his friend . xxmaj and xxmaj i 'll swear to the xxmaj prince thou art a 
▁ tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk ; but i 
▁ know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be 
▁ drunk . xxmaj but xxmaj i 'll swear it ; and i would thou wouldst be a tall 
▁ fellow of thy hands . 
▁ xxup autolycus . i will prove so , sir , to my power . 
▁ xxup clown . xxmaj ay , by any means , prove a tall fellow . xxmaj if i do not wonder 
▁ how thou dar'st venture to be drunk not being a tall fellow , 
▁ trust me not . xxmaj hark ! the kings and the princes , our kindred , are 
▁ going to see the xxmaj queen 's picture . xxmaj come , follow us ; we 'll be thy 
▁ good masters . xxmaj exeunt 




 xxup scene xxrep 3 i . 
 xxmaj sicilia . a chapel in paulina 's house 

 xxmaj enter xxup leontes , xxup polixenes , xxup florizel , xxup perdita , xxup camillo , xxup paulina , 
 xxup lords and xxup attendants 

▁ xxup leontes . o grave and good xxmaj paulina , the great comfort 
▁ xxmaj that i have had of thee ! 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj what , sovereign sir , 
▁ i did not well , i meant well . xxmaj all my services 
▁ xxmaj you have paid home ; but that you have vouchsaf'd , 
▁ xxmaj with your crown'd brother and these your contracted 
▁ xxmaj heirs of your kingdoms , my poor house to visit , 
▁ xxmaj it is a surplus of your grace , which never 
▁ xxmaj my life may last to answer . 
▁ xxup leontes . o xxmaj paulina , 
▁ xxmaj we honour you with trouble ; but we came 
▁ xxmaj to see the statue of our queen . xxmaj your gallery 
▁ xxmaj have we pass'd through , not without much content 
▁ xxmaj in many singularities ; but we saw not 
▁ xxmaj that which my daughter came to look upon , 
▁ xxmaj the statue of her mother . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj as she liv'd peerless , 
▁ xxmaj so her dead likeness , i do well believe , 
▁ xxmaj excels whatever yet you look'd upon 
▁ xxmaj or hand of man hath done ; therefore i keep it 
▁ xxmaj lonely , apart . xxmaj but here it is . xxmaj prepare 
▁ xxmaj to see the life as lively mock'd as ever 
▁ xxmaj still sleep mock'd death . xxmaj behold ; and say ' tis well . 
▁ [ paulina draws a curtain , and discovers xxup hermione 
▁ standing like a statue ] 
▁ i like your silence ; it the more shows off 
▁ xxmaj your wonder ; but yet speak . xxmaj first , you , my liege . 
▁ xxmaj comes it not something near ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj her natural posture ! 
▁ xxmaj chide me , dear stone , that i may say indeed 
▁ xxmaj thou art xxmaj hermione ; or rather , thou art she 
▁ xxmaj in thy not chiding ; for she was as tender 
▁ xxmaj as infancy and grace . xxmaj but yet , xxmaj paulina , 
▁ xxmaj hermione was not so much wrinkled , nothing 
▁ xxmaj so aged as this seems . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxup o , not by much ! 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj so much the more our carver 's excellence , 
▁ xxmaj which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her 
▁ xxmaj as she liv'd now . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj as now she might have done , 
▁ xxmaj so much to my good comfort as it is 
▁ xxmaj now piercing to my soul . xxup o , thus she stood , 
▁ xxmaj even with such life of majesty- warm life , 
▁ xxmaj as now it coldly stands- when first i woo'd her ! 
▁ i am asham'd . xxmaj does not the stone rebuke me 
▁ xxmaj for being more stone than it ? o royal piece , 
▁ xxmaj there 's magic in thy majesty , which has 
▁ xxmaj my evils conjur'd to remembrance , and 
▁ xxmaj from thy admiring daughter took the spirits , 
▁ xxmaj standing like stone with thee ! 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj and give me leave , 
▁ xxmaj and do not say ' tis superstition that 
▁ i kneel , and then implore her blessing . xxmaj lady , 
▁ xxmaj dear queen , that ended when i but began , 
▁ xxmaj give me that hand of yours to kiss . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxup o , patience ! 
▁ xxmaj the statue is but newly fix'd , the colour 's 
▁ xxmaj not dry . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj my lord , your sorrow was too sore laid on , 
▁ xxmaj which sixteen winters can not blow away , 
▁ xxmaj so many summers dry . xxmaj scarce any joy 
▁ xxmaj did ever so long live ; no sorrow 
▁ xxmaj but kill'd itself much sooner . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj dear my brother , 
▁ xxmaj let him that was the cause of this have pow'r 
▁ xxmaj to take off so much grief from you as he 
▁ xxmaj will piece up in himself . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj indeed , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj if i had thought the sight of my poor image 
▁ xxmaj would thus have wrought you- for the stone is mine- 
▁ xxmaj i 'd not have show'd it . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj do not draw the curtain . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj no longer shall you gaze on't , lest your fancy 
▁ xxmaj may think anon it moves . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj let be , let be . 
▁ xxmaj would i were dead , but that methinks already- 
▁ xxmaj what was he that did make it ? xxmaj see , my lord , 
▁ xxmaj would you not deem it breath'd , and that those veins 
▁ xxmaj did verily bear blood ? 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj masterly done ! 
▁ xxmaj the very life seems warm upon her lip . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj the fixture of her eye has motion in't , 
▁ xxmaj as we are mock'd with art . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj i 'll draw the curtain . 
▁ xxmaj my lord 's almost so far transported that 
▁ xxmaj he 'll think anon it lives . 
▁ xxup leontes . o sweet xxmaj paulina , 
▁ xxmaj make me to think so twenty years together ! 
▁ xxmaj no settled senses of the world can match 
▁ xxmaj the pleasure of that madness . xxmaj let ' t alone . 
▁ xxup paulina . i am sorry , sir , i have thus far stirr'd you ; but 
▁ i could afflict you farther . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj do , xxmaj paulina ; 
▁ xxmaj for this affliction has a taste as sweet 
▁ xxmaj as any cordial comfort . xxmaj still , methinks , 
▁ xxmaj there is an air comes from her . xxmaj what fine chisel 
▁ xxmaj could ever yet cut breath ? xxmaj let no man mock me , 
▁ xxmaj for i will kiss her . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj good my lord , forbear . 
▁ xxmaj the ruddiness upon her lip is wet ; 
▁ xxmaj you 'll mar it if you kiss it ; stain your own 
▁ xxmaj with oily painting . xxmaj shall i draw the curtain ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj no , not these twenty years . 
▁ xxup perdita . xxmaj so long could i 
▁ xxmaj stand by , a looker - on . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj either forbear , 
▁ xxmaj quit presently the chapel , or resolve you 
▁ xxmaj for more amazement . xxmaj if you can behold it , 
▁ xxmaj i 'll make the statue move indeed , descend , 
▁ xxmaj and take you by the hand , but then you 'll think- 
▁ xxmaj which i protest against- i am assisted 
▁ xxmaj by wicked powers . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj what you can make her do 
▁ i am content to look on ; what to speak 
▁ i am content to hear ; for ' tis as easy 
▁ xxmaj to make her speak as move . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj it is requir'd 
▁ xxmaj you do awake your faith . xxmaj then all stand still ; 
▁ xxmaj or those that think it is unlawful business 
▁ i am about , let them depart . 
▁ xxup leontes . xxmaj proceed . 
▁ xxmaj no foot shall stir . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj music , awake her : strike . [ music ] 
▁ ' tis time ; descend ; be stone no more ; approach ; 
▁ xxmaj strike all that look upon with marvel . xxmaj come ; 
▁ xxmaj i 'll fill your grave up . xxmaj stir ; nay , come away . 
▁ xxmaj bequeath to death your numbness , for from him 
▁ xxmaj dear life redeems you . xxmaj you perceive she stirs . 
▁ [ hermione comes down from the pedestal ] 
▁ xxmaj start not ; her actions shall be holy as 
▁ xxmaj you hear my spell is lawful . xxmaj do not shun her 
▁ xxmaj until you see her die again ; for then 
▁ xxmaj you kill her double . xxmaj nay , present your hand . 
▁ xxmaj when she was young you woo'd her ; now in age 
▁ xxmaj is she become the suitor ? 
▁ xxup leontes . xxup o , she 's warm ! 
▁ xxmaj if this be magic , let it be an art 
▁ xxmaj lawful as eating . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj she embraces him . 
▁ xxup camillo . xxmaj she hangs about his neck . 
▁ xxmaj if she pertain to life , let her speak too . 
▁ xxup polixenes . xxmaj ay , and make it manifest where she has liv'd , 
▁ xxmaj or how stol'n from the dead . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj that she is living , 
▁ xxmaj were it but told you , should be hooted at 
▁ xxmaj like an old tale ; but it appears she lives 
▁ xxmaj though yet she speak not . xxmaj mark a little while . 
▁ xxmaj please you to interpose , fair madam . xxmaj kneel , 
▁ xxmaj and pray your mother 's blessing . xxmaj turn , good lady ; 
▁ xxmaj our xxmaj perdita is found . 
▁ xxup hermione . xxmaj you gods , look down , 
▁ xxmaj and from your sacred vials pour your graces