xxbos xxmaj upon my daughter 's head ! xxmaj tell me , mine own , 
▁ xxmaj where hast thou been preserv'd ? xxmaj where liv'd ? xxmaj how found 
▁ xxmaj thy father 's court ? xxmaj for thou shalt hear that xxup i , 
▁ xxmaj knowing by xxmaj paulina that the oracle 
▁ xxmaj gave hope thou wast in being , have preserv'd 
▁ xxmaj myself to see the issue . 
▁ xxup paulina . xxmaj there 's time enough for that , 
▁ xxmaj lest they desire upon this push to trouble 
▁ xxmaj your joys with like relation . xxmaj go together , 
▁ xxmaj you precious winners all ; your exultation 
▁ xxmaj partake to every one . xxup i , an old turtle , 
▁ xxmaj will wing me to some wither'd bough , and there 
▁ xxmaj my mate , that 's never to be found again , 
▁ xxmaj lament till i am lost . 
▁ xxup leontes . o peace , xxmaj paulina ! 
▁ xxmaj thou shouldst a husband take by my consent , 
▁ xxmaj as i by thine a wife . xxmaj this is a match , 
▁ xxmaj and made between 's by vows . xxmaj thou hast found mine ; 
▁ xxmaj but how , is to be question'd ; for i saw her , 
▁ xxmaj as i thought , dead ; and have , in vain , said many 
▁ a prayer upon her grave . xxmaj i 'll not seek far- 
▁ xxmaj for him , i partly know his mind- to find thee 
▁ xxmaj an honourable husband . xxmaj come , xxmaj camillo , 
▁ xxmaj and take her by the hand whose worth and honesty 
▁ xxmaj is richly noted , and here justified 
▁ xxmaj by us , a pair of kings . xxmaj let 's from this place . 
▁ xxmaj what ! look upon my brother . xxmaj both your pardons , 
▁ xxmaj that e'er i put between your holy looks 
▁ xxmaj my ill suspicion . xxmaj this your son - in - law , 
▁ xxmaj and son unto the xxmaj king , whom heavens directing , 
▁ xxmaj is troth - plight to your daughter . xxmaj good xxmaj paulina , 
▁ xxmaj lead us from hence where we may leisurely 
▁ xxmaj each one demand and answer to his part 
▁ xxmaj perform'd in this wide gap of time since first 
▁ xxmaj we were dissever'd . xxmaj hastily lead away . xxmaj exeunt 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 





 1609 

 a xxup lover 's xxup complaint 

 by xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare 



▁ xxmaj from off a hill whose concave womb reworded 
▁ a plaintful story from a sist'ring vale , 
▁ xxmaj my spirits t'attend this double voice accorded , 
▁ xxmaj and down i laid to list the sad - tuned tale , 
▁ xxmaj ere long espied a fickle maid full pale , 
▁ xxmaj tearing of papers , breaking rings atwain , 
▁ xxmaj storming her world with sorrow 's wind and rain . 

▁ xxmaj upon her head a platted hive of straw , 
▁ xxmaj which fortified her visage from the sun , 
▁ xxmaj whereon the thought might think sometime it saw 
▁ xxmaj the carcase of a beauty spent and done . 
▁ xxmaj time had not scythed all that youth begun , 
▁ xxmaj nor youth all quit , but spite of heaven 's fell rage 
▁ xxmaj some beauty peeped through lattice of seared age . 

▁ xxmaj oft did she heave her napkin to her eyne , 
▁ xxmaj which on it had conceited characters , 
▁ xxmaj laund'ring the silken figures in the brine 
▁ xxmaj that seasoned woe had pelleted in tears , 
▁ xxmaj and often reading what contents it bears ; 
▁ xxmaj as often shrieking undistinguished woe , 
▁ xxmaj in clamours of all size , both high and low . 

▁ xxmaj sometimes her levelled eyes their carriage ride , 
▁ xxmaj as they did batt'ry to the spheres intend ; 
▁ xxmaj sometime diverted their poor balls are tied 
▁ xxmaj to th ' orbed earth ; sometimes they do extend 
▁ xxmaj their view right on ; anon their gazes lend 
▁ xxmaj to every place at once , and nowhere fixed , 
▁ xxmaj the mind and sight distractedly commixed . 

▁ xxmaj her hair , nor loose nor tied in formal plat , 
▁ xxmaj proclaimed in her a careless hand of pride ; 
▁ xxmaj for some , untucked , descended her sheaved hat , 
▁ xxmaj hanging her pale and pined cheek beside ; 
▁ xxmaj some in her threaden fillet still did bide , 
▁ xxmaj and , true to bondage , would not break from thence , 
▁ xxmaj though slackly braided in loose negligence . 

▁ a thousand favours from a maund she drew 
▁ xxmaj of amber , crystal , and of beaded jet , 
▁ xxmaj which one by one she in a river threw , 
▁ xxmaj upon whose weeping margent she was set ; 
▁ xxmaj like usury applying wet to wet , 
▁ xxmaj or monarchs ' hands that lets not bounty fall 
▁ xxmaj where want cries some , but where excess begs all . 

▁ xxmaj of folded schedules had she many a one , 
▁ xxmaj which she perused , sighed , tore , and gave the flood ; 
▁ xxmaj cracked many a ring of posied gold and bone , 
▁ xxmaj bidding them find their sepulchres in mud ; 
▁ xxmaj found yet moe letters sadly penned in blood , 
▁ xxmaj with sleided silk feat and affectedly 
▁ xxmaj enswathed and sealed to curious secrecy . 

▁ xxmaj these often bathed she in her fluxive eyes , 
▁ xxmaj and often kissed , and often ' gan to tear ; 
▁ xxmaj cried , ' o false blood , thou register of lies , 
▁ xxmaj what unapproved witness dost thou bear ! 
▁ xxmaj ink would have seemed more black and damned here ! 
▁ xxmaj this said , in top of rage the lines she rents , 
▁ xxmaj big discontents so breaking their contents . 

▁ a reverend man that grazed his cattle nigh , 
▁ xxmaj sometime a blusterer that the ruffle knew 
▁ xxmaj of court , of city , and had let go by 
▁ xxmaj the swiftest hours observed as they flew , 
▁ xxmaj towards this afflicted fancy fastly drew ; 
▁ xxmaj and , privileged by age , desires to know 
▁ xxmaj in brief the grounds and motives of her woe . 

▁ xxmaj so slides he down upon his grained bat , 
▁ xxmaj and comely distant sits he by her side ; 
▁ xxmaj when he again desires her , being sat , 
▁ xxmaj her grievance with his hearing to divide . 
▁ xxmaj if that from him there may be aught applied 
▁ xxmaj which may her suffering ecstasy assuage , 
▁ ' tis promised in the charity of age . 

▁ ' father , ' she says , ' though in me you behold 
▁ xxmaj the injury of many a blasting hour , 
▁ xxmaj let it not tell your judgement i am old : 
▁ xxmaj not age , but sorrow , over me hath power . 
▁ i might as yet have been a spreading flower , 
▁ xxmaj fresh to myself , if i had self - applied 
▁ xxmaj love to myself , and to no love beside . 

▁ ' but woe is me ! too early i attended 
▁ a youthful suit- it was to gain my grace- 
▁ xxup o , one by nature 's outwards so commended 
▁ xxmaj that maidens ' eyes stuck over all his face . 
▁ xxmaj love lacked a dwelling and made him her place ; 
▁ xxmaj and when in his fair parts she did abide , 
▁ xxmaj she was new lodged and newly deified . 

▁ ' his browny locks did hang in crooked curls ; 
▁ xxmaj and every light occasion of the wind 
▁ xxmaj upon his lips their silken parcels hurls . 
▁ xxmaj what 's sweet to do , to do will aptly find : 
▁ xxmaj each eye that saw him did enchant the mind ; 
▁ xxmaj for on his visage was in little drawn 
▁ xxmaj what largeness thinks in xxmaj paradise was sawn . 

▁ ' small show of man was yet upon his chin ; 
▁ xxmaj his phoenix down began but to appear , 
▁ xxmaj like unshorn velvet , on that termless skin , 
▁ xxmaj whose bare out - bragged the web it seemed to wear : 
▁ xxmaj yet showed his visage by that cost more dear ; 
▁ xxmaj and nice affections wavering stood in doubt 
▁ xxmaj if best were as it was , or best without . 

▁ ' his qualities were beauteous as his form , 
▁ xxmaj for maiden - tongued he was , and thereof free ; 
▁ xxmaj yet if men moved him , was he such a storm 
▁ xxmaj as oft ' twixt xxmaj may and xxmaj april is to see , 
▁ xxmaj when winds breathe sweet , unruly though they be . 
▁ xxmaj his rudeness so with his authorized youth 
▁ xxmaj did livery falseness in a pride of truth . 

▁ ' well could he ride , and often men would say , 
▁ " that horse his mettle from his rider takes : 
▁ xxmaj proud of subjection , noble by the sway , 
▁ xxmaj what rounds , what bounds , what course , what stop he makes ! " 
▁ xxmaj and controversy hence a question takes 
▁ xxmaj whether the horse by him became his deed , 
▁ xxmaj or he his manage by th ' well - doing steed . 

▁ ' but quickly on this side the verdict went : 
▁ xxmaj his real habitude gave life and grace 
▁ xxmaj to appertainings and to ornament , 
▁ xxmaj accomplished in himself , not in his case , 
▁ xxmaj all aids , themselves made fairer by their place , 
▁ xxmaj came for additions ; yet their purposed trim 
▁ xxmaj pierced not his grace , but were all graced by him . 

▁ ' so on the tip of his subduing tongue 
▁ xxmaj all kind of arguments and question deep , 
▁ xxmaj all replication prompt , and reason strong , 
▁ xxmaj for his advantage still did wake and sleep . 
▁ xxmaj to make the weeper laugh , the laugher weep , 
▁ xxmaj he had the dialect and different skill , 
▁ xxmaj catching all passions in his craft of will , 

▁ ' that he did in the general bosom reign 
▁ xxmaj of young , of old , and sexes both enchanted , 
▁ xxmaj to dwell with him in thoughts , or to remain 
▁ xxmaj in personal duty , following where he haunted . 
▁ xxmaj consents bewitched , ere he desire , have granted , 
▁ xxmaj and dialogued for him what he would say , 
▁ xxmaj asked their own wills , and made their wills obey . 

▁ ' many there were that did his picture get , 
▁ xxmaj to serve their eyes , and in it put their mind ; 
▁ xxmaj like fools that in th ' imagination set 
▁ xxmaj the goodly objects which abroad they find 
▁ xxmaj of lands and mansions , theirs in thought assigned ; 
▁ xxmaj and labouring in moe pleasures to bestow them 
▁ xxmaj than the true gouty landlord which doth owe them . 

▁ ' so many have , that never touched his hand , 
▁ xxmaj sweetly supposed them mistress of his heart . 
▁ xxmaj my woeful self , that did in freedom stand , 
▁ xxmaj and was my own fee - simple , not in part , 
▁ xxmaj what with his art in youth , and youth in art , 
▁ xxmaj threw my affections in his charmed power 
▁ xxmaj reserved the stalk and gave him all my flower . 

▁ ' yet did i not , as some my equals did , 
▁ xxmaj demand of him , nor being desired yielded ; 
▁ xxmaj finding myself in honour so forbid , 
▁ xxmaj with safest distance i mine honour shielded . 
▁ xxmaj experience for me many bulwarks builded 
▁ xxmaj of proofs new - bleeding , which remained the foil 
▁ xxmaj of this false jewel , and his amorous spoil . 

▁ ' but ah , who ever shunned by precedent 
▁ xxmaj the destined ill she must herself assay ? 
▁ xxmaj or forced examples , ' gainst her own content , 
▁ xxmaj to put the by - past perils in her way ? 
▁ xxmaj counsel may stop awhile what will not stay ; 
▁ xxmaj for when we rage , advice is often seen 
▁ xxmaj by blunting us to make our wills more keen . 

▁ ' nor gives it satisfaction to our blood 
▁ xxmaj that we must curb it upon others ' proof , 
▁ xxmaj to be forbod the sweets that seems so good 
▁ xxmaj for fear of harms that preach in our behoof . 
▁ o appetite , from judgement stand aloof ! 
▁ xxmaj the one a palate hath that needs will taste , 
▁ xxmaj though xxmaj reason weep , and cry it is thy last . 

▁ ' for further i could say this man 's untrue , 
▁ xxmaj and knew the patterns of his foul beguiling ; 
▁ xxmaj heard where his plants in others ' orchards grew ; 
▁ xxmaj saw how deceits were gilded in his smiling ; 
▁ xxmaj knew vows were ever brokers to defiling ; 
▁ xxmaj thought characters and words merely but art , 
▁ xxmaj and bastards of his foul adulterate heart . 

▁ ' and long upon these terms i held my city , 
▁ xxmaj till thus he ' gan besiege me : " gentle maid , 
▁ xxmaj have of my suffering youth some feeling pity , 
▁ xxmaj and be not of my holy vows afraid . 
▁ xxmaj that 's to ye sworn to none was ever said ; 
▁ xxmaj for feasts of love i have been called unto , 
▁ xxmaj till now did ne'er invite nor never woo . 

▁ ' " all my offences that abroad you see 
▁ xxmaj are errors of the blood , none of the mind ; 
▁ xxmaj love made them not ; with acture they may be , 
▁ xxmaj where neither party is nor true nor kind . 
▁ xxmaj they sought their shame that so their shame did find ; 
▁ xxmaj and so much less of shame in me remains 
▁ xxmaj by how much of me their reproach contains . 

▁ ' " among the many that mine eyes have seen , 
▁ xxmaj not one whose flame my heart so much as warmed , 
▁ xxmaj or my affection put to th ' smallest teen , 
▁ xxmaj or any of my leisures ever charmed . 
▁ xxmaj harm have i done to them , but ne'er was harmed ; 
▁ xxmaj kept hearts in liveries , but mine own was free , 
▁ xxmaj and reigned commanding in his monarchy . 

▁ ' " look here what tributes wounded fancies sent me , 
▁ xxmaj of paled pearls and rubies red as blood ; 
▁ xxmaj figuring that they their passions likewise lent me 
▁ xxmaj of grief and blushes , aptly understood 
▁ xxmaj in bloodless white and the encrimsoned mood- 
▁ xxmaj effects of terror and dear modesty , 
▁ xxmaj encamped in hearts , but fighting outwardly . 

▁ ' " and , lo , behold these talents of their hair , 
▁ xxmaj with twisted metal amorously empleached , 
▁ i have receiv'd from many a several fair , 
▁ xxmaj their kind acceptance weepingly beseeched , 
▁ xxmaj with the annexions of fair gems enriched , 
▁ xxmaj and deep - brained sonnets that did amplify 
▁ xxmaj each stone 's dear nature , worth , and quality . 

▁ ' " the diamond ? why , ' twas beautiful and hard , 
▁ xxmaj whereto his invised properties did tend ; 
▁ xxmaj the deep - green em'rald , in whose fresh regard 
▁ xxmaj weak sights their sickly radiance do amend ; 
▁ xxmaj the heaven - hued sapphire and the opal blend 
▁ xxmaj with objects manifold ; each several stone , 
▁ xxmaj with wit well blazoned , smiled , or made some moan . 

▁ ' " lo , all these trophies of affections hot , 
▁ xxmaj of pensived and subdued desires the tender , 
▁ xxmaj nature hath charged me that i hoard them not , 
▁ xxmaj but yield them up where i myself must render- 
▁ xxmaj that is , to you , my origin and ender ; 
▁ xxmaj for these , of force , must your oblations be , 
▁ xxmaj since i their altar , you enpatron me . 

▁ ' " o then advance of yours that phraseless hand 
▁ xxmaj whose white weighs down the airy scale of praise ; 
▁ xxmaj take all these similes to your own command , 
▁ xxmaj hallowed with sighs that burning lungs did raise ; 
▁ xxmaj what me your minister for you obeys 
▁ xxmaj works under you ; and to your audit comes 
▁ xxmaj their distract parcels in combined sums . 

▁ ' " lo , this device was sent me from a nun , 
▁ xxmaj or sister sanctified , of holiest note , 
▁ xxmaj which late her noble suit in court did shun , 
▁ xxmaj whose rarest havings made the blossoms dote ; 
▁ xxmaj for she was sought by spirits of richest coat , 
▁ xxmaj but kept cold distance , and did thence remove 
▁ xxmaj to spend her living in eternal love . 

▁ ' " but , o my sweet , what labour is't to leave 
▁ xxmaj the thing we have not , mast'ring what not strives , 
▁ xxmaj playing the place which did no form receive , 
▁ xxmaj playing patient sports in unconstrained gyves ! 
▁ xxmaj she that her fame so to herself contrives , 
▁ xxmaj the scars of battle scapeth by the flight , 
▁ xxmaj and makes her absence valiant , not her might . 

▁ ' " o pardon me in that my boast is true ! 
▁ xxmaj the accident which brought me to her eye 
▁ xxmaj upon the moment did her force subdue , 
▁ xxmaj and now she would the caged cloister fly . 
▁ xxmaj religious love put out religion 's eye . 
▁ xxmaj not to be tempted , would she be immured , 
▁ xxmaj and now to tempt all liberty procured . 

▁ ' " how mighty then you are , o hear me tell ! 
▁ xxmaj the broken bosoms that to me belong 
▁ xxmaj have emptied all their fountains in my well , 
▁ xxmaj and mine i pour your ocean all among . 
▁ i strong o'er them , and you o'er me being strong , 
▁ xxmaj must for your victory us all congest , 
▁ xxmaj as compound love to physic your cold breast . 

▁ ' " my parts had pow'r to charm a sacred nun , 
▁ xxmaj who , disciplined , ay , dieted in grace , 
▁ xxmaj believed her eyes when they t'assail begun , 
▁ xxmaj all vows and consecrations giving place , 
▁ o most potential love , vow , bond , nor space , 
▁ xxmaj in thee hath neither sting , knot , nor confine , 
▁ xxmaj for thou art all , and all things else are thine . 

▁ ' " when thou impressest , what are precepts worth 
▁ xxmaj of stale example ? xxmaj when thou wilt inflame , 
▁ xxmaj how coldly those impediments stand forth , 
▁ xxmaj of wealth , of filial fear , law , kindred , fame ! 
▁ xxmaj love 's arms are peace , ' gainst rule , ' gainst sense , ' gainst shame . 
▁ xxmaj and sweetens , in the suff'ring pangs it bears , 
▁ xxmaj the aloes of all forces , shocks and fears . 

▁ ' " now all these hearts that do on mine depend , 
▁ xxmaj feeling it break , with bleeding groans they pine , 
▁ xxmaj and supplicant their sighs to your extend , 
▁ xxmaj to leave the batt'ry that you make ' gainst mine , 
▁ xxmaj lending soft audience to my sweet design , 
▁ xxmaj and credent soul to that strong - bonded oath , 
▁ xxmaj that shall prefer and undertake my troth . " 

▁ ' this said , his wat'ry eyes he did dismount , 
▁ xxmaj whose sights till then were levelled on my face ; 
▁ xxmaj each cheek a river running from a fount 
▁ xxmaj with brinish current downward flowed apace . 
▁ xxup o , how the channel to the stream gave grace ! 
▁ xxmaj who glazed with crystal gate the glowing roses 
▁ xxmaj that flame through water which their hue encloses . 

▁ ' o father , what a hell of witchcraft lies 
▁ xxmaj in the small orb of one particular tear ! 
▁ xxmaj but with the inundation of the eyes 
▁ xxmaj what rocky heart to water will not wear ? 
▁ xxmaj what breast so cold that is not warmed here ? 
▁ o cleft effect ! cold modesty , hot wrath , 
▁ xxmaj both fire from hence and chill extincture hath . 

▁ ' for lo , his passion , but an art of craft , 
▁ xxmaj even there resolved my reason into tears ; 
▁ xxmaj there my white stole of chastity i daffed , 
▁ xxmaj shook off my sober guards and civil fears ; 
▁ xxmaj appear to him as he to me appears , 
▁ xxmaj all melting ; though our drops this diff'rence bore : 
▁ xxmaj his poisoned me , and mine did him restore . 

▁ ' in him a plenitude of subtle matter , 
▁ xxmaj applied to cautels , all strange forms receives , 
▁ xxmaj of burning blushes or of weeping water , 
▁ xxmaj or swooning paleness ; and he takes and leaves , 
▁ xxmaj in either 's aptness , as it best deceives , 
▁ xxmaj to blush at speeches rank , to weep at woes , 
▁ xxmaj or to turn white and swoon at tragic shows ; 

▁ ' that not a heart which in his level came 
▁ xxmaj could scape the hail of his all - hurting aim , 
▁ xxmaj showing fair nature is both kind and tame ; 
▁ xxmaj and , veiled in them , did win whom he would maim . 
▁ xxmaj against the thing he sought he would exclaim ; 
▁ xxmaj when he most burned in heart - wished luxury , 
▁ xxmaj he preached pure maid and praised cold chastity . 

▁ ' thus merely with the garment of a xxmaj grace 
▁ xxmaj the naked and concealed fiend he covered , 
▁ xxmaj that th ' unexperient gave the tempter place , 
▁ xxmaj which , like a cherubin , above them hovered . 
▁ xxmaj who , young and simple , would not be so lovered ? 
▁ xxmaj ay me , i fell , and yet do question make 
▁ xxmaj what i should do again for such a sake . 

▁ ' o , that infected moisture of his eye , 
▁ xxup o , that false fire which in his cheek so glowed , 
▁ xxup o , that forced thunder from his heart did fly , 
▁ xxup o , that sad breath his spongy lungs bestowed , 
▁ xxup o , all that borrowed motion , seeming owed , 
▁ xxmaj would yet again betray the fore - betrayed , 
▁ xxmaj and new pervert a reconciled maid . ' 

 xxup the xxup end 



 < < this xxup electronic xxup version xxup of xxup the xxup complete xxup works xxup of xxup william 
 xxup shakespeare xxup is xxup copyright 1990 - 1993 xxup by xxup world xxup library , xxup inc . , xxup and xxup is 
 xxup provided xxup by xxup project xxup gutenberg xxup etext xxup of xxup illinois xxup benedictine xxup college 
 xxup with xxup permission . xxup electronic xxup and xxup machine xxup readable xxup copies xxup may xxup be 
 xxup distributed xxup so xxup long xxup as xxup such xxup copies ( 1 ) xxup are xxup for xxup your xxup or xxup others 
 xxup personal xxup use xxup only , xxup and ( 2 ) xxup are xxup not xxup distributed xxup or xxup used 
 xxup commercially . xxup prohibited xxup commercial xxup distribution xxup includes xxup by xxup any 
 xxup service xxup that xxup charges xxup for xxup download xxup time xxup or xxup for xxup membership . > > 



 xxmaj end of this xxmaj etext of xxmaj the xxmaj complete xxmaj works of xxmaj william xxmaj shakespeare