
                       Enter Nurse.

  Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
    Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
  Friar. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
  Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
    Just in her case!
  Friar. O woeful sympathy!
    Piteous predicament!
  Nurse. Even so lies she,  
    Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
    Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
    For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
    Why should you fall into so deep an O?
  Rom. (rises) Nurse-
  Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
  Rom. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
    Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
    Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
    With blood remov'd but little from her own?
    Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
    My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
  Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
    And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
    And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
    And then down falls again.
  Rom. As if that name,
    Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
    Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
    Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,  
    In what vile part of this anatomy
    Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
    The hateful mansion.                     [Draws his dagger.]
  Friar. Hold thy desperate hand.
    Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
    Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
    The unreasonable fury of a beast.
    Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
    Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
    Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
    I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
    Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
    And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
    By doing damned hate upon thyself?
    Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
    Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
    In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
    Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
    Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
    And usest none in that true use indeed  
    Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
    Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
    Digressing from the valour of a man;
    Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
    Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
    Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
    Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
    Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
    is get afire by thine own ignorance,
    And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
    What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
    For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
    There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
    But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
    The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
    And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
    A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
    Happiness courts thee in her best array;
    But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
    Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.  
    Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
    Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
    Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
    But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
    For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
    Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
    To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
    Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
    With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
    Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
    Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
    And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
    Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
    Romeo is coming.
  Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
    To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
    My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
  Rom. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
  Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
    Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late.           Exit.  
  Rom. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
  Friar. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
    Either be gone before the watch be set,
    Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
    Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
    And he shall signify from time to time
    Every good hap to you that chances here.
    Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
  Rom. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
    It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
    Farewell.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene IV.
Capulet's house

Enter Old Capulet, his Wife, and Paris.

  Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
    That we have had no time to move our daughter.
    Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
    And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
    'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
    I promise you, but for your company,
    I would have been abed an hour ago.
  Par. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
    Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
  Lady. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
    To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
  Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
    Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
    In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
    Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
    Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
    And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-  
    But, soft! what day is this?
  Par. Monday, my lord.
  Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
    Thursday let it be- a Thursday, tell her
    She shall be married to this noble earl.
    Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
    We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
    For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
    It may be thought we held him carelessly,
    Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
    Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
    And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
  Par. My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow.
  Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
    Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
    Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
    Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
    Afore me, It is so very very late
    That we may call it early by-and-by.
    Good night.  
                                                          Exeunt




Scene V.
Capulet's orchard.

Enter Romeo and Juliet aloft, at the Window.

  Jul. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
    It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
    That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
    Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
    Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
  Rom. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
    No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
    Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
    Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
    Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
    I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
  Jul. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
    It is some meteor that the sun exhales
    To be to thee this night a torchbearer
    And light thee on the way to Mantua.
    Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
  Rom. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.  
    I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
    I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
    'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
    Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
    The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
    I have more care to stay than will to go.
    Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
    How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
  Jul. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
    It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
    Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
    Some say the lark makes sweet division;
    This doth not so, for she divideth us.
    Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
    O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
    Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
    Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
    O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
  Rom. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
  
                          Enter Nurse.

  Nurse. Madam!
  Jul. Nurse?
  Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
    The day is broke; be wary, look about.
  Jul. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
                                                         [Exit.]
  Rom. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
                                                  He goeth down.
  Jul. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
    I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
    For in a minute there are many days.
    O, by this count I shall be much in years
    Ere I again behold my Romeo!
  Rom. Farewell!
    I will omit no opportunity
    That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
  Jul. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
  Rom. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve  
    For sweet discourses in our time to come.
  Jul. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
    Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
    As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
    Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
  Rom. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
    Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Exit.
  Jul. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
    If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
    That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
    For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
    But send him back.
  Lady. [within] Ho, daughter! are you up?
  Jul. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
    Is she not down so late, or up so early?
    What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?

                       Enter Mother.
  
  Lady. Why, how now, Juliet?
  Jul. Madam, I am not well.
  Lady. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
    What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
    An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
    Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
    But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
  Jul. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
  Lady. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
    Which you weep for.
  Jul. Feeling so the loss,
    I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
  Lady. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
    As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
  Jul. What villain, madam?
  Lady. That same villain Romeo.
  Jul. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.-
    God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
    And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
  Lady. That is because the traitor murderer lives.  
  Jul. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
    Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
  Lady. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
    Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
    Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
    Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
    That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
    And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
  Jul. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
    With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
    Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
    Madam, if you could find out but a man
    To bear a poison, I would temper it;
    That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
    Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
    To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
    To wreak the love I bore my cousin Tybalt
    Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him!
  Lady. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
    But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.  
  Jul. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
    What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
  Lady. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
    One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
    Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
    That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
  Jul. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
  Lady. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
    The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
    The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
    Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
  Jul. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
    He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
    I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
    Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
    I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
    I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
    It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
    Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
  Lady. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,  
    And see how be will take it at your hands.

                   Enter Capulet and Nurse.

  Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
    But for the sunset of my brother's son
    It rains downright.
    How now? a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
    Evermore show'ring? In one little body
    Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
    For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
    Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
    Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
    Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
    Without a sudden calm will overset
    Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
    Have you delivered to her our decree?
  Lady. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
    I would the fool were married to her grave!
  Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.  
    How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
    Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
    Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
    So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
  Jul. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
    Proud can I never be of what I hate,
    But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
  Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
    'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
    And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
    Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
    But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
    To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
    Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
    Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
    You tallow-face!
  Lady. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
  Jul. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
    Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
  Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!  
    I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
    Or never after look me in the face.
    Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
    My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
    That God had lent us but this only child;
    But now I see this one is one too much,
    And that we have a curse in having her.
    Out on her, hilding!
  Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
    You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
  Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
    Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
  Nurse. I speak no treason.
  Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
  Nurse. May not one speak?
  Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
    Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
    For here we need it not.
  Lady. You are too hot.
  Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,  
    At home, abroad, alone, in company,
    Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
    To have her match'd; and having now provided
    A gentleman of princely parentage,
    Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
    Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
    Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
    And then to have a wretched puling fool,
    A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
    To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
    I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
    But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
    Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
    Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
    Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
    An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
    An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
    For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
    Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
    Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.         Exit.  
  Jul. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
    That sees into the bottom of my grief?
    O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
    Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
    Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
    In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
  Lady. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
    Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee.            Exit.
  Jul. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
    My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
    How shall that faith return again to earth
    Unless that husband send it me from heaven
    By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
    Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
    Upon so soft a subject as myself!
    What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
    Some comfort, nurse.
  Nurse. Faith, here it is.
    Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
    That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;  
    Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
    Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
    I think it best you married with the County.
    O, he's a lovely gentleman!
    Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
    Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
    As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
    I think you are happy in this second match,
    For it excels your first; or if it did not,
    Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
    As living here and you no use of him.
  Jul. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
  Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
  Jul. Amen!
  Nurse. What?
  Jul. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
    Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
    Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
    To make confession and to be absolv'd.
  Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done.           Exit.  
  Jul. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
    Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
    Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
    Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
    So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
    Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
    I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
    If all else fail, myself have power to die.            Exit.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT IV. Scene I.
Friar Laurence's cell.

Enter Friar, [Laurence] and County Paris.

  Friar. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
  Par. My father Capulet will have it so,
    And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
  Friar. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
    Uneven is the course; I like it not.
  Par. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
    And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
    For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
    Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
    That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
    And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
    To stop the inundation of her tears,
    Which, too much minded by herself alone,
    May be put from her by society.
    Now do you know the reason of this haste.
  Friar. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
    Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.  

                    Enter Juliet.

  Par. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
  Jul. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
  Par. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
  Jul. What must be shall be.
  Friar. That's a certain text.
  Par. Come you to make confession to this father?
  Jul. To answer that, I should confess to you.
  Par. Do not deny to him that you love me.
  Jul. I will confess to you that I love him.
  Par. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
  Jul. If I do so, it will be of more price,
    Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
  Par. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
  Jul. The tears have got small victory by that,
    For it was bad enough before their spite.
  Par. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
  Jul. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;  
    And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
  Par. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
  Jul. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
    Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
    Or shall I come to you at evening mass
  Friar. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
    My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
  Par. God shield I should disturb devotion!
    Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
    Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.             Exit.
  Jul. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
    Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
  Friar. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
    It strains me past the compass of my wits.
    I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
    On Thursday next be married to this County.
  Jul. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
    Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
    If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
    Do thou but call my resolution wise  
    And with this knife I'll help it presently.
    God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
    And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
    Shall be the label to another deed,
    Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
    Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
    Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
    Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
    'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
    Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
    Which the commission of thy years and art
    Could to no issue of true honour bring.
    Be not so long to speak. I long to die
    If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
  Friar. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
    Which craves as desperate an execution
    As that is desperate which we would prevent.
    If, rather than to marry County Paris
    Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
    Then is it likely thou wilt undertake  
    A thing like death to chide away this shame,
    That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
    And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
  Jul. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
    From off the battlements of yonder tower,
    Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
    Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
    Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
    O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
    With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
    Or bid me go into a new-made grave
    And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
    Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
    And I will do it without fear or doubt,
    To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
  Friar. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
    To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
    To-morrow night look that thou lie alone;
    Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
    Take thou this vial, being then in bed,  
    And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
    When presently through all thy veins shall run
    A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
    Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
    No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
    The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
    To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
    Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
    Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
    Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
    And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
    Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
    And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
    Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
    To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
    Then, as the manner of our country is,
    In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
    Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
    Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
    In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,  
    Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
    And hither shall he come; and he and I
    Will watch thy waking, and that very night
    Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
    And this shall free thee from this present shame,
    If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
    Abate thy valour in the acting it.
  Jul. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
  Friar. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
    In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
    To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
  Jul. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
    Farewell, dear father.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene II.
Capulet's house.

Enter Father Capulet, Mother, Nurse, and Servingmen,
                        two or three.

  Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
                                            [Exit a Servingman.]
    Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
  Serv. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
    their fingers.
  Cap. How canst thou try them so?
  Serv. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
    fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
    me.
  Cap. Go, begone.
                                                Exit Servingman.
    We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
    What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
  Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
  Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
    A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.  

                        Enter Juliet.

  Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
  Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
  Jul. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
    Of disobedient opposition
    To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
    By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
    To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
    Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
  Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
    I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
  Jul. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
    And gave him what becomed love I might,
    Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
  Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
    This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
    Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
    Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,  
    All our whole city is much bound to him.
  Jul. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
    To help me sort such needful ornaments
    As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?
  Mother. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
  Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church to-morrow.
                                        Exeunt Juliet and Nurse.
  Mother. We shall be short in our provision.
    'Tis now near night.
  Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
    And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
    Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
    I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
    I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
    They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
    To County Paris, to prepare him up
    Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
    Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
                                                         Exeunt.




Scene III.
Juliet's chamber.

Enter Juliet and Nurse.

  Jul. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
    I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
    For I have need of many orisons
    To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
    Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

                          Enter Mother.

  Mother. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
  Jul. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
    As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
    So please you, let me now be left alone,
    And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
    For I am sure you have your hands full all
    In this so sudden business.
  Mother. Good night.
    Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.  
                                      Exeunt [Mother and Nurse.]
  Jul. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
    I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
    That almost freezes up the heat of life.
    I'll call them back again to comfort me.
    Nurse!- What should she do here?
    My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
    Come, vial.
    What if this mixture do not work at all?
    Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
    No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
                                             Lays down a dagger.
    What if it be a poison which the friar
    Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
    Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
    Because he married me before to Romeo?
    I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
    For he hath still been tried a holy man.
    I will not entertain so bad a thought.
    How if, when I am laid into the tomb,  
    I wake before the time that Romeo
    Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
    Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
    To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
    And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
    Or, if I live, is it not very like
    The horrible conceit of death and night,
    Together with the terror of the place-
    As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
    Where for this many hundred years the bones
    Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
    Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
    Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
    At some hours in the night spirits resort-
    Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
    So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
    And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
    That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
    O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
    Environed with all these hideous fears,  
    And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
    And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
    And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
    As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
    O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
    Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
    Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
    Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

        She [drinks and] falls upon her bed within the curtains.




Scene IV.
Capulet's house.

Enter Lady of the House and Nurse.

  Lady. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
  Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.

                       Enter Old Capulet.

  Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
    The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
    Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
    Spare not for cost.
  Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
    Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
    For this night's watching.
  Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
    All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
  Lady. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
    But I will watch you from such watching now.
                                          Exeunt Lady and Nurse.  
  Cap. A jealous hood, a jealous hood!

  Enter three or four [Fellows, with spits and logs and baskets.

    What is there? Now, fellow,
  Fellow. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
  Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit Fellow.] Sirrah, fetch drier
      logs.
    Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
  Fellow. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
    And never trouble Peter for the matter.
  Cap. Mass, and well said; a merry whoreson, ha!
    Thou shalt be loggerhead. [Exit Fellow.] Good faith, 'tis day.
    The County will be here with music straight,
    For so he said he would.                         Play music.
    I hear him near.
    Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!

                              Enter Nurse.  
    Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
    I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
    Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
    Make haste, I say.
                                                       [Exeunt.]




Scene V.
Juliet's chamber.

[Enter Nurse.]

  Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
    Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
    Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
    What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
    Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
    The County Paris hath set up his rest
    That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
    Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
    I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
    Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
    He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
                                     [Draws aside the curtains.]
    What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
    I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
    Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
    O weraday that ever I was born!
    Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!  

                           Enter Mother.

  Mother. What noise is here?
  Nurse. O lamentable day!
  Mother. What is the matter?
  Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
  Mother. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
    Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
    Help, help! Call help.

                            Enter Father.

  Father. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
  Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
  Mother. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
  Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
    Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
    Life and these lips have long been separated.
    Death lies on her like an untimely frost  
    Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
  Nurse. O lamentable day!
  Mother. O woful time!
  Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
    Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.

  Enter Friar [Laurence] and the County [Paris], with Musicians.

  Friar. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
  Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
    O son, the night before thy wedding day
    Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
    Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
    Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
    My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
    And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
  Par. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
    And doth it give me such a sight as this?
  Mother. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
    Most miserable hour that e'er time saw  
    In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
    But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
    But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
    And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
  Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
    Most lamentable day, most woful day
    That ever ever I did yet behold!
    O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
    Never was seen so black a day as this.
    O woful day! O woful day!
  Par. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
    Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
    By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
    O love! O life! not life, but love in death
  Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
    Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
    To murther, murther our solemnity?
    O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
    Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
    And with my child my joys are buried!  
  Friar. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
    In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
    Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
    And all the better is it for the maid.
    Your part in her you could not keep from death,
    But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
    The most you sought was her promotion,
    For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
    And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
    Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
    O, in this love, you love your child so ill
    That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
    She's not well married that lives married long,
    But she's best married that dies married young.
    Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
    On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
    In all her best array bear her to church;
    For though fond nature bids us all lament,
    Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
  Cap. All things that we ordained festival  
    Turn from their office to black funeral-
    Our instruments to melancholy bells,
    Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
    Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
    Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
    And all things change them to the contrary.
  Friar. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
    And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
    To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
    The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
    Move them no more by crossing their high will.
                           Exeunt. Manent Musicians [and Nurse].
  1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
  Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
    For well you know this is a pitiful case.            [Exit.]
  1. Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.

                         Enter Peter.

  Pet. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!  
    O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
  1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
  Pet. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
    of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
  1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
  Pet. You will not then?
  1. Mus. No.
  Pet. I will then give it you soundly.
  1. Mus. What will you give us?
  Pet. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
     minstrel.
  1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
  Pet. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
    I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
    me?
  1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
  2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
  Pet. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
    wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
  
           'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
             And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
           Then music with her silver sound'-

    Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
    What say you, Simon Catling?
  1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
  Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
  2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
  Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
  3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
  Pet. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say for you. It
    is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
    for sounding.

           'Then music with her silver sound
             With speedy help doth lend redress.'         [Exit.

  1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
  2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the  
    mourners, and stay dinner.
                                                         Exeunt.




<<THIS ELECTRONIC VERSION OF THE COMPLETE WORKS OF WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE IS COPYRIGHT 1990-1993 BY WORLD LIBRARY, INC., AND IS
PROVIDED BY PROJECT GUTENBERG ETEXT OF ILLINOIS BENEDICTINE COLLEGE
WITH PERMISSION.  ELECTRONIC AND MACHINE READABLE COPIES MAY BE
DISTRIBUTED SO LONG AS SUCH COPIES (1) ARE FOR YOUR OR OTHERS
PERSONAL USE ONLY, AND (2) ARE NOT DISTRIBUTED OR USED
COMMERCIALLY.  PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION INCLUDES BY ANY
SERVICE THAT CHARGES FOR DOWNLOAD TIME OR FOR MEMBERSHIP.>>



ACT V. Scene I.
Mantua. A street.

Enter Romeo.

  Rom. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
    My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
    My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
    And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
    Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
    I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
    (Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
    And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
    That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
    Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
    When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!

                Enter Romeo's Man Balthasar, booted.

    News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
    Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
    How doth my lady? Is my father well?  
    How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
    For nothing can be ill if she be well.
  Man. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
    Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
    And her immortal part with angels lives.
    I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
    And presently took post to tell it you.
    O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
    Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
  Rom. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
    Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
    And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
  Man. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
    Your looks are pale and wild and do import
    Some misadventure.
  Rom. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
    Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
    Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
  Man. No, my good lord.
  Rom. No matter. Get thee gone  
    And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
                                               Exit [Balthasar].
    Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
    Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
    To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
    I do remember an apothecary,
    And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
    In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
    Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
